
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/01728/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th July 2017                      |      On 7th July 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     SR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  21st
    April  2017  dismissed  his  claim  for  protection.   The  Appellant's
    immigration history is set out within the determination  at  paragraphs
    13-18, namely that he arrived in the United Kingdom in the  back  of  a
    lorry having travelled from France to the UK on 25 May 2008. He claimed
    asylum the following day  and  it  was  discovered  that  he  had  been
    fingerprinted in Greece  and  therefore  a  "third  country  case"  was
    commenced with the object returning to Greece. He  was  then  detained.
    Upon his release he failed to sign with the respondent and then appears
    to have absconded. In January 2011 the Secretary of State  decided  not
    to pursue his return to Greece. It was not until the year 2013 that the
    Appellant was interviewed in respect of his claim for asylum which  was
    refused in a decision letter of 26 July 2013. He appealed that decision
    it came before an immigration judge who  dismissed  his  appeal  having
    found his account of events to be "inconsistent and vague" and rejected
    his account of having been detained as claimed or that the  authorities
    in Iran had any interest in him.

 3. The Appellant became appeal rights exhaust on 23 December 2014. He  was
    not removed from the United Kingdom and on 10 November 2016  he  lodged
    further submissions on the basis that he had converted to Christianity.
    The respondent treated this as a fresh claim.

 4. Thus For the present application, the Appellant was interviewed on  the
    13th January 2017 and  his  claim  was  considered  but  refused  in  a
    detailed decision letter of the 19th January  2017.

 5. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on  17th  March  2017.   The
    judge had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of the Appellant  and
    for his evidence to be the subject of cross-examination.  The judge  in
    the determination did not find that he was a credible witness and  that
    importantly did not find him to be a genuine  convert  to  Christianity
    and dismissed his appeal.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  provide  sufficient  or
    sustainable reasons for the  adverse  credibility  findings  that  were
    contained within the determination.  Furthermore  that  the  judge  had
    failed to give reasons for rejecting the evidence of a witness from the
    Church who attested to his faith.

 7.  Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Brunnen)  on
    15th May 2017.

 8. At the hearing before the  Tribunal,  Mr  Gayle,  who  represented  the
    Appellant in the First-tier  Tribunal,  relied  upon  the  grounds.  He
    submitted that the judge made it clear that the Appellant's credibility
    in his fresh claim had been undermined by the adverse findings  in  his
    previous claim. Thus he submitted this demonstrated a materially flawed
    analysis of the fresh claim. In his submission  the  judge's  reasoning
    was therefore infected by the previous findings. As to the  credibility
    findings generally, he relied upon the grounds at  paragraphs  4  to  9
    relating  to  whether  there  was  an  inconsistency  as  to  who   had
    accompanied the Appellant to church and who had attended  the  baptism.
    In respect of the First issue, he submitted the  when  looking  at  the
    evidence including witness statements and the interview there had  been
    no discrepancy or inconsistency. As  to  the  baptism,  the  judge  had
    misunderstood the evidence as could be seen from the witness  statement
    of H who had not said that he had attended the baptism.

 9. Mr Gayle also submitted that whilst the  judge  acknowledged  that  the
    witness K, who had given oral evidence before the Tribunal on behalf of
    the church had been genuine in her belief  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    Christian, that the judge had failed to place weight on  that  evidence
    that she had given as to the Appellant's belief in Christianity and his
    attendance. Furthermore there were no reasons given for  the  rejection
    of that evidence. In this respect he also submitted that the judge  did
    not take  into  account  when  reaching  an  overall  decision  on  the
    genuineness of his conversion the earlier  written  evidence  from  the
    Reverend and also a deacon. For those reasons  he  submitted  that  the
    grounds demonstrated that the decision was not sustainable.

10. Mr Jarvis on behalf  of  the  Respondent  argued  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to find the Appellant not to be credible based on the  various
    findings looked at cumulatively relying on the decision of  Y  v  SSSHD
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 where  the  Court  of  Appeal  made  reference  to
    assessments of credibility and that a judge should look at the issue of
    credibility in the round "based on an accumulation of  points."  As  to
    paragraph 3, he submitted that there had been no error of  law  in  the
    judge's approach who are properly applied the decision  of  Devaseelan.
    As to the inconsistencies highlighted by the judge both to the  baptism
    and attendance at church, he  submitted  that  those  were  permissible
    findings by the judge who was entitled to draw the inferences from  the
    evidence. Thus he submitted they did not demonstrate any material error
    of law. Furthermore had there been any inconsistencies or any ambiguity
    is not evidence they could have been specifically clarified  after  the
    interview by way of further representations  made  by  the  Appellant's
    solicitors.

11. As to the consideration of the evidence  from  the  church,  Mr  Jarvis
    accepted the importance of the decision in Dorodian but that the  judge
    had not ignored the evidence of the witness  K  and  had  described  it
    fairly. However she was not required to take into account the  previous
    decision of the immigration judge or make a broader  judgement  of  the
    truthfulness and therefore  her  evidence  could  not  be  said  to  be
    determinative. Thus he submitted overall the decision was open  to  the
    judge. In the alternative if errors of law were present, this is a case
    that should be remitted to be reheard as credibility was central to the
    issue of risk on return.

12. I have considered with care the submissions that I have heard from each
    of the parties in the light of the determination and the evidence  that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal. As to paragraph 3 of the grounds, I
    find no error of law. The judge properly directed himself in accordance
    with the law, that the starting point was the previous decision of  the
    immigration  judge  applying   the   well-established   principles   of
    Devaseelan (2002) UKIAT 00702 (see determination at paragraph  27).  It
    would have been an error had the judge not considered the  new  factual
    claim and the evidence provided, however, he did not ignore or fail  to
    deal with that evidence and went on  to  make  an  examination  of  the
    Appellant's claim in the light  of  the  further  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal. Consequently  I  find  no  legal  error  identified  in  that
    approach. Furthermore I reject Mr Gayle's submission  that  by  setting
    out the previous findings of fact that this led the judge's findings as
    a whole to be flawed. The judge was entitled to take  into  account  in
    the overall credibility findings any previous  adverse  findings  which
    had been reached.

13. Furthermore I can find no arguable inconsistency as to the  Appellant's
    evidence as to whether he was accompanied by his friend  to  his  First
    church attendance. Whilst both the witness statement of H stated he had
    taken him to church with him and the Appellant's statement at paragraph
    6 referred to the same, question 44 of the interview when read  with  a
    question 45  does  support  the  judge's  finding  that  there  was  an
    inconsistency as to the Appellant attending without H. Therefore it was
    open to the judge to reach that conclusion. What is more  important  is
    whether such a discrepancy was ever put to  the  Appellant  to  clarify
    this and it does not appear that it was.  In  any  event  as  Mr  Gayle
    submits it is a peripheral point of credibility as the  judge  appeared
    to accept the evidence that he had been a regular church attender.

14. That said, I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination as set out in the grounds. As to the finding relating  to
    the circumstances of the baptism and who attended, I am satisfied  that
    the judge did misunderstand the evidence in this regard. The  Appellant
    had given consistent evidence as  to  the  date  of  his  baptism  (see
    question nine) supported by evidence from the church.  The  Appellant's
    evidence was that the  witness  H  did  not  attend  the  baptism.  The
    Appellant's witness H (see D 1 of the bundle) stated that the Appellant
    had invited him to the baptism  but  the  statement  is  silent  as  to
    whether or not he went. The judge's finding  at  [33]  mischaracterises
    the evidence by referring to this witness saying that he did attend the
    baptism ("he adds that he attended  the  Appellant's  baptism..."  when
    that was not what the document said.

15. Furthermore the judge at two separate places in the determination makes
    reference to the evidence provided from two witnesses which lacked  the
    letterhead of the church. In relation to the witness H at paragraph  34
    the judge noted that the letter did not  bear  the  letterhead  of  the
    church and at paragraph 45 in relation to the witness K  he  also  made
    the same observation. Mr Jarvis on behalf  of  the  respondent  submits
    that they were not findings that were intended to undermine the  weight
    of that evidence but were merely observations. However, I  can  see  no
    reason for making such an observation if it was not a  relevant  matter
    to the weight that should be attached to that evidence. In the case  of
    H, he was not a church official of any  kind  and  thus  there  was  no
    reason to expect any communication from him would be written  on  paper
    bearing a church letterhead. Whilst the evidence of K did emanate  from
    the church and was not on paper with such a letterhead, this was of  no
    relevance in the light of a letter from the Reverend in  which  he  had
    stated  K  was  a  church  elder  appointed  to  attend  the   hearing.
    Consequently if those observations did go to the weight of the evidence
    they were not made out.

16. The real issue it seems to me is the consideration of the oral evidence
    given by the witness K. The decision of the Tribunal in Dorodian is  of
    some age now. However that decision made it clear that "no  one  should
    be regarded as a committed Christian who is not vouched for as such  by
    a minister of a church established in this country, as we have said, it
    is church membership rather than mere belief which may lead  to  risk."
    Thus it is often argued that in the absence of oral evidence  attesting
    to an applicant's faith, that the Tribunal cannot be  satisfied  as  to
    the genuineness of the Christian conversion. In this case the judge had
    oral and written evidence from the church. Dealing with  the  statement
    of K, it was in very brief terms. However Mr  Gayle  accepts  that  the
    judge accurately recorded the witness's oral evidence at paragraphs  47
    to 49. The conclusion reached at paragraph 50 was that the judge had no
    doubt that the witness "genuinely  believe  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    genuine Christian convert". However at paragraph 51, the judge,  having
    looked at the totality evidence said that he did not find  that  to  be
    the position. Whilst Mr Jarvis submits that it was open to the judge to
    consider  that  evidence  in  the  light  of  the  other  discrepancies
    identified, as set out above I do not consider that those discrepancies
    were either present or material if they were. Secondly, the judge  made
    no analysis of the witness's evidence or gave any tangible reasons  for
    rejecting the substance of that evidence given. It would have been open
    to the judge to reach the conclusion at [ 50] but it was  incumbent  on
    the judge  to  set  out  what  it  was  about  the  evidence  given  in
    conjunction with the other issues that led him  to  reach  a  different
    view. There was also other written evidence from the church although  I
    would accept that given  the  non-attendance  that  would  have  little
    weight but nonetheless was a matter to be factored in to  the  evidence
    as a whole.

17.  For those reasons I am satisfied that the grounds have been  made  out
    and that the decision cannot stand and therefore the decision shall  be
    set aside.

18. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of this nature was for the appeal  to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  because  it  would  enable  the
    judge to consider the applicant's evidence and his account and for  the
    witness from the church to attend; this  being  a  case  in  which  the
    adverse credibility findings are unsafe and cannot be preserved.

19. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  that  is  the
    correct course to take and therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to hear afresh.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of flaw and is set aside; it shall be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Reeds
                     Date: 6th July 2017
