
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/01535/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 October 2019                     |    On 14 November 2019               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                    m O K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L. Bashow, counsel instructed by Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Albania born on 22 November  1987.   She
    arrived in the UK on 5 October 2014, she was  subsequently  encountered
    during an operation at an  address  in  Salford  and  found  to  be  in
    possession of a false Italian identity document.  She was convicted  on
    23 February 2015 for possession of  false  documents  with  intent  and
    sentenced to eight months' imprisonment.  She was subsequently arrested
    on 22 December 2015 working illegally  at  a  bar  in  Manchester.  The
    Appellant subsequently on 20 March 2015 made an  asylum  claim  on  the
    basis that she was a victim of trafficking.

 2. A referral to the National Referral Mechanism was made on  14  November
    2017 but it was subsequently concluded that she was  not  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  Her application for asylum was initially  refused  on  18
    January 2018 with no  in-country  right  of  appeal,  but  following  a
    judicial review she was given the right of appeal along with a  refusal
    dated 6 February 2019.  The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision
    and her appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Raikes  for
    hearing on 10 June 2019.  In the decision and reasons promulgated on 25
    June 2019 the judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  the  judge
    had erred materially in law: firstly, in failing to  give  any  or  any
    adequate reasons for rejecting the evidence of the  Appellant's  former
    work colleague, a British citizen Ms ZD and the written evidence of the
    restaurant manager, Mr AC, who confirmed that the  Appellant  had  been
    working in the restaurant Avalanche, six days a  week  during  December
    2014. This was material to the Appellant's claim  to  be  a  victim  of
    trafficking because the evidence submitted by the  Respondent,  in  the
    form of a letter from the British Embassy in Tirana dated 9  May  2017,
    indicated that the Appellant's passport had been used  on  16  December
    2014 to travel into Albania across the  land  border  from  Montenegro.
    This indicated that if the Appellant was in the UK  at  the  time,  she
    cannot have used her passport and it thus corroborated her  claim  that
    her passport had been retained by her trafficker.

 4. The second ground of appeal asserted that at [62]  the  Judge  had,  in
    finding it was not impossible for the Appellant to  have  left  the  UK
    during that period of time based on the fact there  was  some  evidence
    from facebook of her presence in the UK, that the judge has imposed too
    high a standard of proof given the Appellant was only required to  show
    there was a reasonable degree of likelihood.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted in a decision dated 25  July  2019  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson in the following terms:

         "There is some arguable merit in Ground 1 at para 10 because it  is
         arguable that the judge  has  made  no  reference  to  the  witness
         statement of the restaurant manager.   It  may  well  be  that  the
         witness statement of the restaurant manager could not be relied  on
         but the judge arguably made  no  findings  of  fact  on  it  and  a
         consideration of this may make a material difference to the outcome
         of the case.  It is difficult to conclude that  the  other  grounds
         are not arguable in the circumstances as  all  of  them  relate  to
         whether or not the Appellant was in the UK between 24 November  and
         21 December.  Permission is granted on all grounds."

     Hearing

 6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Bates  acknowledged  there
    was no Rule 24 response but he was seeking to defend  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 7. In her submissions, Ms Bashow sought to rely on the grounds  of  appeal
    as drafted by her.  She also addressed, at my request, the issue of the
    materiality of any error given the judge's alternative findings at [68]
    onwards.  She submitted that if there was objective evidence  that  the
    Appellant is a victim of trafficking, then the starting  point  of  any
    assessment of risk would be that  the  Appellant  was  credible  rather
    than, as was the position at the  previous  hearing,  from  a  negative
    perspective which clearly infects the approach.  For example, at  [66],
    the Judge was sceptical of the Appellant's  receipt  of  treatment  for
    PTSD.  If there was a finding that she had been trafficked  this  would
    put that treatment in context.  At [74]  the  Judge  makes  a  negative
    finding as to the risk of re-trafficking  but  again  that  is  in  the
    context of finding that the Appellant had not been trafficked.  At [70]
    the Judge found the Appellant had a strong family structure upon  which
    she could rely, but this is outwith the Appellant's evidence that  they
    have put a black cross on her referring to her parents rather  than  to
    her sister and her cousin.  There is clearly stigma in Albanian society
    towards prostitution.

 8. Ms Bashow submitted that the materiality also impacts on the Article  8
    proportionality assessment: see [88].  If the Appellant were recognised
    as a victim of trafficking, her  case  could  be  reconsidered  by  the
    competent authorities  and  a  different  reasonable  grounds  decision
    issued, which would have benefits including the recognition as a victim
    of trafficking and the grant of a period of leave which would impact on
    any consideration of Article 8 and the Appellant's  private  life.   It
    would further impact on the safety  of  the  decision  to  convict  the
    Appellant for travel with the use of false identity  documents  because
    that relates to the fact that she was a victim of trafficking  and  her
    claim that her former trafficker had retained  her  passport.   If  she
    were not a victim of trafficking, then the Appellant would not be  able
    to access reintegration packages in Albania, so it is material to  that
    assessment as well.

 9. Ms Bashow further submitted that there was an issue  arising  from  the
    fact that the Appellant's name, address and  date  of  birth  had  been
    published in the UK due to the operation when she  was  arrested  along
    with a number of other individuals at the same time who  were  involved
    in drugs.  This had also been reported in the Albanian press  and  this
    could negatively impact on her future  and  possibility  of  employment
    even though the Appellant herself was not involved with drugs.

10. Ms Bashow submitted that the Appellant had provided evidence to support
    her assertion she was in the UK for the whole of  December  2014.   She
    had arrived in the UK in October of that year and her case is that  she
    has never left since that time.  She  stated  that  her  boyfriend  and
    trafficker retained her passport and it is her claim that her  passport
    was used by somebody else at the behest of her trafficker: see page 114
    of the Respondent's bundle

11. Ms Bashow submitted that the witness ZD, whose statement is at pages  1
    to 2 of the supplementary bundle, gave oral evidence  which  was  quite
    compelling as she was able to elaborate on how she was able to remember
    events four years previously and this was because she  was  the  events
    manager at the restaurant.  She had to directly supervise the Appellant
    who was responsible for some aspects of the restaurant and  would  have
    to provide her with an itinerary on a  daily  basis.   There  are  also
    photographs confirming that the Appellant worked  for  that  restaurant
    and that she was friends with  Ms  D.   Ms  D's  evidence  was  further
    corroborated by a statement from the floor manager, AC, albeit  he  did
    not attend to give oral evidence.

12. Ms Bashow submitted, based on  the  facebook  evidence,  the  Appellant
    would only have been in Albania in any event for about  five  days  and
    that this contradicted the fact that, as the witness stated, this was a
    very busy time of year and the Appellant was working at the  restaurant
    throughout, which was clear circumstantial evidence she would not  have
    gone back to Albania at this time.  Ms Bashow submitted  that,  in  any
    event, the Judge's finding at [64] is not clear as to the  reasons  she
    was rejecting the evidence of Ms D, whether it was because  she  was  a
    friend, whether it is  because  it  was  based  on  the  witness's  own
    knowledge or whether it was because the events took  place  four  years
    ago.  She submitted the judge clearly made a material error of  law  in
    this respect.

13. With regard to the second ground of appeal and the Judge's  finding  at
    [62] that it was not impossible for the Appellant to have left  the  UK
    between 24 November and 21 December 2014, she submitted that  this  was
    too high a standard of proof, which should have  been  whether  it  was
    reasonably likely that the Appellant was in the UK or had left  the  UK
    given the evidence as to her employment.  Ms Bashow took me to pages 70
    to 71 of the Respondent's bundle which is a  letter  from  the  British
    Embassy in Tirana dated 9 May 2017,  which  purports  to  set  out  the
    Appellant's travel in and out of Albania as  a  consequence  of  checks
    conducted with the Albanian border and migration  department.  However,
    it does not establish which documents the Appellant was travelling  on.
    There is reference both to a passport and to a national identity  card,
    both of which are valid to 5 April 2021.  The letter from  the  British
    Embassy refers to an enclosure which is a scanned copy of  an  official
    response from the General Directorate of Civil Registry at the Ministry
    of Interior of Albania dated 10 April  2017.   Mr  Bates  was  able  to
    provide a copy of this document which is in Albanian and gave  that  to
    Ms Basho for her instructing solicitors to  arrange  a  translation  if
    they so wish.  Ms Basho submitted that ultimately, given  the  case  is
    about trafficking, any issue about cross-border travel  is  potentially
    material and she asked that I find errors of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

14. In his submissions, Mr Bates submitted that in terms of the two grounds
    of appeal they are centred on the Judge's findings and unwillingness to
    accept that the Appellant was in the UK throughout.  He submitted  that
    really the first ground of appeal was no more than a challenge  to  the
    weight that the judge had attached to the evidence of Ms ZD.  The judge
    was  not  willing  to  accept  the  Appellant  had  given  a   credible
    explanation at [51] as to her circumstances when  leaving  Albania  and
    the Judge relies on the Appellant's answers in the screening  interview
    that when she left Italy she  had  an  Albanian  passport,  albeit  she
    thought this related to  her  identity  card,  but  there  remained  an
    inconsistency.

15. Mr Bates submitted the judge found the Appellant's failure to  disclose
    that she had had  an  Albanian  passport  undermined  her  credibility.
    There were further discrepancies as to who had bought  the  tickets  to
    travel to Italy.  At [54] the judge found the Appellant's  account  had
    been inconsistent as to who had provided details of the outward  flight
    to Italy on 29 March 2014 but had not given any information  about  her
    return to Albania with her supposed  trafficker  in  August  2014.   Mr
    Bates submitted that what the Judge was finding at [64]  was  that  the
    evidence of Ms ZD was not reliable  because  she  was  the  Appellant's
    friend and she was speaking from memory relating to events  four  years
    previously.

16. In relation to the facebook evidence, Mr Bates submitted  there  was  a
    question mark over its reliability given that any  account  holder  has
    considerable leeway to edit her  own  posts  and  information  and  the
    Presenting Officer's submission to this effect is recorded at  [63]  of
    the decision.  Consequently, it was open to the judge to find that  the
    facebook photographs were not reliable in terms  of  showing  that  the
    Appellant was in the UK on 16 December 2014.

17. In relation to the second ground of  appeal,  Mr  Bates  submitted  the
    Judge  was  simply  using  the  same  language   as   the   Appellant's
    representatives, who submitted it was impossible that the Appellant had
    left the UK, gone to Albania and returned to the UK  in  such  a  short
    timescale.  He submitted in terms of establishing  that  the  Appellant
    was absent for a period of time outside the UK, the Judge does not find
    it impossible and it was entirely possible she could have exited the UK
    on an earlier date and gone to Montenegro and to Albania from there.

18. Mr Bates submitted there was nothing in the grounds of appeal  to  show
    that the competent authority would have reached a different decision in
    respect of whether or not the Appellant was a victim of trafficking and
    in any event, they apply a  higher  standard  of  proof,  that  of  the
    balance of probabilities.  At [68] the judge found that, in any  event,
    the Appellant would not be at risk on  return  even  if  she  had  been
    trafficked because she could turn to extended family  members  such  as
    the cousin who assisted her in leaving.

19. Mr Bates submitted that the  grounds  of  appeal  are  focused  on  the
    credibility of the trafficking claim rather than any challenge  to  the
    alternative  findings  and  it  had  been  open  to   the   Appellant's
    representative to cover all  points.   He  submitted  that  there  were
    clearly significant areas of concern  that  were  in  addition  to  the
    question of whether the Appellant was in the UK at the time when  there
    is the conflicting information and that the  ultimate  outcome  in  the
    decision had not actually been challenged.

20. In reply, Ms Bashow submitted that  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  her
    interview at questions 100 to 102 was that there was no  return  flight
    booked from Italy and the reason that she and the  trafficker  returned
    to Albania was because his mother was  sick.   She  submitted  that  no
    weight should be placed on the  ability  of  a  person  to  edit  their
    facebook account.  Whilst there were  gaps  in  the  facebook  evidence
    during which time the Appellant could have left the UK, the evidence of
    the witness ZD and the restaurant or floor manager was crucial and this
    had not been properly addressed by the judge.

21. Ms Bashow drew my attention to the country guidance decision in  TD  at
    [15] and [16] which is that when assessing the eligibility for  support
    for victims of trafficking, any decision by a  competent  authority  is
    taken into account and thus any assessment by  them  is  likely  to  be
    negative following the findings from the UK authorities.

22. Ms Bashow submitted if the Appellant's  name  is  googled,  the  search
    results show both UK and Albanian press reports of  the  incident  when
    she was arrested.  This would jeopardise the Appellant's future if  any
    would-be employer or a shelter were to check her name.

23. I reserved my decision, which I now give my reasons.




Findings and reasons

24.  I have concluded, with some reluctance in light  of  the  evident  care
taken by the  Judge, as is evidenced by the length and detail  contained  in
the decision and reasons,  that she made material errors of law. My  reasons
for so finding are as follows:

24.1.    The key, albeit not the only, issue in relation to the  Appellant's
credibility arose from      the  contents  of  a  letter  from  the  British
Embassy  in  Tirana  dated  9  May  2017,      which  indicated   that   the
Appellant's passport had been used on 16 December 2014 to       travel  into
Albania across the land border from Montenegro. The Appellant claimed   that
she was working in a bar and restaurant in  Manchester  throughout  December
2014 and that her passport must have been used by her former  trafficker  in
respect of    another person. Thus it is apparent that this  issue  goes  to
the heart of whether  or  not      the  Appellant  had  been  trafficked  as
claimed.

24.2.    At [64] the Judge held as follows:

     "I note that the Appellant's witness has  sought  to  present  evidence
that the Appellant was     working in Avalanche restaurant for the whole  of
the December period and therefore in the     UK for the  whole  time  period
referred to. However,  whilst  I  accept  that  she  wishes  to  assist  her
friend in whatever way she can,  I  find  that  merely  asserting  that  her
friend did so, and based   on a knowledge of both her particular  tasks  and
restaurant's rota dating from over four years    ago is  evidence  that  she
was in the UK as asserted by her."

     Even taking account of the fact  that  it  is  likely  that  the  Judge
intended to insert the     word "not" before  the  word  "evidence"  in  the
last sentence of this paragraph, it is  apparent that the  reasons  provided
for not accepting the evidence of ZD are unclear.      No  further  analysis
of Ms ZD's evidence was provided and I find it  is  not  possible  to   tell
exactly why the Judge  failed  to  give  this  evidence  full  corroborative
weight. The   fact that they are friends is not per se  sufficient  reasons,
particularly when the  evidence of the witness went far beyond that  because
they were work colleagues at    the material time viz December 2014.

24.3. The Judge's error is further exacerbated by  a  failure  to  give  any
consideration to  a      statement  from  the  bar  and  restaurant's  floor
manager Mr AC, which was potentially     corroborative  of  the  Appellant's
claim to have been working there throughout  December 2014. I find that  the
failure to take this evidence into  consideration  is  also  a      material
error of law.

24.4.    There was also before the Judge evidence in the  form  of  facebook
photographs which      indicated  that  the  Appellant  was  in  the  UK  at
various dates in December 2014. At   [62]  the  Judge  found  that:  "Whilst
again it is asserted that there would be  no  reason  why     the  Appellant
would travel back to Albania from Montenegro for a period of  four  days  or
so   and then arrive in the UK thereafter I find  that  given  there  is  no
supportive evidence as to her   whereabouts between the 24 November  and  21
December  based  on  the  facebook  entries  alone      this   is   not   an
impossibility." This finding amounts to a material error  of  law,  firstly,
because the facebook entries were not the only evidence before the Judge  in
light of      the evidence of Ms ZD and  Mr  AC  and  secondly,  because  it
appears that the Judge     was potentially misdirecting herself with  regard
to the standard of proof, which it is   well-established  is  whether  there
is a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  rather  than  a     possibility  or
impossibility.

24.5.    Mr Bates's position  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  that  these
errors are not material,   given that the Judge went on at [68] to  [77]  to
find that, even if he were wrong in his      earlier findings  in  rejecting
the Appellant's claim to have been trafficked, she would  not be at risk  of
persecution on return to Albania and these alternative findings  have    not
been challenged in the grounds of appeal. I specifically put this  point  to
Ms   Bashow to give her the  opportunity  to  respond:  [7]  and  [8]  above
refer.

24.6.    I have concluded that the errors  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
whereabouts in    December 2014 are material in that this may have  infected
the Judge's overall    consideration of whether or not the  Appellant  is  a
victim of trafficking. Whilst as    Mr Bates pointed out this  was  not  the
only adverse credibility finding made   against the  Appellant,  it  is  not
possible to say whether the Judge would have reached   the  same  conclusion
had she accepted the evidence of both ZD and AC and the   facebook  evidence
that the Appellant was in the UK and did not use her  passport  to    travel
to Albania in December 2014, nor that she would have made the same  findings
      in  the  alternative,  given  that  the  CG  decision  in  TD  and  AD
(Trafficked Women) CG  [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) is predicated  upon  a  women
from Albania having been   trafficked.  The Judge was, at  the  very  least,
obliged to engage with the evidence in  support of the Appellant's  presence
in the UK in December 2014 in the round and   provide  proper  and  adequate
reasons for rejecting it.

     Decision

25.  I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Raikes. I remit  the appeal for a hearing de novo  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal.

     Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper   Tribunal) Rules 2008

     Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
is granted    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him    or any member of their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to    the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of    court proceedings.

Signed        Rebecca Chapman                    Date 10 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
