
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/01027/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 September 2017                      | On 04 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                              Muhammad Rafaqat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Reyaz, Rasools Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Muhammad Rafaqat, was born on 13 July 1990 and is a male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He entered the United Kingdom in April 2011 on  a
    student visa.  Thereafter, he overstayed in  the  United  Kingdom.   In
    March 2015 he was encountered working in  Rochdale.  He  made  a  human
    rights claim based on private life  grounds  and  his  application  was
    refused without any right  of  appeal  (it  was  certified  as  clearly
    unfounded).  On 19 July 2016, the appellant made a  claim  for  asylum.
    On 17 January 2017,  a  decision  was  made  to  refuse  to  grant  the
    appellant asylum.  The appellant appealed against that decision to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Caskie) which, in a decision promulgated  on
    21 March 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Before Judge Caskie, the appellant's representative indicated that  "no
    aspect of the case was being pursued but Article 8 inside  and  outside
    the [Immigration] Rules".  As Mr Reyaz, who appeared before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, put it in his submissions, the case turns upon the nature  of
    the appellant's claimed relationship with his partner, described in the
    decision [12] as "the appellant's wife"; the judge noted [8]  that  the
    appellant and his partner had not entered a civil marriage because  the
    Home Office had retained the appellant's passport.  I shall, therefore,
    refer to this  person  as  "the  appellant's  partner".   She  has  two
    children (H and R) who "have contact with their [natural] father at the
    time of Eid only" [12].  The children H and R are British citizens.  Mr
    Reyaz submitted  that  the  strength  and  nature  of  the  appellant's
    relationship both with his partner and with the children was such  that
    the judge should have allowed the appeal.  Instead, the judge had  made
    a number of findings favourable to the appellant but he  had  concluded
    that the relationship was not genuine or subsisting.  Mr Singh, for the
    Secretary of State, submitted that the judge had found this a difficult
    decision to reach [41] but that his findings on the evidence, which had
    been coloured by the fact that he found  that  the  appellant  and  his
    partner  had  given  inconsistent   and   untruthful   evidence,   were
    sustainable as was the judge's conclusion that the  appellant  did  not
    satisfy the requirements of HC 395 nor could his appeal  succeed  under
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. The judge summarised at length the evidence which he  heard  from  both
    the appellant and his partner.  He recorded in detail the  inconsistent
    evidence given by the two witnesses and concludes that either  or  both
    of them gave untruthful evidence to the Tribunal.  The judge found that
    there was "clearly some form of relationship between the appellant  and
    his partner" [33].  He found that the appellant and  his  partner  were
    living together with the children in Birmingham.   He  found  that  the
    relationship between the appellant and the partner was "clearly one  of
    some length"  although  he  did  record  that  there  was  no  legally-
    recognised marriage.  Equally, the judge found that both the  appellant
    and his wife "have simply lied to me" [34].  The extent  of  the  lying
    was very serious; he found  that  the  appellant's  evidence  had  been
    "entirely  contradicted  by  the  evidence  of  his  wife".   This  was
    particularly true of the contact which the appellant  claimed  to  have
    had with his partner during the period of her marriage to another  man.
    The judge was invited to find that there was a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship between the appellant and  the  children  but  he
    "noted that evidence of [the appellant's] involvement in the lives  [of
    the children] was simply lacking".  He found that the appellant did not
    seem to "understand that a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with children involved more than simply the functional tasks  [such  as
    taking them to and from school etc.] described".  The judge found  [37]
    that there was no relationship between the appellant and  the  children
    prior to July 2015.

 4. At [41], Judge Caskie wrote:

         This has not been an easy  determination  to  write  because  I  am
         entirely satisfied there is some form of relationship  between  the
         appellant and his partner.  I simply do not know what the nature of
         that relationship is because of the lies and inconsistent  evidence
         that has been presented to me.  For the avoidance of doubt, I  make
         clear that I am not satisfied as to the nature and  extent  of  any
         relationship the appellant claims to have with  any  of  the  other
         parties involved in this application, including his  wife  and  the
         three children.  In those circumstances, the appeal is dismissed as
         the needs of immigration control far outweigh  the  rights  of  the
         parties involved to continue whatever relationships they might have
         with one another.

 5. In essence, Mr Reyaz's submission was that, given  the  findings  which
    the judge had made about the relationship between  the  appellant,  his
    partner and the children, he was left with no option but to  allow  the
    appeal.  As regards the children, the public interest did  not  require
    the appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom  given  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act (as amended).  It is also not the  Home
    Office's current policy to remove an individual who had a  current  and
    subsisting genuine relationship with a  partner  or  children  who  are
    British and who cannot (as Judge Caskie found)  relocate  to  Pakistan.
    The judge's decision was, therefore, perverse.

 6.  The problem with such a submission is that it entirely fails to engage
    with the nuanced analysis of Judge Caskie.  It is plain that the  judge
    was fully aware of the apparent contradiction between the  evidence  in
    this case (which appeared to show that the appellant is married to  his
    partner, that they live together and that he is  involved  on  a  daily
    basis in the lives of her children) and his conclusion that the  appeal
    should be dismissed.  It is because Judge  Caskie  was  aware  of  that
    apparent contradiction that he went to some length,  in  particular  at
    [41],  to  explain  the  reasons  for  his  decision.   The  judge  has
    acknowledged the evidence which appears to  show  the  existence  of  a
    relationship but, equally, both the  appellant  and  his  partner  were
    found to have given untruthful evidence about that relationship to  the
    Tribunal.  As the judge found, that untruthful  evidence  has  obscured
    the nature of the relationship between the appellant, his  partner  and
    the children to such an extent that the judge was  unable  to  conclude
    that those relationships were genuine and subsisting.  In light of  the
    fact that witnesses had lied to the judge, that was a conclusion  which
    he was fully entitled to reach.  If Mr  Reyaz's  submission  is  right,
    then the judge would have been compelled to ignore in his analysis  the
    fact that the witnesses lied to him.

 7. The consequence of the untruthful evidence given by the  witnesses  was
    that the judge was left with no clear idea of the true  nature  of  the
    relationships between the parties involved in the appeal. However,  the
    judge was not required to define exactly what those  relationships  may
    be; the onus rested on the appellant to prove his case  and  the  judge
    found that he had failed to do so.  The judge was required to  consider
    whether the relationships were of such a  strength  and  nature  as  to
    require that the appellant remain in the United Kingdom. It was open to
    the judge to conclude that they were not. I can identify  no  error  of
    law in his analysis which would lead me to set aside his decision.



Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 5 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 5 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
