
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01598/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2019                           |On 06 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                  S S M S A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Nizami, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Egypt.  He  sought   international
    protection. His application was refused and following a  hearing  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Wright, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    November 2018, dismissed the Appellant's appeal. The  Judge  found  his
    account not credible.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Ford on 5 December 2018.  Her  reasons  for  so
    granting were: -

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal in  time,  against  a
         decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Wright)  dated  12  November
         2018 whereby  it  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
         Secretary of State's decision to refuse his Protection claim.

         2.   It is argued that the Tribunal erred in; -

             a.   Failing to make due  allowance  for  the  impact  of  the
             Appellant's PTSD on his recollection  of  events  including  a
             visit to the Appellant's family home by the authorities  after
             he had fled Egypt. Grounds 2  and  3  are  closely  linked  to
             Ground 1.

             b.    Failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the   adverse
             credibility  findings  and/or  failing  to  make  findings  on
             important issues.

             c.    Wrongly  requiring  documentary  corroboration  of   his
             account of his brothers being in hiding (paragraph 37 and 62).

         3.   Only Ground 6 in the application is arguable.

         4.   When looked at as a whole the Tribunal has given due weight to
         the Appellant's medical report and PTSD diagnosis in assessing  the
         evidence and has done an adequate assessment of the evidence giving
         sufficiently clear and cogent reasons for its findings.

         5.   It is just about arguable that the Tribunal made  an  arguable
         material error of law."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. This is an appeal where I find the Judge has materially erred  for  the
    reasons put forward in the first three  of  Counsel's  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal. They effectively amount to  one  singular  ground
    which is that the Judge in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give
    proper regard to the Medico-legal report and  consequently  misdirected
    herself in law.

 5. This was resisted by Mr Howells who submitted that the Judge had  found
    the Appellant, at paragraph 54 of her decision, suffered from both PTSD
    and mild depression and that it was open to the Judge, irrespective  of
    that, to find that such a diagnosis did not explain the fact  that  the
    Appellant had given new evidence in cross-examination. Further that  it
    was open to the Judge to find  that  it  was  "not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant would suddenly  "remember"  such  information  during  cross-
    examination". Further given that the Judge was  not  provided  with  an
    application to consider the Appellant a vulnerable witness there was no
    onus upon the Judge to do so.  The  Judge  had  come  to  findings  and
    conclusions on the evidence which were open to be made.

 6. In considering  the  Appellant's  evidence  the  Judge  has  failed  to
    consider, albeit that it is acknowledged that the Appellant has  mental
    health difficulties, the medical legal  report  of  Dr  Michael  Shortt
    dated 26 March 2018. It is recorded at page 42 thereof that: -

         "(...) episodes of repeated reliving of  the  trauma  in  intrusive
         memories ("flashbacks") or dreams, occurring against the persisting
         background  of  a  sense  of  "numbness"  and  emotional  blunting,
         detachment from other  people,  unresponsiveness  to  surroundings,
         anhedonia, and avoidance of activities and  situations  reminiscent
         of the trauma. Commonly there is fear and avoidance  of  cues  that
         remind the sufferer of the original trauma. Rarely,  there  may  be
         dramatic, acute bursts of fear, panic or aggression,  triggered  by
         stimuli arousing a sudden recollection and/or re-enactment  of  the
         trauma or of the original reaction to it."

 7. At paragraph 23 of her decision the Judge records, in relation  to  the
    Medico-legal report, that "there was however no reference to the report
    by the Appellant in his evidence in chief. In addition, the report  was
    barely referred to in closing submissions.". This again gives rise to a
    material error of law. The submissions that were made  at  the  hearing
    relied heavily on Counsel's written skeleton argument wherein there are
    several references to this evidence.

 8. Whilst the Appellant's representatives accept that  the  Appellant  did
    not disclose certain issues prior to the appeal hearing, in  particular
    that the Egyptian authorities visited his family home after he fled his
    country of origin, such late disclosure is possible in the  context  of
    an appeal hearing. This is particularly so in the context of an  unwell
    Appellant who gave evidence in cross-examination  in  relation  to  his
    mental ill-health and which was supported by the above-mentioned Medico-
    legal report.

 9. Accordingly, I find that the Judge  has  failed  to  consider  material
    matters that were before her, erred in  finding  that  the  report  was
    barely  relied  on  and  erred  in  her  credibility  assessment   with
    particular reference to the late evidence.

10. For these reasons I find that  the  Judge's  credibility  findings  are
    materially flawed and cannot stand. There is therefore no need  for  me
    to consider further any of the other grounds put forward.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Wright.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


Signed   Date 4 February 2019.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
