




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/01734/2017
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                  Decision and Reasons   |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 20 November 2017              |                  On: 4 December 2017    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                              Ms Huong Thi Tran
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Vietnam. She  appeals  with  permission
      against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  Bartlett,  who
      dismissed her asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights  appeal
      in a decision promulgated on 4 April 2017.

   2. Notice of the hearing was sent to the  appellant  at  her  address  on
      record on 28 September 2017. The matter  was  stood  down  until  1pm.
      However, there was still no appearance.

   3. I am satisfied that the appellant has been notified of the hearing and
      I consider it to be in the interests of justice to  proceed  with  the
      appeal.

   4. In granting the appellant permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge M J Gillespie found with regard to  the  protection  claim  that
      there is no error  of  law  identifiable  in  the  findings  of  Judge
      Bartlett on this issue.

   5. The appellant  was  unrepresented  at  that  stage  and  submitted  an
      application for permission to appeal which she signed and dated. Judge
      Gillespie then considered whether there were other  potential  grounds
      of appeal apparent which would not be obvious to the lay person.

   6. He decided that there was an  arguable  error  of  law  affecting  the
      decision on the human rights  claim.  He  noted  that  Judge  Bartlett
      considered the human rights  claim  first  through  the  lens  of  the
      Immigration Rules  and  has  made  an  unequivocal  finding  that  the
      appellant would meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

   7. Judge Bartlett found that  the  appellant  has  no  family  who  could
      support her in a financial or  practical  sense  if  she  returned  to
      Vietnam. She had no  financial  resources  of  her  own.  She  had  no
      accommodation to return to in Vietnam.  Having  regard  to  all  those
      circumstances, Judge Bartlett considered that the appellant would face
      very significant obstacles to her integration in Vietnam as on  return
      she would be a single lone female with a low level  of  education,  no
      family support, no accommodation and no money [29].

   8. As noted by  Judge  Gillespie  however,  Judge  Bartlett  nevertheless
      concluded that there is no appeal available on the  grounds  that  the
      decision fails to conform with the Rules. Further analysis of the case
      proceeded under the residual protection of Article 8,  in  respect  of
      which, notwithstanding the early finding  that  she  would  face  such
      obstacles to integration in Vietnam as would engage Rule  276ADE,  the
      Judge held  that  removal  would  not  constitute  a  disproportionate
      interference.

   9. Judge Gillespie granted  permission  on  the  basis  that  the  latter
      conclusion was arguably inconsistent with the former conclusion. It is
      particularly so as a claim under Rule 276ADE is one recognised by  the
      respondent as a human rights claim. If  therefore  she  met  the  more
      stringent human rights protection under  276ADE  it  is  arguably  not
      rational to hold that she fails to engage the wider  protection  under
      Article 8.

  10. The respondent did not seek to cross  appeal  the  findings  regarding
      Rule 276ADE.

  11. Ms Ahmad accepted that there has been an error on a point of  law  for
      the reasons set out by Judge Gillespie.  She noted that  there  is  no
      error of law relating to the asylum findings.

  12. She accepted that the decision should be set aside and remitted to the
      First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision  to  be  made  and  that  the
      findings in the asylum and humanitarian protection claims  are  to  be
      preserved.

  13. There should be a fresh decision made with respect to  the  Article  8
      claim only.


      Notice of Decision and Directions


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on  a  point
      of law and is set aside.


      The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross  for
      a fresh decision to be made  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.


      The findings in the asylum and humanitarian protection claims  are  to
      be preserved


      The appellant is permitted to file and serve further evidence relating
      to her Article 8 claim seven days prior to the date of the hearing.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 1 December 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

