
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01885/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 January 2018                     |On 6 February 2018                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A A R
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Yekinni, Supreme Solicitors, Rainham, Essex


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ] 1981.   She  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 9 February  2017  refusing
    her asylum and humanitarian protection claims and her  claim  on  human
    rights grounds.  Her appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal Courtney on 23 August  2017.   Her  appeal  was  dismissed  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds but allowed under Article  8
    of ECHR in a decision promulgated on 14 September 2017.


 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged by the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department and permission was granted  by  Judge  of
    the First-Tier Tribunal Alis on 10 November 2017.   The  grounds  argue
    that the Judge failed to consider  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, failed to consider proportionality and
    allowed the appeal on the basis that the children's best interests must
    outweigh the public interest in removal.  The  permission  states  that
    although the findings are not separated under  distinct  headings  that
    identify a protection/Article 3/Article 8 claim, the Judge  noted  that
    the children's best interests would need to  be  considered.  She  then
    looked at the protection claim and the risk posed by forced FGM to  the
    appellant's daughters. She rejected the protection  claim.   Article  8
    issues were only considered at paragraph 65 and the  permission  states
    that the Judge seems to have been confusing protection  and  Article  8
    issues, as having rejected the claim that the  appellant  would  be  at
    risk because on return her daughters might suffer forced FGM, the Judge
    appears to allow the appeals under Article 8 based on the risk posed to
    her daughters by forced FGM.


 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 5. The Presenting Officer referred to the grounds and submitted  that  the
    appeal appears to have been allowed on the  basis  of  the  appellant's
    children suffering FGM if they are returned  to  Nigeria  and  yet  the
    asylum claim has been dismissed and the appeal allowed under Article 8.
     He submitted that the decision is contradictory.  He submitted that if
    the appellant's children are at risk in  Nigeria  because  there  is  a
    possibility of forced FGM then they and their mother should  have  been
    granted refugee status, but the Judge  has  found  that  they  are  not
    refugees and appears to have allowed the claim under  Article  8  as  a
    consolation prize.

 6. He submitted that to allow this  claim  under  Article  8  of  ECHR  is
    confusing and contradictory when the Judge's other findings  are  taken
    into account.


 7. The appellant's representative submitted that the Judge has  considered
    the best interests of the children.  I was referred to  paragraphs  28,
    29 and 30 of the decision and he  submitted  that  based  on  the  best
    interests of the children the Judge has allowed the claim under Article
    8 of ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.  He submitted that  the  Judge
    has found that the children's best interests are going to be served  by
    their mother remaining with them in the United Kingdom.   He  submitted
    that the Judge was correct to allow the appeal under Article 8 of ECHR.


 8. He submitted that the appellant's children are in  need  of  protection
    and cannot return to Nigeria and the Judge was entitled  to  find  that
    the appellant was not entitled to asylum but  was  entitled  to  remain
    under Article 8 of ECHR based on the best interests of the children.


 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that although the  best  interests  of
    the children are a primary  consideration  they  are  not  the  primary
    consideration.   He  submitted  that  the  Judge's  decision  has   not
    specifically stated that the best interests  of  the  children  are  to
    remain in the United Kingdom with their mother.


10. The Presenting Officer submitted that the  Judge  has  found  that  the
    appellant should not be granted asylum on protection grounds  in  spite
    of the possible FGM situation for her children but has then gone on  to
    allow the claim under Article 8 on the basis that the children may have
    to suffer forced FGM if they are removed to Nigeria.  He submitted that
    the children either are at risk or are not at risk  and  an  assessment
    has to be made of the children's private life in the United Kingdom and
    a proportionality assessment is required as to  whether  the  appellant
    and her children can be removed as a unit.


11. He submitted that there must be a material error of law in the  Judge's
    decision which is that the appellant's children require protection  and
    yet asylum has not been granted. The appeal has been allowed only under
    Article 8 of ECHR.

Decision & Reasons

12. At paragraphs 28 to 30 of the decision the Judge has  referred  to  the
    best interests of the children but she has not stated that  their  best
    interests would be to remain in the United Kingdom with  their  mother.
    Although the Judge has stated that  she  has  taken  into  account  the
    seriousness of the difficulties which they might encounter  in  Nigeria
    there is no proportionality assessment in the  decision.   Neither  has
    the Judge considered Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

13. At paragraph 63 the Judge has stated that there  could  be  the  viable
    option of internal relocation, away from any coercive pressure or  risk
    of enforced FGM at the hands of relatives.  She finds  that  there  are
    circumstances  in  which  the  appellant   would   acquiesce   to   the
    circumcision of her daughters in Nigeria although she would not in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Judge makes reference to the case of AMM &  Others
    (Somalia) [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). She states that in that case the Upper
    Tribunal found that the  Refugee  Convention  cannot  be  construed  as
    affording refugee protection to a person who is in favour of inflicting
    harm on another, whether or not the societal and  religious  background
    of that person might be responsible for her having that  view,  whether
    the harm is inflicted by that  person  or  by  someone  else  with  her
    approval.  Because of this decision the judge did not grant  asylum  to
    the appellant.  The Judge goes on to state that  if  the  appellant  is
    returned to Nigeria she will take her children with her. The Judge  has
    found that the appellant's two daughters will be placed at risk if they
    accompany their mother to her country of origin and so  the  Judge  has
    allowed the appellant's appeal under Article 8 of  ECHR,  stating  that
    the  girls'  best  interests  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   the
    appellant's  removal.   The  Judge  then  states  that  it  is  in  the
    children's best interests that the appellant is permitted to remain  in
    the United Kingdom but although it is clear from the decision that  the
    reason she finds that the appellant should remain in the United Kingdom
    is on protection grounds based  on  FGM  being  performed  on  her  two
    daughters she has dismissed the protection claim and allowed the  claim
    under Article 8 of ECHR.  This cannot be right. If it is found that FGM
    is a danger for the appellant's two daughters  then  asylum  should  be
    granted.  Article 8 leave is not appropriate.

14. The judge has confused the protection claim and the human rights claim.
    She has not  carried  out  a  proportionality  assessment  relating  to
    Article 8 outside the Rules or referred to Section  117B  of  the  2002
    Act. These omissions amount to material errors of law.

Notice of Decision

15. I direct that the decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.
    None of its findings are to stand other than as a record  of  what  was
    said  on  that  occasion.   It  is  appropriate  in  terms  of  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit  the
    case to the First-Tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.

16. The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are
    not to include Judge Courtney.


17. Anonymity has been directed.





Signed                                  Date   02 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray





