
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01272/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 24 January 2017                   |On 30 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     ZS
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as DM.

Introduction

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his international protection claim.

       2. This is an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of Libya, against  a
          decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dated  18  October  2016,  in
          which it dismissed his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision
          dated  26  January  2016  to  refuse   asylum   and   humanitarian
          protection.

Asylum and humanitarian protection claim

       3. The  appellant's  claim  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  a
          straightforward one and comprised two parts: (i) he is an  atheist
          and this would place him at  enhanced  risk  in  Libya;  (ii)  the
          country situation in Libya had  deteriorated  to  such  an  extent
          that he is entitled to Article 15c protection.

First-tier Tribunal decision

       4. The First-tier Tribunal did not  accept  the  credibility  of  the
          appellant's claim to be an atheist.  In so  doing  the  First-tier
          Tribunal noted that the  appellant's  previous  asylum  claim  had
          been dismissed by a previous Tribunal following a  hearing  on  16
          October 2012.  That  Tribunal  roundly  rejected  the  appellant's
          credibility and did not accept that he had been targeted in  Libya
          because of a claim to be atheist.


       5. The First-tier Tribunal also found that there would be  no  breach
          of  Article  15c  if  the  appellant  returned  to  Tripoli,   and
          therefore dismissed the appeal.

       6. In grounds of appeal, both  findings  (credibility  and  Art  15c)
          were  challenged  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.    In   granting
          permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Page observed  that
          the assessment of risk under Article 15c  is  brief  and  arguably
          unlawful.

       7. In  a  rule  24  the  respondent  submitted  that  the  First-tier
          Tribunal had directed itself appropriately.

Error of law

       8. After initial discussions at the beginning  of  the  hearing  both
          representatives agreed that the decision contains material  errors
          of  law  in  relation  to  the  assessment  of   the   appellant's
          credibility and Article 15c, such that it must be  set  aside  and
          remade by the First-tier Tribunal.  They were right to do  so  for
          the reasons I give below.


       9. Mr Nicholson acknowledged that the grant  of  permission  did  not
          explicitly  refer  to  the   grounds   of   appeal   relating   to
          credibility, but  neither  did  it  grant  permission  on  limited
          grounds only.  Mr Diwnycz made it clear that he did not object  to
          the credibility grounds of appeal being considered  on  the  basis
          that permission had not been expressly limited to the Article  15c
          point, albeit observations were only  made  in  relation  to  that
          point.

Atheist claim

      10. The First-tier Tribunal was  obliged  to  take  into  account  the
          comprehensive adverse factual findings regarding  the  appellant's
          credibility in the previous Tribunal decision from 2012.   As  the
          First-tier Tribunal observed no  new  evidence  was  presented  in
          relation to the past treatment of the  appellant  in  Libya  [39].
          The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  also  entitled  to  consider   the
          appellant's  admitted  use  of  past  deception  as  well  as  the
          appellant's admission that he relied upon forged documents  before
          the previous Tribunal [39].  These are clearly highly relevant  to
          the  appellant's  credibility  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
          entitled to take  them  into  account.   However,  the  First-tier
          Tribunal appears to have concluded that  the  appellant's  use  of
          deception in the past is such that he "is not a credible  witness"
          [40].   The  FTT  has  effectively  concluded  that  because   the
          appellant was not believed  by  the  2012  Tribunal  and  employed
          deception in the past, his claim to have become a  more  committed
          atheist since that time cannot be believed.


      11. The relevant  guidance  of  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  in
          Devaseelan [2004] UKIAT 000282 includes the following:


                 "37.  ...The  first  Adjudicator's   determination   stands
                 (unchallenged,  or  not  successfully  challenged)  as   an
                 assessment of the claim the Appellant was then  making,  at
                 the time of that determination. It is not  binding  on  the
                 second Adjudicator; but, on  the  other  hand,  the  second
                 Adjudicator is not hearing an  appeal  against  it.  As  an
                 assessment of  the  matters  that  were  before  the  first
                 Adjudicator it should simply be regarded  as  unquestioned.
                 It may be built upon, and, as a result, the outcome of  the
                 hearing  before  the  second  Adjudicator  may   be   quite
                 different from what might have been expected from a reading
                 of the first determination only. But it is not  the  second
                 Adjudicator's  role  to  consider  arguments  intended   to
                 undermine the first Adjudicator's determination.?


                 39. The second Adjudicator  must,  however  be  careful  to
                 recognise that the issue before him is not the  issue  that
                 was before the first Adjudicator. In particular,  time  has
                 passed; and  the  situation  at  the  time  of  the  second
                 Adjudicator's determination may be shown  to  be  different
                 from that which obtained previously. Appellants may want to
                 ask the second Adjudicator to consider arguments on  issues
                 that were not - or could not be - raised before  the  first
                 Adjudicator; or evidence that was not - or could  not  have
                 been - presented to the first Adjudicator."

      12. In LD (Algeria) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 804, the  Court  of  Appeal
          approved the guidelines saying: ?

                 "30. Perhaps the most important feature of the guidance  is
                 that  the   fundamental   obligation   of   every   special
                 adjudicator independently to decide each new application on
                 its own individual merits was preserved. The  guidance  was
                 expressly subject to this overriding principle."


      13.  Mr  Diwnycz  accepted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has   not
          independently decided the merits of the appellant's evidence  that
          he is an atheist.  As he said the First-tier Tribunal  has  simply
          "latched on to past credibility findings" without considering  all
          the appellant's evidence in the round.  The  conclusion  that  the
          appellant is not credible is based solely upon the  past  findings
          and his past use of deception.  Such matters are  highly  relevant
          but the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  finding  them  to  be
          determinative.


      14. The First-tier Tribunal has also erred in law in its  approach  to
          the evidence from the three  witnesses  called  to  give  evidence
          regarding the appellant's atheism.  Having arrived in  the  UK  in
          August 2012 it is perhaps unsurprising that the appellant did  not
          know  anyone  sufficiently  well  for  them  to  provide  evidence
          regarding his religious beliefs at  a  hearing  in  October  2012.
          Some  four  years  later  at  the  hearing  in  October  2016  the
          witnesses  were  in  much  better  positions  to   outline   their
          understanding of the appellant's religious beliefs.  In  addition,
          although the First-tier Tribunal properly directed itself  to  the
          lower standard of proof [7], it erred  in  law  in  inversing  the
          applicable standard of proof in finding at [41] "that there  is  a
          reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant had  told  [the
          witnesses] that he is an atheist when this is  not  the  case,  to
          bolster his claim for asylum".  The question is  not  whether,  on
          the lower standard  of  proof,  the  appellant  has  lied  to  the
          witnesses, but whether, on the lower standard  of  truth,  he  has
          told the truth.

Article 15c

      15. It is clear from FA (Libya: art 15c)  Libya  CG  [2016]  UKUT  413
          (IAC) that  it  was  necessary  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
          conduct a careful assessment of the risk upon return, in light  of
          the various matters highlighted therein suggesting an increase  in
          risk (see paras 11 and 12  of  the  grounds  of  appeal),  and  in
          failing to do so the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law.


      16. Furthermore, Mr Diwnycz candidly accepted that  the  finding  that
          the appellant could  safely  return  to  Tripoli  via  Tunisia  is
          entirely unsupported by evidence.

Re-making the decision

      17. By paragraph 7.2 of the relevant practice  statement  for  appeals
          on or after 25 September 2012, I must be satisfied that:

                 "the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
                 necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
                 made  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the   overriding
                 objective in rule 2 it is appropriate to remit the case  to
                 the First-tier Tribunal."

      18. Both representatives agreed that there needed to be  further  fact
          finding regarding the appellant's claimed atheism  and  that  this
          should be done in the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the  nature  and
          extent of the judicial fact finding that is necessary  and  having
          regard to the overrising objective  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
          appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

      19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law and I set it aside.




      20. The decision shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

   1) The matter shall be listed on the  first  available  date  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal with a time estimate of 2.5 hrs.
   2) The appellant's solicitors shall file and serve  a  skeleton  argument
      outlining his position on two disputed  issues  (claimed  atheism  and
      Article 15c) and the evidence relied upon with page references to  the
      appellant's bundle, 28 days before the hearing.
   3) The respondent shall file and serve a position statement  in  response
      14 days before the hearing.
   4) Arabic, North African interpreter.






Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
24 January 2017


