
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01162/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Piccadilly Exchange,        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Manchester                           |                                     |
|On 24th January 2018                 |On 28 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     MS
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Holmes instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent  in
this determination identified as MS.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
rise to contempt of court proceedings


      1. SM, an Iranian national, claimed international  protection  on  the
         grounds that he had converted from Islam to Christianity and  would
         thus, on return to Iran, be at serious risk of being persecuted for
         a Convention reason. His application was refused by  the  SSHD  for
         reasons set out in a letter dated 16th January  2017.  He  appealed
         the decision, such appeal being heard by First-tier Tribunal  judge
         Lloyd who found that the weight of  the  evidence  (which  included
         oral evidence from some 12 witnesses) "suggests [SM] is  a  genuine
         convert to Christianity. I do not make this finding  lightly  given
         [SM] has lied to an Immigration Tribunal  on  a  previous  occasion
         about a faith conversion. I  have  reminded  myself  of  the  lower
         standard of proof which is very much in [SM's] favour."  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Lloyd allowed the appeal.


    Background


      2. SM arrived in the UK on 11 February 2007 and clamed asylum that day
         on the basis that he had had a relationship with  a  married  woman
         and had been arrested by the Iranian authorities for adultery.  His
         application was refused and his appeal dismissed by the  First-tier
         Tribunal following a hearing on 13th December 2007. The judge found
         that SM  had  "fabricated  his  account"  and  he  "comprehensively
         disbelieved" SM's account.


      3. SM did not leave the UK. On 17th March 2009, he was convicted of  a
         criminal offence of knowingly possessing a false instrument  namely
         a  forged  Italian  passport.  He  was  sentenced  to  12   months'
         imprisonment. On 1st April 2009,  he  was  served  with  notice  of
         automatic deportation and on 3rd August  2009  he  made  a  further
         asylum claim. That claim was  made  on  the  grounds  that  he  had
         converted to the Baha'i  faith;  the  claim  was  refused  on  22nd
         January 2010 and on 7th April 2011 his appeal was  dismissed  by  a
         First-tier Tribunal judge who found he had  not  given  a  truthful
         account of his conversion to the Baha'i faith.


      4. SM neither left the UK nor was he deported.


      5. On 7th May 2013 he made further representations on the basis of his
         relationship with a  British  national.  The  representations  were
         treated as an application to revoke the deportation  order  and  it
         was refused on 22nd August 2013. His appeal against  that  decision
         was heard on 20th November 2013. It seems that at that  hearing  he
         also claimed to have converted  to  Christianity.   His  appeal  on
         international protection grounds was refused, the judge finding  SM
         to be


             "...  a  wholly  unreliable  and  untruthful  witness  who  is
             prepared to  lie  to  immigration  officers  and  to  Tribunal
             judges.....given the vehemence  with  which  he  asserted  his
             commitment to the Baha'i faith and the ease with which he  has
             abandoned it, we have no doubt that  his  conversion  to  that
             faith  was  a  fabrication   demonstrating   that   [SM]   has
             compunction about asserting at a tribunal that he has a  faith
             he does not. That, taken with the extent to which he has  been
             found to be an untruthful witness and  the  lack  of  evidence
             from a minister of religion, leads us to the  firm  conclusion
             that [SM's] claimed conversion to Christianity is no more than
             a device."


         The  judge  accepted,  because  a  concession  made  had  not  been
         withdrawn, that he was in a relationship with a British citizen


      6. A further application to revoke the deportation order was  made  on
         27th  January  2015  on  the  basis  that  he  had   converted   to
         Christianity. His relationship with his British  partner  ended  in
         2014. The refusal of the  application  to  revoke  the  deportation
         order was the subject of the appeal before Judge Lloyd, who allowed
         the appeal.


      7. SM's evidence to Judge Lloyd included:


         *    he admits to having lied about converting to the Baha'i  faith
             which was done because he thought it would mean  he  would  be
             released from prison;


         *    At the 2011 hearing he gave evidence that his family were  not
             strict Muslims and he had told them of his conversion  to  the
             Baha'i faith; before Judge  Lloyd  he  said  his  family  were
             strict Muslims who no  longer  talk  to  him  because  of  his
             conversion to Christianity;


         *    he had started his conversion to Christianity while in  prison
             between December 2008 to December 2009 (although it is likely,
             given that his conviction was in March 2009, that by  December
             2009 he had been released from prison on licence  particularly
             given his evidence that  he  was  released  shortly  after  Mr
             Nazary who had served six months);


         *    Mr Rahman Nazary, with whom he had been convicted and shared a
             cell had sent him a bible after he, Mr Nazary, was released (6
             months after their conviction). Mr Nazary had found God whilst
             in prison  and  been  subsequently  recognised  as  a  refugee
             because of his conversion although he did not now  go  to  any
             prayer groups or attend any student Christian  groups  but  he
             goes to (a different) church once a month;


         *    SM started attending church a year after he was released  from
             prison;


         *    he attended St Paul's church in Stalybridge for a year and was
             baptised on 15th June 2014; at the end  of  2014/beginning  of
             2015 he started to attend Kings Church every week where he was
             re-baptised by full immersion;


         *    several witnesses  (friends,  the  Senior  Minister  at  Kings
             Church, part time pastor at Kings  Church,  other  members  of
             Kings Church) gave oral evidence, the general tenor  of  which
             was that SM was a regular attender at church, attended  church
             prayer meetings, had grown in faith and, in their view, he  is
             a genuine convert;


         *     a letter from a  psychiatrist  diagnoses  SM  with  recurrent
             depressive disorder, emotionally unstable personality  traits,
             no acute or definitive suicide plans and corrects  an  earlier
             letter which states that SM has converted to the Baha'i  faith
             whilst in Iran. He thinks SM's conversion is genuine:  he  has
             spoken of his love for Jesus for 18 months, finds  his  church
             very supportive and friendly and his family remain protective;


    Error of law


      8. If SM is to be believed, he was attending church on a regular basis
         for several months prior to his appeal hearing against the decision
         that he had converted to the Baha'i faith (April 2011). Although it
         seems possible that the asylum claim on that basis  had  been  made
         whilst he was in prison, he was not in prison when it  was  refused
         and yet he pursued his appeal on the basis that he  had  converted,
         contrary to his evidence that he  had  claimed  conversion  to  the
         Baha'i faith to get out of prison. There was no evidence  from  him
         why he had not disclosed his claimed increasing Christian faith  at
         the hearing in April 2011. By the time of that hearing he had  been
         out of prison for at least a year.


      9. Judge Lloyd found:


             "83. [SM] says he converted to Christianity in prison in  late
             2009. Judge Heynes found he  has  not  converted  following  a
             hearing on 20 November 2013. This was due to the fact that  no
             one from his church attended to give evidence,  and  [SM]  had
             previously lied about a conversion to Islam (this is  probably
             a typographical error and should read the Baha'i faith).
             ...


             86.   I  bear  in  mind  that  [SM]  has  previously  lied  to
             Immigration Officials and to an Immigration Judge....
             ...


             88.  It is  clear  that  the  King's  church  is  a  welcoming
             environment that goes out of its way to welcome new members.
             ...


             90.  There seems absolutely no reason  why  an  individual  in
             [SM's] circumstances would not be attracted to  the  community
             at King's church. I find they are a warm and welcoming  church
             to help and support their members.
             ...


             95.  I have no reason to doubt the sincerity of any of  [SM's]
             witnesses.


             96.  [SM] says he has inner peace since he converted.


             97.  On the evidence before me, the  weight  of  the  evidence
             suggests [SM] is a genuine convert to Christianity.


     10. The SSHD sought and was granted permission to appeal on the grounds
         that it was arguable the judge


          i) Made a material misdirection in law in failing  to  treat  the
             adverse credibility findings on the same issue (conversion  to
             Christianity) as the starting point;


         ii) Failed to give any or any adequate reason for finding that the
             weight of the evidence suggests SM is  a  genuine  convert  to
             Christianity; there have been no findings on  the  credibility
             of his evidence, the finding he is a genuine convert is  based
             solely on the evidence of others and not  on  him;  failed  to
             provide any or any  adequate  reasons  why  the  new  evidence
             allows  a  departure  from  the  previous  findings   of   two
             immigration judges.


        iii) Made a perverse or irrational finding on  a  matter  that  was
             material to  the  outcome;  the  evidence  in  favour  of  the
             appellant was evidence from witnesses only and  none  of  SM's
             evidence referred to  indicates  the  genuine  nature  of  his
             conversion.


     11. The judge refers to and quotes from Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  00702
         and concludes that he should apply the  Devaseelan  guidelines.  In
         paragraph 86 of his judgment, the judge says  he  "bears  in  mind"
         that SM has previously lied. He has  not  considered  the  previous
         judgments as a starting point but "borne them  in  mind".  If  that
         were simply a matter of inaccurate summary  of  the  principle  but
         that the actual principle had been applied  this  would  be  of  no
         consequence. But in this case the  judge  has  failed  to  consider
         specifically that relevant  facts  had  not  been  brought  to  the
         earlier Tribunal's attention;  the  very  late  disclosure  of  his
         conversion despite there being outstanding applications to the SSHD
         and an appeal; the contradictions in  his  evidence  regarding  his
         family support and whether they were "strict" Muslims or  not.  The
         judge in paragraph 83 give the reason for the previous dismissal of
         his claim as being predicated upon the  lack  of  attendance  of  a
         minister  and  lies  previously  told.  The  previous   claim   was
         disbelieved for far greater reasons than this. The judge  not  only
         found him to be wholly untruthful but also referred specifically to
         the issue of his previous claimed conversion to the  Baha'i  faith.
         Judge Lloyd has not addressed these very strong words  by  previous
         judges but has merely borne in mind that SM  has  previously  lied.
         This is not an appeal decision where it can  be  implied  that  the
         judge understood the approach he should take to previous  findings,
         despite having quoted Devaseelan in his decision.


     12. The judge has not addressed SM's evidence. Of course,  his  finding
         that he had no reasons to doubt the  sincerity  of  the  witnesses'
         evidence is a finding open to him. But that is  very  different  to
         assessing SM's evidence. The  judge's  finding  that  there  "seems
         absolutely no reason" why an individual should not be attracted  to
         the Kings community may  be  true  in  a  general  sense  but  such
         attraction should be analysed in the context of this appeal and  SM
         who has not only been convicted of a serious offence  of  deception
         but has three adverse decisions against him, all concluding that he
         is an untruthful witness. The judge has not considered whether  and
         to what extent the witnesses were aware of  SM's  previous  adverse
         decisions or of his conviction.  There  has  been  no  analysis  of
         whether Mr Nazary's low current  church  involvement  impacts  upon
         SM's claimed beliefs;  there  has  been  no  consideration  of  the
         claimed  conversion  in  the  context  of   previous   claims   for
         protection. That the witnesses, and there were many, considered  SM
         to be a genuine convert is a factor, possibly a  strong  factor  in
         SM's favour. But without an analysis of the evidence as a whole and
         in  particular  SM's  evidence,  it  is  insufficient  to  found  a
         successful appeal.


     13. AS (Iran) [2017] EWCA 1539 draws very proper attention to the  care
         to be taken in addressing a "reasons" challenge:


             "In approaching criticism of reasons  given  by  a  First-tier
             Tribunal, the Respondent  correctly  reminds  us  to  avoid  a
             requirement of perfection. As Brooke LJ observed in the course
             of his decision in R (Iran) v The Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982, "unjustified  complaints"
             as to an alleged failure to give adequate reasons are all  too
             frequent. The obligation on a Tribunal is to give  reasons  in
             sufficient detail to show the principles on which the Tribunal
             has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.  Such
             reasons need not be elaborate, and  do  not  need  to  address
             every argument or every factor which weighed in the  decision.
             If a Tribunal has not expressly addressed an argument, but  if
             there are grounds on which the argument  could  properly  have
             been rejected, it should be assumed that the Tribunal acted on
             such grounds. It is sufficient that the  critical  reasons  to
             the decision are recorded. In respect of each of these grounds
             of complaint, the Secretary of State  submits  that  perfectly
             acceptable reasoning was set out in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             decision."


         That is not what has happened here. The judge has not addressed the
         evidence before him,  has  failed  to  provide  any  assessment  of
         adverse factors in the context of the weight given to the witnesses
         and  has  failed  to  approach  the  decision  in  accordance  with
         Devaseelan.

     14. There are material errors of law in the decision of the  First-tier
         Tribunal and I set aside the decision to be remade; no findings  of
         fact preserved.


     15. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
         assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper  Tribunal.
         The facts in this appeal are  disputed  and  I  conclude  that  the
         decision should be remitted to the First-tier  judge  to  determine
         the appeal afresh.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
    heard afresh, no findings preserved.

[pic]

                                    Date 1st February 2018
                               Re-promulgated 23rd February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
