
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/01538/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 September 2016                    |On 19 October 2016                 |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     Z L
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Tan of West 12 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of China.  He appealed to a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision of  24  September
    2015 refusing his asylum claim.

2.   The judge did not accept that the appellant had a well-founded fear  on
    return  to  China  on  account  of  his  activities  while  in   China.
    Specifically he  found  at  paragraph  34  of  his  decision  that  the
    appellant's claim was fabricated with regard to the claim that  he  had
    come to the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities  in  China  as  a
    consequence of being involved with pro-Tibetan separatists and  helping
    them to  organise  leaflets,  banners  and  accommodation  prior  to  a
    demonstration in China during 2011.  It was also not accepted  that  he
    had helped this group financially.  It was not accepted that the arrest
    warrant  produced  was  reliable.   All  these  adverse  findings  were
    challenged, but permission was refused in relation to those.

3.   The appellant however was granted permission to appeal in  relation  to
    risk in connection with his sur place activities.  He claimed  that  he
    is involved with a Tibetan group in the United Kingdom and  had  joined
    the Tibet Society.  He had taken part in a Tibetan demonstration in the
    United Kingdom during March 2016.  The judge accepted this evidence and
    also accepted evidence of  Mr  Frederick  Hyde-Chambers  who  had  been
    informed by the appellant of his  involvement  in  Tibetan  matters  in
    China.  Mr Hyde-Chambers  is,  among  things,  Chairman  of  the  Tibet
    Society of the UK.  He believed that  individuals  in  the  appellant's
    situation face persecution if returned to China.

4.   The judge noted the country guidance of SP [2007] UKIAT 00021 where  it
    was concluded that  removal  to  the  People's  Republic  of  China  of
    Tibetans who left China illegally on the Tibet Nepal route  would  give
    rise to a real risk of persecution.  The judge noted that the appellant
    was not however Tibetan but was Han Chinese,  he  had  not  left  China
    illegally and he had a valid passport.  The judge had  noted  that  the
    appellant had gone to the  Chinese  Embassy  in  London  to  renew  his
    passport and did this after  the  so-called  arrest  warrant  had  been
    issued and that  would  form  part  of  the  judge's  reasons  for  not
    accepting the claim to be at risk on account  of  activities  while  in
    China.  The judge accepted that  the  appellant  sympathised  with  the
    Tibetan cause but  found  that  he  had  not  shown  that  his  limited
    involvement in the United Kingdom with this cause had  brought  him  to
    the attention of the Chinese authorities, nor had it been shown by  him
    that it was reasonably likely to be the case in the future.  The  judge
    commented that his support in the United  Kingdom  was  low  level  and
    concluded the claim could not succeed.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  the  Home  Office
    evidence had been before the judge which stated "persons  who  support,
    or are perceived to support, independence for  Tibet  are  at  risk  of
    similar ill-treatment by the authorities".

6.   In his submissions Mr Tan drew on  the  points  made  in  his  skeleton
    argument in relation to this.  He argued that the judge's acceptance of
    the evidence as regards the sur place activities of the  appellant  and
    the evidence of Mr Hyde-Chambers meant that in  light  of  the  country
    information from the Home Office concerning  risk  on  return  set  out
    above the appeal should be allowed.  If the Tribunal did not  agree  it
    could only send the matter back for a fresh  hearing  if  there  was  a
    conflict as to what the judge had accepted.

7.   Mr Norton agreed that the matter  essentially  turned  on  the  judge's
    findings at paragraphs 35 and 36 of his decision.   The  appellant  had
    left China lawfully, and had renewed his passport while in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He had had only limited involvement with  the  Tibetan  cause
    while in the United Kingdom, and there was no adverse interest in  him.
    The question of his activities on return to China was not a matter that
    had  been  argued.   There  was  no  credible  history  of  pro-Tibetan
    activities in China, in  fact  there  were  adverse  findings  in  that
    regard, at paragraph 34 of the judge's decision.  There  was  no  doubt
    about Mr Hyde-Chambers evidence but he was clearly not  an  independent
    source and  merely  recorded  his  acknowledgment  of  the  appellant's
    involvement in certain activities.

8.   By way of reply Mr Tan argued that Mr Hyde-Chambers had given  evidence
    in person and  the  judge  had  accepted  his  evidence  and  this  was
    unqualified  and  he  had  not  said  that  Mr  Hyde-Chambers  was  not
    independent.  It was not possible to go behind this.  The case was  not
    dissimilar to SP and Others where all the appellants were failed asylum
    seekers and as Tibetans faced risk on return.  The expert knowledge  of
    Mr Hyde-Chambers could be relied on to support risk on return and  that
    was a conclusion the judge had not rebutted.

9.   I reserved my determination.

10.  I do not read the judge's acceptance of Mr Hyde-Chambers'  evidence  or
    that evidence itself as showing that the appellant  would  be  at  risk
    purely on the basis of his  sur  place  activities.   Mr  Hyde-Chambers
    accepted what the appellant said about his activities  while  in  China
    and that clearly formed part of his view as to risk on return.

11.   The  fact  that  the  appellant  has  been  involved  in   pro-Tibetan
    activities and in particular attending a demonstration, does not in  my
    view show that he faces a real risk on return.  It was clearly open  to
    the judge to conclude that the appellant had not shown that his limited
    involvement in the  United  Kingdom  with  the  pro-Tibetan  cause  had
    brought him to the attention  of  the  Chinese  authorities.   In  this
    regard it was clearly relevant that he had been confident enough to  go
    to the Chinese Embassy in London to renew his passport and was able  to
    renew it.  As Mr Norton pointed out when I raised the HJ  (Iran)  issue
    with him, the question of the appellant's activities on return to China
    is not a matter that has been argued.  It did  not  form  part  of  the
    appellant's evidence that he would wish  to  express  his  views  about
    Tibet on return to China.  As a consequence, I  consider  that  it  was
    fully open to the judge to find that he did not face  a  real  risk  on
    return to China, bearing in mind the Home Office Country Report  of  23
    October 2015 at paragraph 2.3.1,  and  bearing  in  mind  there  is  no
    indication that his activities had brought him to the attention of  the
    Chinese authorities and he was able to renew his  passport  in  London.
    As noted above, the question of how he would act on return to China did
    not form part of his evidence and the judge  cannot  be  said  to  have
    erred in not speculating about that issue.

12.  For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the judge  did  not  err
    in law in his decision, and his  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal is accordingly maintained.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              19 October 2016


