
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01495/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th December 2018                         |On 8th January 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     EP
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Short (Counsel), instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Whitwell (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Moxon, promulgated on 11th July 2018, following a hearing at Bradford on
3rd July 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of the
Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied for, and was
granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter
comes before me.



The Appellant

The Appellant is a citizen of Iran, female, and was born on [~] 1988.  She
appealed against a decision of the Respondent refusing her application for
asylum and for humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC
395, in a decision dated 19th January 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

The Appellant's fear of return to Iran is based upon her claim that she has
converted to Islam to Christianity, and that she also fears return on
account of her imputed political opinion, as well as an infringement of her
Article 8 rights to private and family life.

The Judge's Findings

The judge noted how the Appellant had given an account of the treatment of
political dissidents and Christian converts in Iran "which is prima facie
plausible when considering country evidence.  This enhances her
credibility" (paragraph 36).  The judge also observed how the Appellant had
been baptised and attends church (paragraph 38).  Furthermore, there was
written evidence from Reverend Clarke, and written and oral evidence from
Reverend Whalley, and the judge concluded that he "found the evidence from
the church leaders to be credible" (paragraph 39).

However, as against this, the judge did not accept that the Appellant
became disillusioned with Islam, or that she was approached by her
subsequent mother-in-law, whilst working in a shop, and that thereafter the
two families arranged for a marriage proposal, which underwent a one year
engagement, given that the family that the Appellant married into was
"religiously zealous", and it was not credible that the in-laws would have
approached this young female whom they did not know, interacted with her
family to arrange an engagement, "without learning of her religious
convictions" (paragraph 41(a)).  Insofar as there were discrepancies in the
evidence given, the judge concluded that he would not accept that the
discrepancies arose on account of interpreter issues (paragraph 41(d)).

The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

The grounds of application state that the judge failed to note that there
was a distinction between a substantive asylum interview and a screening
interview, the latter was not meant to interrogate the reason for applying
for asylum, and the judge in the determination had confused the two forms
of interview.  Moreover, the reasons for not believing the Appellant had
converted to Christianity was speculative at best and no consideration was
given to the treatment of Christian converts in Iran.  On 31st November
2018, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.



Submissions

At the hearing before me on 17th December 2018, Ms Short, appearing as
Counsel of the Appellant, submitted that the judge's credibility assessment
was central to the Appellant's claim, and the judge had reached an eventual
conclusion (at paragraph 42) which was irrational (on the basis of the
assessment carried out at paragraph 41).

First, the judge had concluded (at paragraph 39) that "I would expect that
the very thought of questioning the faith of someone attending worship and
other church activities with apparent enthusiasm would be unpalatable to
them" when referring to the evidence of the church ministers, the Reverend
Clarke, and the Reverend Whalley.  However, the reality was that not only
was this speculative, but, in point of fact, Reverend Whalley had
explicitly stated that he had questioned the Appellant about her
convictions, and he had set out his considerable experience in assessing
the genuineness of conversion claims, and had been involved in meetings
with the Home Office on this very subject.

Second, the screening interview referred both to the Appellant's fear, on
account of her Christian conversion, as well as her fear on account of her
imputed political opinion.  Nevertheless, there were a number of errors
there, which were occasioned by the Appellant, who spoke next to no English
at all, having to use an interpreter by phone.  Some of these errors do not
go either way, but remain as errors nevertheless.  For example, the
Appellant's date of birth is out by ten years (her real date of birth being
4th January 1988).  Her race and ethnicity is wrongly described as Kurdish,
when she comes from Shiraz.  Given that it was well accepted that the
Appellant had struggled with an interpreter on the telephone, the judge was
wrong to have said that he did not accept that the discrepancies arose on
account of interpreter difficulties.

For his part, Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge had made it quite clear
at the outset (at paragraph 10) that he had taken into account of all the
evidence.  Therefore, no criticism could be made of the judge in terms of
failing in the proper evaluation of the evidence.

Second, whereas it is true that Reverend Whalley gave oral evidence and
stated that the Appellant was a genuine convert, and that he would not have
attended court on her behalf if he had doubted her genuineness, and whereas
it was also true that he saw the Appellant regularly and communicated with
a true Farsi interpreter (paragraph 33), nevertheless, it was the case that
the judge later explained that the church witnesses would have found it
"unpalatable" to question the church activities of a witness who had
demonstrated such "apparent enthusiasm" (paragraph 39).  That was a
conclusion open to the judge.

Third, and perhaps most importantly, the judge was entitled to come to the
conclusion that the Appellant could not be a genuine convert, because she
had married into a family who were "religiously zealous" people, and the
suggestion that the family of her marriage had taken to her "without
learning of her religious convictions" (paragraph 41(a)) was simply not
credible, and the judge was right to have pointed this out.  It was one
thing to say, as the Appellant herself was saying, that she was religiously
unconcerned, but it was quite a different thing to say that the family that
she was marrying into were "religiously zealous", and yet it mattered not
to them what the Appellant's own religious views were.  At the very least,
they would have expected her to be religious in Islamic terms.

In reply, Ms Short submitted that the core evidence of Reverend Whalley
shows that, far from it being "unpalatable" for the church ministers to
question the Appellant, Reverend Whalley had actually questioned the
Appellant on this very point, and to state that the church witnesses could
not be given controlling weight in their evidence in this appeal, on a
factually incorrect basis of their not having questioned the Appellant, was
plainly an error.  In the earlier case of Dorodian (paragraph 45 of the
refusal letter) it was well accepted that the attendance of church
ministers would carry considerable weight at a religious conversion
hearing.  That just goes to show the importance of such witnesses, and they
had been wrongly given a reduced weight in the balancing exercise, on
account of it being wrongly suggested that they would find it "unpalatable"
to question the Appellant, when this had in fact been done.

Error of Law

I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved the
making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)) of TCEA 2007 such
that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are as follows.  I accept
that the judge was fully entitled to come to the conclusion that the
Appellant lacked in credibility, when she claims to have married into a
family that were "religiously zealous."  After all, this was on the basis
of her mother-in-law simply meeting her in a clothing shop, after which a
long one year engagement followed, "without learning of her religious
convictions", a matter which does not necessarily amount to speculation, in
the way that has been submitted before me. However, I do find that the
treatment of the church witnesses has been such that the judge fell into
error.

The starting point is the significance to be attached to church witnesses
who attend court to vouch for the veracity of a convert who has changed
their religion to Christianity.  This was a case where Reverend Whalley,
who gave oral evidence, in addition to his written evidence, had stated
that he would not have attended court on behalf of the Appellant if he had
doubted her genuineness.  He had stated that he saw her regularly, and
communicated with her regularly.  (Paragraph 33).  On this basis, and in
circumstances where the judge found both Reverend Whalley and Reverend
Clarke to be entirely credible, for the judge to state that whilst their
evidence should be given "significant weight I would expect that the very
thought of questioning faith of someone attending worship and other church
activities with apparent enthusiasm would be unpalatable to them"
(paragraph 39), was factually wrong.  The Reverend Whalley actually gave
evidence to say that he had questioned the Appellant on this matter and
then come to the firm view that the Appellant was a genuine convert.  The
effect of the judge having approached the evidence of both Reverend Whalley
and Reverend Clarke on the footing that they would have found it
"unpalatable" to question the Appellant was to downplay the significance of
their evidence in the eventual finding of fact as to whether the Appellant
was a bona fide and genuine convert.  Second, given that the Appellant had
been baptised and attended church (see paragraph 37), the judge failed to
consider the legal position in relation to converts returning to Iran, as
apostates.  That issue needed consideration.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law.  I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I remake the
decision as follows.  This appeal is to be heard by a judge other than
Judge Moxon under practice statement 7.2(b).

An anonymity order is made.

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 4th January 2019

