
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/01525/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 December 2017                  |On 15 January 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                LIYA GOITOME
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr R Beadnell (Legal Representative, IAS Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant arrived in the UK in August 2016 and claimed asylum on the
   basis that she is Eritrean and a Pentecostal Christian, that she had
   lived in Ethiopia until deported the Eritrea in 2000 before living in
   Sudan, returning to Eritrea and then coming to the UK. The claim was
   rejected for the reasons given in the Refusal Letter of the 29th of
   January 2017. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Pickup on the
   14th of March 2017 and dismissed in a decision promulgated on the 29th of
   March 2017. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper
   Tribunal in grounds of application of the 7th of April 2017 permission
   being granted by Designated Judge McCarthy on the 2nd of August 2017.

2. The Judge found that the Appellant had not taken reasonable steps to
   establish that her nationality was not Ethiopian for the reasons given in
   paragraphs 34 to 36. The Judge had regard to the Appellant's preferred
   language not being Tigrinyan and evidence that Ethiopian was used by
   Eritreans who had been deported, paragraphs 38. The Judge also rejected
   the Appellant's claim to be of the Pentecostal faith.

3. The grounds of application argued that the Judge had not had sufficient
   regard to the evidence relating to the language that the Appellant speaks
   would be Ethiopian and that the Appellant's findings that Tigrinyan would
   be her home language was insufficiently reasoned. Secondly it is argued
   that the approach to the Appellant's claimed deportation should have been
   made explicitly. With regard to the Appellant's faith the findings made
   were not consistent with the evidence relating to the evidence of
   corruption and the ability of a person to obtain their release and the
   reasons were not sufficient, it was not clear if the Appellant's
   witness's evidence had been accepted. Fourthly the Judge had erred in
   respect of the Appellant's efforts to establish her nationality and had
   not had regard to the totality of the evidence.


4. At the Upper Tribunal hearing the parties made submissions in line with
   their respective positions. The submissions are set out in the Record of
   Proceedings and referred to where relevant below. Mr Bates submitted that
   the key issue in the appeal was the Appellant's nationality, if that was
   accepted then it was accepted that the Appellant would be at risk on
   return.


5. The Judge's conclusions centre on the Appellant's use of Ethiopian
   rather than Tigrinyan and the Judge's findings that the Appellant's lack
   of Tigrinyan being at odds with his finding that that would have been the
   language that she used at home given her parents' background. The issue
   of the Appellant's language was discussed as part of the considerations
   given to nationality.


6. In paragraph 37 the Judge referred to background evidence that
   Tigringyans maintain their language when living in different countries.
   It is not clear what source the Judge was referring to in making that
   observation although it is a common position for ex-patriates of any
   country having migrated to a different part of the world and the First-
   tier Tribunal frequently needs interpreters for individuals who have
   lived in the UK for decades. In paragraph 38 the Judge referred to the
   evidence that Ahmaric was common among Eritreans brought up in Ethiopia
   but returned to Eritrea and if another Eritrean language was not spoken
   they would be unlikely to be Eritrean. The Judge was aware of the
   Appellant's claim to speak some Tigrinyan and placed that evidence in
   context.


7. The other two main features of the Judge's reasoning turn on the
   Appellant's approach to the Ethiopian embassy and the absence of other
   supporting evidence such as from her school and the position of YG, the
   witness called in support of the Appellant's case.


8. So far as the approach to the embassy was concerned the Judge clearly
   took the view that the Appellant's actions in this regard were more of
   form than substance and that is made clear in paragraphs 35 and 36. With
   regard to the evidence of YG the Judge discussed his evidence in
   paragraph 51 and did not treat the exercise as formulaic or
   superficially. The judge was aware of the decision in YG's appeal and the
   findings that had been made. The findings were not binding on him and
   reasons were given for rejecting the claimed support that he gave to the
   Appellant's case. It is clear that his evidence was not accepted and it
   was explained why particularly with regard to the inconsistency that the
   Judge found.


9. In assessing this appeal I have had regard to the guidance of the court
   of appeal. Burnett LJ in EA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 10 at paragraph 27
   gave made the following observations: "Decisions of tribunals should not
   become formulaic and rarely benefit from copious citation of authority.
   Arguments that reduce to the proposition that the F-tT has failed to
   mention dicta from a series of cases in the Court of Appeal or elsewhere
   will rarely prosper. Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v
   Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be read on the
   assumption that, unless he has demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew
   how he should perform his functions and which matters he should take into
   account". He added that an "appellate court should resist the temptation
   to subvert the principle that they should not substitute their own
   discretion for that of the judge by a narrow textual analysis which
   enables them to claim that he misdirected himself". Moreover, some
   principles are so firmly embedded in judicial thinking that they do not
   need to be recited. For example, it would be surprising to see in every
   civil judgment a paragraph dealing with the burden and standard of proof;
   or in every running down action a treatise, however short, on the law of
   negligence. That said, the reader of any judicial decision must be
   reassured from its content that the court or tribunal has applied the
   correct legal test to any question it is deciding."


10. Having regard to the final line, which can be regarded as a practical
   approach to Upper Tribunal functions I find that the Appellant knew what
   the decision was, the decision itself demonstrated that the Judge was
   applying the appropriate legal principles and coherent reasons were given
   for the findings that were made. The grounds amount to a disagreement
   with findings properly made and open to the Judge for the reasons given.
   The decision is not infected by an error of law and the appeal to the
   Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 10th January 2018


