


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/01433/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : IAC Birmingham              |     Decision & Reasons  Promulgated|
|On  12 June 2017                       |     On 16 June 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                Ahmed Saleem

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of  27
January 2017 to refuse his protection and human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan,  born  on  23  September  1985.  He
arrived in the UK in December 2010 with a Tier 4 student visa valid until  6
May 2012 and was subsequently granted further leave until 30  October  2015.
On 4 February 2015 his leave was curtailed to expire on 10  April  2015.  He
claimed asylum on 8 December 2016 after being  encountered  by  the  police,
arrested and served with papers as an overstayer. He was  interviewed  about
his asylum claim and made further representations, relying upon  a  Rule  35
report. His claim was refused on 27 January 2017.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 8 March 2017 and  was  dismissed  in  a  decision
promulgated on 22 March 2017. Permission was granted on 20 April 2017.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant's claim is based upon a land dispute between  his  father  and
uncle which began in 2010 when his uncle wanted to take  over  his  father's
five shops in Lahore. His uncle claimed to have bought  the  shops  in  2005
whereas  his  father  claimed  to  have  inherited/  bought  them  from  his
grandfather. Between 2010 and 2014 there was  discussion  about  the  matter
but the problem did not escalate beyond verbal abuse until 24 July 2014.  At
that time the appellant was in Pakistan, having gone there from  July  to  6
August 2014 before returning to the UK. On 24 July 2014  the  appellant  was
closing his father's shop when eight men entered and attacked  him  and  his
workers. He reported the matter to the  police  with  his  father  but  they
refused to lodge an FIR because they said his uncle was a  respectable  man.
Instead the police claimed there  was  an  outstanding  report  against  him
accusing him of attacking three men and they arrested him. He  was  detained
for one day and one night and was beaten. His father came with a  lawyer  to
secure his release. He did  not  know  if  there  were  outstanding  charges
against him when he was released. On 24 August 2014 his  uncle's  five  year
old son was shot and killed and the appellant was implicated in his  murder.
His father told him that an arrest warrant had been issued against  him  and
the police came to his family home on 28 August 2014 looking  for  him.  His
uncle attacked his family on three or four occasions but the incident of  24
July 2014 was the only significant one. The appellant said that  his  father
passed away on 13 March 2015 and his grandfather on 10 June 2015.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, noted that the  appellant
had submitted three FIRs and  some  newspaper  article  in  support  of  his
claim, but did not give them any weight.  The  respondent  referred  to  the
Rule 35 report produced by the appellant and  considered  that  the  account
given there for the appellant's injuries were inconsistent with the  account
he  had  given  in  support  of  his  claim.  The  respondent  rejected  the
appellant's account of the problems with his uncle  and  concluded  that  he
would be at no risk on return to Pakistan. It  was  not  accepted  that  his
removal to Pakistan would breach his human rights.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Telford. The judge heard from the appellant but did not  find
his account to be credible and concluded that he  was  an  economic  migrant
and that the documentary evidence was of no weight. He considered  that  the
appellant would be at no risk on return and that  his  removal  to  Pakistan
would not breach his human rights. He dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge Telford's  decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal. Permission to appeal was granted in relation to the Rule  35
report on the grounds that the judge ought arguably to  have  accorded  some
weight to the report and  arguably  erred  by  expecting  the  appellant  to
provide corroborative medical evidence.

The appeal came before me on 12 June 2017. There was no appearance by or  on
behalf of the appellant. I noted that he was not  legally  represented.  The
file records showed that he had been released from  detention  on  28  April
2017 following the grant of permission and that the notice  of  hearing  had
been served on him at the address to which he had been  released.  That  was
the current address also held by the  respondent,  as  Mr  Mills  confirmed.
Accordingly it appeared that the notice of hearing had been properly  served
on the appellant and, in the absence of any explanation for his  absence,  I
considered there to be no reason not to proceed with  the  appeal  and  hear
submissions from Mr Mills.

Mr Mills relied on the  Rule  24  response  which  had  been  filed  by  the
respondent on 4 May  2017.  He  submitted  that  the  judge's  reference  to
corroboration in relation to the appellant's injuries  was  consistent  with
the findings in TK (Burundi) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
[2009] EWCA Civ 40 since this was a case where supporting  medical  evidence
could reasonably have been obtained from a GP in the UK  but  had  not  been
provided. The judge was entitled to draw the adverse conclusion that he  did
from the appellant's failure to obtain such evidence and he  properly  dealt
with the medical point.

Consideration and findings.

I am entirely in agreement with Mr Mills, that Judge Telford made  no  error
of law in placing the limited weight that he did upon  the  Rule  35  report
and the medical evidence from Pakistan as evidence of  torture  suffered  by
the appellant owing to the absence of any further independent evidence  from
a medical expert in the UK.

As Judge Telford indicated at [24], the Rule  35  report  said  little  more
than that the appellant had  told  the  medical  practitioner  that  he  had
suffered from torture and simply recounted the appellant's  own  explanation
for the scars on his body, concluding that the scars  "may  be  due  to  the
history given". The medical evidence from Pakistan was simply  a  record  of
injuries on the appellant's body. What the judge found  to  be  missing,  in
order for that evidence to be given any material weight, was expert  medical
evidence confirming that the injuries had been caused in the manner  claimed
by the appellant. The judge's adverse findings based  upon  the  absence  of
such evidence was entirely consistent with the approach taken by  the  Court
of Appeal in  TK  (Burundi)  which  emphasised  how  important  it  was  for
independent supporting evidence to be provided where it would ordinarily  be
available. That was particularly so when, as in the appellant's case,  there
were various other reasons for doubting the reliability of the  evidence  as
a whole, in particular his adverse immigration history, the  timing  of  his
asylum claim and the circumstances under which he made his  claim,  together
with the concerns identified by the judge at [19] in relation to  the  other
documentary evidence.

Judge Telford plainly  undertook  a  full  and  careful  assessment  of  the
appellant's evidence as a whole and provided full  and  proper  reasons  for
making the credibility findings that he did. The  adverse  conclusions  that
he reached were fully and properly open to him on the evidence  before  him.
For all of these reasons I conclude  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law. I  do
not set aside the decision. The decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
therefore stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity. I  see  no  reason
    for anonymity in this case and therefore discharge the order,  pursuant
    to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 12 June
2017
