
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01464/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2019                  |On 11 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                               Mr MOHAMMED [A]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer, counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a  national  of  Iraq  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  appealed
    against the Secretary of State's decision, dated 17  January  2018,  to
    refuse an asylum and Humanitarian Protection claim.  His appeal against
    that decision ultimately came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O  R
    Williams who, on 3 April 2018, dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

2.   The grounds of appeal essentially argued that the Judge had  failed  to
    properly address the  issue  of  internal  relocation  given  that  the
    Appellant was a Kurd born in Erbil,  formerly  living  in  Mosul.   His
    family had been abducted by ISIL.  The home  area  remained  dangerous.
    The Appellant did not have a valid Civil Status ID card (CSID)  and  he
    could not be expected to relocate to Baghdad.  Permission to appeal was
    given by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 29 June  2018.   The  Respondent
    made a Rule 24 response, on 13 September 2018, in which it was said  as
    follows:

         "The Respondent does not oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal.  In the light of the extant country  guidance
         of AAH [2018], (albeit promulgated after the determination)  it  is
         accepted that the FtTJ has given inadequate reasons  as  to  how  A
         (the Appellant) could practically internally relocate from  Baghdad
         to the IKR in the absence of any ID documents".


    The Upper Tribunal was invited to retain the matter if an error of  law
    was established and re-make it on the  accepted  facts.   There  is  no
    dispute as to the adequacy of the Judge's findings on the facts, or the
    extent to which the basis of the Appellant's claim was addressed.

3.   In the light of the concession made as  to  the  error  of  law  I  too
    conclude that the Judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  properly  and
    adequately address the basis of risk, particularly  with  reference  to
    internal relocation, to the Appellant on a return to Iraq.

4.   I find the Original Tribunal made a  material  error  of  law  and  the
    Original Tribunal's decision could not stand.

5.   In being invited to re-make this matter it has been put  on  the  basis
    that there are sufficient findings of fact which can provide  a  proper
    basis of consideration of the claim without the need  for  any  further
    hearing or evidence.

6.   The case of AAH (Iraq) CG [2018] UKUT 00212 makes plain the  particular
    problems and concerns there are  about  returning  Iraqi  nationals  to
    Iraq, and particularly those which  arise  through  the  need  to  move
    within  Iraq  to  another  area  and  the   need   for   identification
    documentation.   Those  paragraphs  of  AAH  [104-107]  and   [108-116]
    highlight  the  issues.   As  Ms  Pettersen  correctly   accepted   and
    identified that with the absence of a CSID the Appellant could  not  be
    expected to relocate to Baghdad, there really  was  when  there  was  a
    threat to his family no real argument  can  be  mounted  that  internal
    relocation was a reasonable option or which could  take  place  without
    there  being  a  serious  risk  of  harm,  destitution  and  diminished
    circumstances which would engage and satisfy the risk of proscribed ill-
    treatment under Article 3 ECHR.

7.   Accordingly, I find the Appellant has to that  low  standard  of  proof
    required in asylum claims discharged the burden of proof of a real risk
    of persecution by reason of his ethnicity and/or  of  serious  harm  by
    reason of his inability to safely and reasonably relocate within  Iraq,
    there is no effective protection in the Horvath sense to which  he  can
    have recourse, that his claim under the Refugee  Convention  succeeded.
    I similarly find his claim under  Article  3  ECHR  would  succeed  and
    whilst I have not considered the  evidence  as  to  the  real  risk  of
    Article 2 ill-treatment, that was not necessary in order  to  determine
    this appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

8.    The  Original  Tribunal's  decision  did  not  stand.   The  following
    decision is substituted.  The appeal is allowed on  Refugee  Convention
    and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity order was originally made nor is one required.

Signed   Date: 3 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable.  No fee award is appropriate.

Signed   Date: 3 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
