
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02011/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26th September 2017                   |On 2nd October 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     JT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs F Mustapha, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Gandhi dismissing his appeal for protection on  the  basis  of  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne.  The grounds upon which permission was  granted  may  be
    summarised as follows:

         "The grounds assert that the judge found the Appellant's account to
         be credible and so erred in the reasons provided  and  findings  on
         risk on return.  The judge's findings and reasons at [64]  to  [66]
         are  at  odds  with  the  various   credible   objective   material
         specifically on this point to  which  the  judge  was  specifically
         referred.  Additionally there was  a  substantial  and  unexplained
         delay of six months between the hearing and the promulgation of the
         decision.  The Court of Appeal cited with approval from  Sambasivam
         [2000] Imm AR 85 a statement from Mario [1998] Imm AR 281 at 287:

             'In an area such as asylum, where  evidence  requires  anxious
             scrutiny, the Tribunal will usually remit a  case  to  another
             Adjudicator where the  period  between  the  hearing  and  the
             dictation of the determination is more than three months.  The
             delay is inordinate and gives rise to legitimate concern as to
             whether the Appellant received a fair hearing of  the  appeal.
             The judge could not be expected to retain a  proper  level  of
             recall of the oral evidence after three months.'

         In an otherwise well-structured and focused decision and reasons it
         is nonetheless arguable that a delay of approximately six months in
         the promulgation of an asylum appeal is too  long.   Per  the  Lord
         Chief Justice in R v Sussex Justices ex parte McCarthy [1924] 2  KB
         224, 'justice should not only be done  but  should  manifestly  and
         undoubtedly be seen to be done'.  It is  arguable  that  the  judge
         could not have recalled the Appellant himself after a delay of  six
         months.  This arguable error of law having been identified, all the
         issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

 3. I was not provided with a Rule 24 reply by the Presenting  Officer  and
    was told that it was not necessary  and  was  encouraged  to  hear  the
    appeal and consider oral submissions from the Respondent in any event.

    Error of Law

 4. At the close of the  hearing  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision which I shall now give.  I do find that there  is  a  material
    error of law such that the determination should be set aside.   I  must
    make clear that I see just sufficient merit in the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    that the determination should be set aside.  My reasons for so  finding
    are as follows.

 5. In relation to the  six  month  delay  as  observed  in  the  grant  of
    permission it is unfortunate and unusual that it occurred.  I was told,
    however, by the  Appellant's  solicitor  in  an  admirable  display  of
    candidness that there was no evidence in the determination of any  lack
    of recall or significant impact as a result of  the  six  month  delay.
    Indeed, the judgment does on its face appear to be well-structured  and
    focused as the grant of permission equally reflects.  However,  reading
    the  determination  as  a  whole,  given   the   significant   positive
    credibility findings which are self-evident from paragraphs 46  through
    to 60 of the  determination,  the  Appellant's  representative  is  not
    incorrect in submitting that one could express surprise  at  the  final
    outcome reached by the First-tier Tribunal.   However,  that  does  not
    indicate any perversity such that the decision should be set  aside  of
    course.

 6. In my view the findings which led to the downfall  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal at paragraphs 64 to 66 do not  take  account  of  the  objective
    material that was put forward on the Appellant's behalf,  which  is  an
    omission that causes me to question whether it was open to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to reach the conclusion it did at paragraphs  64  to  66.
    Although the First-tier Tribunal noted at paragraph 48 the letter  from
    the foster carer at page 7 of the Appellant's bundle  in  my  view  the
    impact of the carer's indirect evidence from the British Red Cross that
    there was not much hope of the Appellant finding any of his family  has
    not been reflected in the judge's assessment at paragraphs 64 to 66 and
    at paragraphs 69 to 71 where it is concluded that there are no  reasons
    or evidence why the uncle could not live in Kabul or  the  uncle  could
    not travel there to meet the Appellant upon his  return  from  the  UK,
    notwithstanding that there was no evidence of contact  with  the  uncle
    and it being observed that there were no efforts made  to  contact  the
    uncle.  This omission is crucial because the judge has made clear  that
    the Appellant and his documentation were credible.   If  she  had  not,
    then it would be of no consequence.

 7. The fact that the Appellant's evidence was accepted as credible and his
    evidence that there was no contact with the uncle at present, alongside
    the failure to trace the uncle against the indirect hearsay evidence of
    the foster carer that there was not much hope of  finding  any  of  the
    Appellant's family, results in an  adverse  conclusion  that  fails  to
    sufficiently grapple with that evidence and is  consequently  perverse.
    I do note the First-tier Tribunal's concern that there was  no  further
    evidence of tracing members of the Appellant's family,  notwithstanding
    that his parents had disappeared.

 8. I pause to comment that it is of concern that  the  Appellant  has  not
    attempted to trace the uncle and I note that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did observe that the phone number for the uncle might be found on
    the old phone bills for the foster carers, given that their  phone  was
    used to telephone the uncle in the past.  I was told by the Appellant's
    solicitor that those bills could not be found.  However, it is not  for
    me to hear evidence on this matter and it will remain for the Appellant
    to sufficiently demonstrate the attempts  made  by  him  to  trace  his
    family including his uncle in Afghanistan if  he  wishes  to  establish
    that he will be an unattended  or  unattached  child  pursuant  to  the
    authority of AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT  00016
    (IAC), that his solicitor sought to rely upon.

 9. On that note, I  observe  that  the  judge  considered  the  first  two
    headnotes of AA (Afghanistan) in her  determination  at  paragraph  19.
    However, in my mind the judge  needed  to  engage  more  directly  with
    paragraphs 91 to 92 of AA (Afghanistan), which underline  the  headnote
    and in essence show that the question  of  risk  is  to  be  gauged  by
    whether the child has the "protection of the  family"  including  their
    individual circumstances and  whether  the  exposition  to  a  risk  of
    serious harm is therefore likely or not.

10. As an addendum, I observe that I did not find merit in the  Appellant's
    suggestion that the fact of his being a member  of  the  nomadic  Kuchi
    tribe will be sufficient to demonstrate that the family  could  not  be
    traced albeit they are a  migratory  group  of  nomads.   The  previous
    position on Kuchis, seen for example at paragraph 8 of WK (Credibility,
    Hizb-i-Islami, Pashtuns, Kabul) Afghanistan [2004]  UKIAT  00280  which
    references objective material shows that, historically, the Kuchis were
    numbered at  60,000  nomads  at  that  time,  and  were  accustomed  to
    migrating between the  seasons.   As  such  the  disappearance  of  the
    Appellant's family is not entirely inexplicable  or  unpredictable  and
    may simply be due to migration.  Thus,  although  the  tribe's  nomadic
    nature is a relevant factor it would not demonstrate in of itself  that
    he would not be a protected child.  More would be required than this.

11. Consequently, whilst this matter has given me great pause  in  deciding
    whether  a  material  error  of  law  cumulatively   exists   in   this
    determination, as indicated earlier, I just find that the determination
    is such that it does  contain  errors  f  law  which  are  cumulatively
    material and are such that the determination should consequently be set
    aside to the  requisite  standard  identified  in  R  (Iran)  &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

Notice of Decision

12. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby  set  aside  and  the
    matter is remitted  to  be  heard  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
    differently constituted bench.

14. The First-tier Tribunal's anonymity direction is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

