
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02227/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2018                           |On 21 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                    [H D]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Nollett
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He was born on [ ] 1984.

 2. He  appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds dated  15  February
    2017.  In a decision promulgated on 22 September 2017,  Judge  Devittie
    (the judge) dismissed the appellant's appeal because he  did  not  find
    the appellant to be a credible witness and that he would not be at risk
    on return.

 3. The grounds claimed that the judge  reached  credibility  findings  not
    reasonably open to him on the evidence, failed to give adequate reasons
    for concluding that the appellant's claim to  be  a  genuine  Christian
    convert was not reasonably  likely  to  be  true  and  failed  to  make
    findings on material matters.

 4. In a decision dated 16 November 2017, Judge Pickup  refused  permission
    to appeal.  He said:

         "The grounds do not disclose any arguable material  error  of  law.
         The judge was entitled to apply Devaseelan and  take  the  previous
         decision of the Tribunal as the starting point.  However, the judge
         gave clear and cogent reasons for rejecting  as  not  credible  the
         claimed Christian conversion.  That a witness may have  been  found
         credible in a different appeal, that of the appellant's brother, is
         not directly relevant and not the starting point for assessment  of
         that witness's evidence.  The other grounds  of  appeal  are  minor
         points, attempting to pick apart the decision rather than  consider
         it as a whole.  Neither was it necessary for the judge to  consider
         a risk on return on the basis of having made a false claim to be  a
         Christian convert."

 5. The grounds  were  repeated.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  granted
    permission on 2 January 2018.  He said inter alia:

         "Given the importance of whether the appellant is a genuine convert
         to Christianity, it is arguable that the judge failed  to  identify
         properly why the choice of church counted  against  the  appellant,
         given  the  continued  attendance  (grounds,  [15];   decision   at
         [24(v)]).  It is also arguable that the judge has, in the light  of
         SA (Iran) [2012] EWHC 2575 failed adequately to explain why he  did
         not attach much weight to  the  evidence  of  Rev.  Roissetter  and
         Pastor Robling given the length of time the appellant had  attended
         church and his  other  activities.   What  is  stated  at  [25]  is
         somewhat  confusing  and  appears  to  indicate  that   the   judge
         considered that  the  appellant  had  to  prove  that  he  had  not
         concocted a false claim which is arguably an error."

 6. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Ms Nollett relied upon the grounds.   Pastor  Roissetter  attended  the
    hearing to give oral evidence and Pastor Robling,  from  a  church  the
    appellant attended in Swansea, sent a letter of support.  The appellant
    had been baptised in Swansea in 2014 until he moved to London in  2015.
    The judge set out the appellant's  claim  to  have  been  converted  to
    Christianity and the evidence in that regard at [13]-[23].   The  judge
    had no concerns regarding the evidence of the  witnesses  in  terms  of
    their strongly held belief in the appellant's credibility.  He went  on
    to say at [24] that there were a number of features of the  appellant's
    evidence and background that he found disturbing and which in his view,
    significantly undermined  the  evidence  that  had  been  presented  to
    support the conclusion that he was a genuine Christian convert.

 8. The judge failed to engage with SA (Iran) and failed to  give  adequate
    reasons for his decision.  Further, the judge failed to engage with the
    appellant's argument that he would be at risk on return in terms of the
    "pinch point" identified in AB and Others Iran [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC).

 9. Mr Mills submitted that SA (Iran) was not binding upon the  judge.   It
    was insufficient merely for the appellant to claim  that  he  had  been
    attending church.  The appellant had not been found to  be  a  truthful
    witness in the past.  He had made an  unsuccessful  asylum  application
    and only three months after he had  exhausted  his  rights  of  appeal,
    claimed to have joined the church in Swansea.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10. I find the grounds are made  out.   It  is  true  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into account the appellant's  poor  history.   He  had
    told lies previously in an attempt in succeeding in  an  asylum  claim.
    Danian  [1999]  EWCA  Civ  3000  was  relevant  in  that  although  the
    appellant's credibility might be likely to be low, the judge was  under
    an obligation to rigorously scrutinise the new claim.  In my view,  the
    judge carried out an erroneous assessment of the evidence.  At [25] the
    judge errs because he expects the appellant to prove a negative:

         "25. I have considered carefully the evidence of  the  pastors  who
             gave evidence in support of the appellant.  I  find  that  the
             appellant has failed to show on the lower standard,  that  his
             claim to be a genuine convert to Christianity, is not a second
             attempt on his part, to concoct an entirely  false  basis  for
             asylum.  In  this  instance,  the  claim  he  makes  no  doubt
             requires him to play and look the part - for without  that  he
             would not get the crucial backing of the church elders in  the
             UK."

11. The judge fails to give any reasoning or any adequate reasoning for his
    findings that the appellant is not a genuine Christian  convert  except
    for  his  previous  untruthful  asylum  claim,   his   exploration   of
    Christianity only three months after he was appeal rights exhausted and
    the fact that he and his brother  stumbled  upon  Haven  Green  Baptist
    Church, rather than putting a great deal of thought into the church  he
    decided to attend.  Given the considerable evidence from the pastor and
    member of City Church Swansea and the pastor  of  Haven  Green  Baptist
    Church, the judge was under an  obligation  to  engage  with  the  same
    rather than his approach which was to expect the appellant to show that
    his conversion to Christianity was not a second attempt on his part  to
    concoct a false basis for asylum.

12. I find the judge materially erred in his analysis  for  the  reasons  I
    have set out above.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law, is  set
    aside and shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
    hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 12 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
