
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02805/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at the  Civil  Justice  Centre,  Manchester       Decision  &  Reasons
Promulgated
On 26th  November  2018                                     On  2nd  January
2019

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                   MR W.K.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Parker promulgated on the 13th April 2018, in which  he
      dismissed the Appellant's protection and Human Rights claims.

   2. Permission to appeal has been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt  on
      the 18th September 2018 who found that it was arguable that First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Miah  had  taken  an  incorrect  approach  where  the
      Appellant's evidence was that he did not know if other  Army  officers
      identified in the photographs on  the  internet  had  been  threatened
      because he had not been in touch with them, rather than  the  evidence
      being that there had been no threats to  them  and  that  further  the
      grounds concerning the likelihood of the Taliban phoning  and  writing
      to the Appellant were also arguable in light of the  country  material
      and it apparently  being  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  photograph
      identifying him as an Army officer who had trained in the  UK  was  on
      the internet.  She found that all the grounds were arguable.

   3. In his oral submissions Mr Greer relied upon the  written  Grounds  of
      Appeal, both the original ones and  those  renewed  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal, which I have taken account of, and submitted that there  are
      three grounds upon which  permission  had  effectively  been  granted.
      Firstly he dealt with  plausibility;  the  second  was  a  failure  to
      resolve a dispute regarding the online  publication  with  photographs
      shown of the Appellant's attendance at Sandhurst;  and  the  third  he
      argued related to even if there was no past threat, whether or not the
      Appellant's profile would put him at risk  upon  return  nevertheless,
      which he argued the Judge had not properly dealt with.

   4. Mr Greer argued it was agreed as a matter of fact that  the  Appellant
      was a Major and therefore a commissioned  officer  within  the  Afghan
      Army who had been invited to attend a  training  course  at  Sandhurst
      around Remembrance Day 2016.  He said that the refusal letter had been
      ambivalent regarding whether or not the picture of the  Appellant  had
      been put on Facebook by himself or if the Taliban became aware  of  it
      or had threatened him, but he  said  there  were  two  key  pieces  of
      evidence before the Tribunal, firstly the "night letter"  referred  to
      at page 8 of the Appellant's bundle with the translation  at  page  9,
      secondly a "screen grab"  of  a  Facebook  post  at  page  12  of  the
      Appellant's bundle.  Mr Greer argued that Judge Parker had  not  given
      adequate reasons for discounting the plausibility of  the  Appellant's
      claim and said at paragraph 23 of the decision  the  Judge  had  found
      that  it  was  not  plausible  that  the  Appellant  would  simply  be
      threatened when the Taliban had it in their means simply to kill  him.



   5. He argued that the evidence before the Tribunal was that  the  Taliban
      did issue night letters and threaten people which was mentioned within
      the Home Office guidance on Afghanistan version 2 which was handed  up
      on the morning of the Tribunal hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
      at paragraph 4.3.1, and that in addition, there was  reference  within
      the UNHCR guidelines referred at page 46  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
      before the First-tier Tribunal referring to the Taliban using threats,
      intimidation and abductions.  Mr Greer said that he  took  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge to those parts of the  evidence.   In  respect  of
      that it was further argued by Mr Greer that the Judge's findings as to
      whether or not the photograph had been put on Facebook  were  unclear.
      He argued that if the article had been put on Facebook and  was  there
      to be seen by a Taliban, then  that  was  an  issue  that  had  to  be
      determined by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  which  had  not  been
      determined.

   6. In respect of the third ground he argued that even  if  the  Appellant
      had not been telling the truth in the past, which was disputed, it was
      argued that he would still be at risk in the future and the Judge  had
      not adequately considered the future risk for someone who is returning
      from the west after a lengthy absence, who had left the  Army  by  the
      date of the hearing and who had links to the west having been  invited
      to a seminar in the UK by the British Army.  He said that the  Judge's
      finding at paragraph 50 that the Appellant simply being a Major in the
      Army would not be enough to put him at  risk  was  insufficient  as  a
      finding, and his profile needed greater  consideration  and  that  the
      Judge failed to take account of all the factors which are said to give
      rise to risk.  He argued that the Judge's attention had been drawn  to
      the Board of Canada report from August 2017 at page 23 of  the  bundle
      where at paragraph 3 it said that it  may  not  simply  be  enough  to
      change jobs and that someone in the Appellant's position would need to
      change sides and that there was evidence of how high ranking  officers
      would be at risk on  page  24,  paragraph  3  and  how  there  was  no
      protection for former Army members at paragraph 5 on page  25  of  the
      bundle.

   7. In his response Mr Tan conceded that the Judge was wrong to state that
      it was implausible that the Taliban  would  use  threats  and  warning
      letters as stated by the Judge at paragraph 23  of  the  decision  and
      that it was clear from the objective evidence that the Taliban did use
      threats and warning letters.  However, he argued  that  although  that
      was an error, it  was  not  material,  as  the  Judge  had  found  the
      Appellant's family had been  able  to  live  violence  free  since  10
      February 2017 and that if the Appellant was at risk  they  would  have
      also come to harm and that further the Appellant had waited two  weeks
      before leaving, without having been harmed  at  paragraph  23  of  the
      decision.  He submitted that the Judge  had  properly  considered  the
      risk, and that the findings were sustainable.

   8. Mr Tan further conceded  that  it  was  not  clear  from  the  Judge's
      findings as to whether the Judge found that the  photograph  had  been
      put on Facebook or not, but had then argued that the ultimate question
      in that regard was whether or not the Appellant was at risk, which  he
      argued the Judge had dealt with.  He therefore conceded that this  was
      an error, but argued that it was not material.

   9. In respect of the final ground, Mr Tan argued that the Judge had dealt
      with the question of internal relocation of  the  Appellant's  profile
      and that the background evidence  was  that  low  level  people  could
      relocate.   He  conceded  that  it  was  not  the  most  comprehensive
      consideration of the risks to the Appellant but argued that it was not
      material.

  10. In response, Mr Greer reminded me that pursuant  to  the  case  of  SH
      (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 1284, at paragraph  15,  it  was  stated
      that for an error to be immaterial it had to  be  inevitable  that  at
      first the Tribunal would have reached the same  decision  irrespective
      and that that could not be said, he argued, in respect of these errors
      which he argued changed the whole decision.  He argued that it was not
      a case that the Appellant's family were able to live  risk  free,  but
      the Appellant in his statement had said that his family were living in
      hiding through fear.

  11. Both legal representatives agreed that it was a material error and the
      case  should  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   for
      reconsideration.







   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  12. It was conceded by Mr Tan on behalf of the Secretary of State that the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge did err at  [23]  in  stating  that  it  was
      "incongruous that the Taliban would make threatening phone  calls  and
      issue warning letters" and that "it would be easier to simply kill the
      Appellant without warning.  By making phone calls and issuing  letters
      it has given the Appellant time to flee which does not  seem  to  make
      sense".

  13. The background evidence both  in  terms  of  the  country  policy  and
      information note on Afghanistan from December 2016 at paragraph  4.3.1
      specifically stated that the Taliban do use night  letters  which  are
      threatening letters.  Further, within the UNHCR guidelines referred to
      within the Appellant's bundle to which the Judge's attention I am told
      was drawn by Mr Greer, there is specific reference at page 46  of  the
      Appellant's bundle, to the utilisation of  threats,  intimidation  and
      abductions.  The  Judge  has  therefore  failed  to  take  account  of
      relevant evidence in finding that it is incongruous that  the  Taliban
      would make threatening phone calls and issue  warning  letters  rather
      than simply killing the Appellant.  The  background  evidence  clearly
      makes reference to the Taliban wishing to  intimidate  their  victims,
      and utilisation of  threats  in  an  attempt  to  do  so.   The  Judge
      therefore has failed to take account  of  relevant  evidence  in  that
      regard.

  14. Although it is argued by Mr Tan that that error, although admitted  to
      be  an  error,  is  not  material  given  that  the  Judge  found  the
      Appellant's family had lived violence free  in  Kabul  since  February
      2017 and that the Appellant had been able to  wait  two  weeks  before
      leaving in circumstances where the Taliban knew  of  his  address,  as
      found by the Judge, given that the findings and risk to the  Appellant
      has to be considered taking account of all of the evidence,  I  cannot
      say that the Judge would necessarily have reached  the  same  decision
      had he taken account of the fact  that  the  Taliban  do  use  warning
      letters and make threatening phone  calls.   It  was  the  Appellant's
      clear case that he had been threatened by the Taliban and that he  had
      received a threatening letter in February 2017.  I therefore find that
      this error is a material error.

  15. It is further clear that although the Judge at [25] did find that  the
      Appellant posting pictures on Facebook seemed a reckless  and  foolish
      thing to do, the Judge has not in fact made findings as to whether  or
      not the Appellant did make the posting on Facebook which can  be  seen
      at page 12 of the Appellant's bundle.  No  clear  findings  have  been
      made by the Judge as to whether or not that posting was in  fact  made
      by the Appellant and what the effect if he had posted it was or as  to
      whether or not it would be likely to come  to  the  attention  of  the
      Taliban.  The Judge therefore  had  failed  to  resolve  an  issue  in
      dispute between the parties in that  regard.   Further,  although  the
      Judge at [30] said that the  pictures  on  Facebook  showed  two  high
      ranking officers who have not been targeted which he considered to  be
      very strange given the Appellant's  story,  in  fact  the  Appellant's
      evidence in that regard was that he did not know whether  or  not  the
      other officers had been targeted as he had had no  contact  with  them
      since, rather than the fact as depicted by the Judge, at the fact that
      they had not been targeted.   The  Judge  therefore  appears  to  have
      misinterpreted the Appellant's evidence in that regard.

  16. The core element of the Appellant's account is  that  he  is  at  risk
      having received the threatening letter having  made  the  postings  on
      Facebook and it  showing  him  having  attended  at  Sandhurst,  which
      although the Judge considered may have been  a  reckless  and  foolish
      thing to do, the Appellant's account was that he had done  it  because
      he was proud of having been invited to attend at a training  event  at
      Sandhurst and wanted to show his friends and family.

  17. I find that the Judge's assessment of the Facebook evidence,  and  his
      failure to actually resolve the issue as to whether or not there was a
      Facebook posting made, does amount to a material error.  It  was  core
      to the Appellant's account and I cannot say that the Judge's  decision
      would necessarily have been the same, had that finding not been made.

  18. In respect of the third ground of appeal, the findings  of  the  Judge
      were open to him on the evidence, and the Judge has  referred  to  the
      background evidence in that regard at [50].

  19. However, given the material errors made by the Judge in respect of the
      Facebook postings and the threatening  letter,  I  do  find  that  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker should be  set  aside  in
      its entirety and the case remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for
      re-hearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge A.J. Parker.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A.J.  Parker  does  contain  a
material error of law and is set aside.

The case to be remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
A.J. Parker.

I do make an anonymity direction in  this  case  given  the  nature  of  the
protection claim made by the Appellant.  No record or  transcript  or  other
note of these proceedings may identify  the  Appellant  or  members  of  his
family  either  directly  or  indirectly.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction may lead to contempt of Court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 26th November 2018


