
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02873/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 May 2019                     |On 13 June 2019                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 DRUPAD [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Lewis, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs N. Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 8 October 1989.
         He is now 29 years old. He appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  against
         the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mace promulgated  on
         29 January 2019 dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
         Secretary of State made on 11 December 2017 refusing his claim  for
         international protection.

      2. In paragraph 2  of  the  determination,  the  judge  described  the
         appellant's claim in summary form as concerning criminals  who  had
         become involved in the business of his father and  his  uncle.  The
         criminals  had  stored  illegal  goods  at  their  warehouse.   The
         appellant claimed they would continue in their campaign  to  target
         him on return and the police would do nothing to protect him. As  a
         result, the appellant is suffering from PTSD and depression.

      3. It is as well to point out at the very beginning that these  events
         are said to have commenced in 2007, some 12  years  ago,  when  the
         appellant was still a minor. He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in
         2009 but felt able to return to India on 7 January  2010.  However,
         he  claimed  that,  on  his  return  to  India,  he  was  abducted,
         unlawfully detained and seriously assaulted before being left on  a
         roadside. He then returned to the United  Kingdom  without  seeking
         further leave to remain when his student visa expired and  did  not
         claim asylum until 13 April 2017, over seven years  later.  In  the
         meantime, he had  been  encountered  by  immigration  officials  in
         October  2015,  found  to  be  an  overstayer.   This  prompted  an
         unsuccessful claim to remain on Article 8  grounds  which  did  not
         mention the subsequent claim that he  should  be  recognised  as  a
         refugee. Notwithstanding this unsuccessful claim made  in  December
         2015, he made further submissions on the same  grounds  in  January
         2016 which were rejected in a reasoned decision made  in  the  same
         month. Inevitably, this poor immigration history  featured  in  the
         overall assessment of the claim.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not find the appellant  credible.
         Her reasoning is found between paragraphs 22 and paragraph 39.  She
         did, however, accept the appellant had been the victim of a serious
         assault and that he suffers from mental health problems, [paragraph
         38]. The Judge found he could return to  his  immediate  family  in
         India where he had lived the majority of  his  life  and  that  his
         mental condition could be managed by  medication  enabling  him  to
         fully participate in society there.

      5. In granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge  relied  upon  what  he  considered  to  be  an
         arguable case that the judge had attached  insufficient  weight  to
         various parts of the  evidence.  The  grant  does  not  immediately
         identify an obvious and arguable error of law since the weight that
         is to be attached to the evidence is a matter for the judge of  the
         First-tier, absent irrationality or perversity.

      6. At the hearing before me, the appeal was advanced on the basis that
         the error of law was a failure to consider  the  appellant's  claim
         within the context of conditions in India: 'What  is  plausible  or
         implausible in the context of the United Kingdom is different  when
         assessed in its context in India.'

      7. Thus, it becomes necessary to consider the  judge's  determination,
         paragraph by paragraph, in order to  establish  whether  the  judge
         did,  indeed,  assess  the  evidence  from  a  parochial,  British,
         standpoint  or  whether  the  adverse  credibility  findings   were
         properly open to her regardless of the prism that  should  properly
         be placed upon the evidence by reason of  the  facts  occurring  in
         India.

      8. In paragraph 22 of the determination, the  judge  had  to  consider
         whether it was likely that the appellant was so deeply involved  in
         his father's business as to have been, and continue to be, a target
         of attention on the part of criminals.  Both  his  father  and  his
         uncle ran the business. His father died in December  2007  but  his
         uncle continued to run it until he sold it.  The uncle provided  no
         evidence of his having experienced any difficulties.  He  continues
         to live in India. This was such an obvious point that the judge was
         bound to take it into account when comparing the  position  of  the
         appellant in 2007 who was still a minor.

      9. As the judge pointed out in paragraph 22, the appellant  stated  he
         worked part-time in the warehouse and, after that, was working  for
         a consultancy as a clerk in a visa consultancy company where he did
         administration work. This work started in June  or  July  2008  and
         continued until 2009 prior to his coming  to  the  United  Kingdom.
         Furthermore, during part of the relevant period, the appellant  had
         been  studying  on  a  degree  course  in  Commerce  which  he  had
         discontinued in 2007. There was, therefore,  overwhelming  evidence
         that the appellant was at the periphery  of  involvement  with  the
         business run by his father and uncle such as to raise a question as
         to why criminals should target him.

     10. There can be no doubt that the process of reasoning adopted by  the
         judge in paragraph 22 was both reasonable and sound common-sense.

     11.  Paragraph  23  makes  a  further  sustainable  point.  Given   the
         appellant's evidence as to his other  activities  working  for  the
         visa  consultancy  company,  the  appellant's  statement   in   his
         interview that, after the death of his father in December 2007,  he
         worked full-time in the business was inconsistent.

     12. In paragraph 24 of the determination, the judge recorded  that  his
         uncle was then said  to  be  living  in  Baroda,  having  sold  the
         business. It was his uncle who had,  apparently,  struck  the  deal
         with the criminals. The judge then considered a  claim  of  rivalry
         between the named criminals. She did not believe it. She  gave  her
         reasons and cannot, even arguably, be said to have erred in law.

     13. So far, none  of  the  findings  made  by  the  judge  have  to  be
         reassessed by reason of Mr Lewis's argument that the  judge  failed
         to contextualise them into an Indian setting.

     14. In paragraph 25 of her  determination,  the  judge  considered  the
         appellant's claim that one of the criminals  wished  to  stand  for
         election. The difficulty in this part of the appellant's  case  was
         that it was said that the individual did not identify the political
         party. Notwithstanding this, the individual demanded the  political
         support of his uncle and father without his  naming  the  political
         party and leaving them to surmise which one it might be. The  judge
         did not believe it. The judge did not find it  credible  that  this
         individual wished to be involved in  party  politics  when  he  was
         known  to  be  a  local  gangster  whose  principal  activity   was
         harassment, kidnap  and  blackmail.  If,  as  the  appellant  said,
         everyone knew he was a thug, this sat uneasily  with  his  evidence
         that  one  of  the  criminals  identified  himself  in  dealing  in
         cosmetics and toys and  that  his  criminal  activities  were  only
         discovered later. Once again, these comments amount to  a  rational
         analysis  of  the  appellant's  evidence  leading  to  the  judge's
         conclusion that the appellant was not reliable.

     15. Paragraph 26 is another example of a finding of fact properly  open
         to the judge. It may be a simple point.  It may be that it did  not
         feature largely in the  judge's  overall  assessment.  It  remains,
         however,  sustainable.  The  appellant  said  he  always   used   a
         particular bus-stop to travel from his home to work but  could  not
         identify the name of the road.

     16. I move on to paragraph 28. The passage records a number of  answers
         provided by the appellant in his interview relating  to  his  claim
         that the police maintain a continuing interest in him. In  summary,
         it is apparent that the appellant failed to  provide  any  coherent
         answers to the questions asked of him. The questioning  then  moved
         to asking the appellant why his mother had failed  to  contact  him
         since August 2017. The suggestion was that she had been arrested by
         the police in their efforts to  locate  the  appellant.  It  was  a
         matter for the judge to determine whether she accepted  this  as  a
         plausible or credible explanation for the  appellant's  failure  to
         remain in  contact  with  his  mother.  It  cannot  conceivably  be
         suggested that, as a matter of  law,  the  judge  was  required  to
         accept that the  appellant  had  established  either  a  continuing
         interest on the part of the police in the  appellant  or  that  the
         circumstances in India were sufficient to explain the cessation  of
         contact between mother and son.

     17.  Paragraph  29  of  the  determination  records  the  obvious.  The
         appellant has never been arrested or detained by the police.  There
         is no warrant in existence  for  his  arrest.  He  has  never  been
         charged. He has been in the United Kingdom for the past nine years.
         The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not find  it  credible  that  the
         police would maintain a sufficient interest  in  the  appellant  to
         attend at his home and arrest his  mother.  I  venture  to  suggest
         there may be many other judges who would  have  reached  a  similar
         conclusion. That apart, Judge Mace was undoubtedly entitled  to  do
         so.

     18. Passing on to paragraph 32, the judge found a  discrepancy  between
         the appellant's claim about the injuries he  sustained  in  January
         2010. At one stage he claimed that his eye injury had  been  caused
         when he was hit by a tennis ball. At  another,  that  he  lost  his
         sight when he was attacked. It is not suggested that the  appellant
         did not provide two inconsistent versions of events. The judge  was
         entitled to treat them as undermining his overall credibility.

     19. It was in these circumstances that the judge made what amounts to a
         series of concluding comments in which she rejected  his  claim  to
         have been more involved with the business than was consistent  with
         his earlier statements that he had helped out and had worked  part-
         time. She rejected his claim that, after  such  a  long  period  of
         absence, the criminals would maintain an interest in him  or  could
         rationally believe he continued to work for a rival  criminal.  The
         judge recorded the appellant evading answers to questions  directed
         to why he would be of interest, rather than his uncle. She rejected
         his claim that the police now maintained any  current  interest  in
         him.

     20. I am satisfied that these findings of fact were  properly  open  to
         the judge.

     21. In paragraph 35, the judge focused upon the  delay  in  making  the
         claim  for  asylum.  The  appellant  had  provided   a   thoroughly
         implausible explanation that, whilst living in the  United  Kingdom
         for a period of eight years, he had never  heard  about  asylum  or
         read a newspaper or watched  television.  The  judge  rejected  the
         possibility that the delay was explicable by reason of  his  mental
         health.

     22. The appellant's mental health should properly be  treated,  as  the
         judge did, as a separate area of consideration. The  appellant  had
         been under the care  of  the  Community  Mental  Health  team  from
         January 2017 to August 2018 when he was discharged.  It  was  noted
         that he was experiencing the symptoms of PTSD in March 2017. He had
         no current suicidal ideation, intent  or  plans  when  assessed  in
         November 2018. The judge noted a report of Dr Singh dated 28  March
         2017 in which the appellant was described  as  experiencing  severe
         depressive symptoms.  This  predated,  by  almost  18  months,  his
         discharge from the local Community Mental Health team.

     23. For the purposes of the litigation, he was seen by  Dr  Dhumad  who
         prepared a report dated 11 January 2019.   This  is  summarised  in
         paragraph 15 of the determination. Dr Dhumad based his report  upon
         the account provided by the appellant which the judge  rejected  as
         not being credible. She analysed the report in paragraph 37 of  the
         determination, having  accepted  the  diagnosis  of  mental  health
         issues emanating from a variety of medical  sources.  She  accepted
         the appellant suffered a serious sexual assault but  rejected  that
         it was perpetrated by the criminals for the reason she had  already
         given. The judge considered the support mechanisms available to the
         appellant on return to India. She noted that his uncle  remains  in
         India. By rejecting the appellant's claim  that  he  is  unable  to
         establish contact with his mother, she implicitly found that he was
         either in contact with her or able to be in contact with  her  and,
         therefore, that she was able to offer him support.

     24. The judge then turned to the availability  of  treatment  including
         the provision of antidepressant drugs.  With  these  mechanisms  in
         mind, the judge reached a sustainable  conclusion  that  assistance
         and treatment available on return established  there  was  no  real
         likelihood of a violation of his Article 3 rights.

     25. For good measure, the judge recorded that the private life that the
         appellant has established since his arrival in the  United  Kingdom
         did not prevent his removal as a violation of his Article 8 rights.

     26. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had proper regard
         to the  evidence  that  was  before  her  and  reached  sustainable
         conclusions on each of the issues that she was required to address.
         I am satisfied that the determination discloses no  material  error
         of law and that the grounds of appeal seeking  to  challenge  those
         findings failed to establish any such error.

      DECISION

          i) The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error of law.

         ii) Her determination of the appeal shall stand.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                                 20 May 2019
