
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02342/2015
                                                               PA/02343/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 November 2016                  |On 22nd November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     DM
                                     SK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, Counsel, instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Row, promulgated on 14 July 2016, in  which  he  dismissed
         the asylum appeal brought by the 1st Appellant (the 2nd  Appellant,
         the wife of the  1st  Appellant,  being  dependent  on  his  claim)
         against the Respondent's decision of 20 October 2015 to refuse  his
         protection claim.

Background

      2. The Appellants are both nationals of Sri Lanka. The  1st  Appellant
         (hereinafter referred to as 'the Appellant')  was  born  in  August
         1976. He arrived in the UK on 22 April 2010 with entry clearance as
         a Tier 4 student which, according to his  evidence  in  his  asylum
         interview, was valid until 2013. The Appellant initially stated  in
         his asylum interview that he was  given  further  leave  to  remain
         until January  2015,  presumably  in  the  same  category.  In  his
         decision however the judge states that the  Appellant's  leave  was
         curtailed in 2013 because he failed to comply with the terms of his
         leave to remain [14]. In so stating the judge  is  likely  to  have
         relied on the Reasons For Refusal Letter which does state that  the
         Appellant's leave was curtailed on non-compliance grounds in  2013.
         The Respondent noted that the Appellant travelled to  Dubai  for  2
         weeks in 2013, and that he returned to Sri  Lanka  on  28  December
         2014 before making his way back to the UK.

      3. On 13 April 2015  the  Appellant  claimed  asylum.  His  claim  was
         premised on a political opinion he believed had been imputed to him
         by the Sri  Lankan  authorities.  The  Appellant  is  of  Sinhalese
         ethnicity. He was never a member  of  the  LTTE  or  any  political
         organisation. He was employed as a printer/manager. Whilst  in  Sri
         Lanka he allowed some Tamils to lodge in  his  house.  Two  of  the
         Tamils were said to be senior members of the LTTE who  stayed  with
         him for a month. The Appellant maintained that he was  detained  by
         the Sri Lankan authorities between December 2009 and February  2010
         on suspicion of assisting the LTTE. During this detention he claims
         to have been assaulted with sticks and belts.  His  father  secured
         his release by paying a bribe.

      4. The Appellant then left Sri Lanka using his own passport  and  came
         to the UK. The Appellants did not study in the  UK.  The  Appellant
         claimed to have returned to Sri Lanka in order  to  reapply  for  a
         student Visa. On his return to  Sri  Lanka  in  December  2014  the
         Appellant claims he was arrested at the  airport  on  suspicion  of
         helping the LTTE. During this detention he was struck with a heated
         rod repeatedly over  his  back  and  shoulders.  His  father  again
         secured his release by paying a bribe. The Appellant left Sri Lanka
         using a false passport and identity and  returned  to  the  UK  via
         Dubai and France.

      5. Whilst noting that the Appellant's claim was internally  consistent
         the Respondent found it was not corroborated by external  evidence.
         The Respondent noted that it was not until April 2015, some 5 years
         after he arrived in the UK, that the Appellant claimed asylum.  The
         Respondent drew an adverse inference based on this delay, and found
         that the Appellant's general credibility was damaged under  section
         8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc)  Act
         2004. The Respondent did not consequently  accept  the  Appellant's
         claim to have been detained and ill-treated.

Decision of the First-tier Judge

      6. The Judge did not find the Appellant credible. The judge noted  the
         Appellant's immigration history, including the use of deception  to
         enter the UK and the Appellant's  delay  in  claiming  asylum.  The
         judge relied on internal discrepancies in the Appellant's  account,
         including his claim in oral evidence that he was shown  photographs
         of him attending a demonstration in the UK when this had never been
         mentioned before [25]. The judge relied on a further  inconsistency
         in relation to the Appellant's location when he was first  detained
         by the Sri Lankan authorities in  2009  [28].  The  judge  did  not
         accept the Appellant's claim that he was able to leave the  airport
         in Sri Lanka either with his own passport in 2010 or with  a  false
         passport in 2014 [26] & [27]. The judge did not find  it  plausible
         that the LTTE would choose the Appellant to accommodate  two  high-
         profile members given that he was Sinhalese [29].  The  judge  held
         against the Appellant the absence of any statement from his father,
         who was residing in Sri Lanka  [30].  The  judge  noted  there  was
         little to suggest the Appellant had been actively political in  the
         UK, other than his attendance at a few demonstrations.

      7. At [33] to [43] the judge dealt with a medico-legal report prepared
         by  Dr  John  McNulty,  dated  20  May  2016,  which  assessed  the
         Appellant's  mental  health  and  the  scarring  on  his  back  and
         shoulders. The judge found there were certain deficiencies  in  the
         medico-legal report such as the failure to obtain and consider  the
         Appellant's medical records, and  the  failure  by  Dr  McNulty  to
         consider other possible causes of the  scarring.  The  judge  found
         that Dr McNulty did not differentiate between the  different  types
         of  scar  found  on  the  Appellant's  body  and  that   this   was
         inconsistent with the case of KV  (scarring-medical  evidence)  Sri
         Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC).

      8. At [41] the judge stated,

             "I am a [sic] not qualified  to  comment  upon  the  cause  or
             nature of any scar but looking at the photographs at pages 24-
             26 it would appear that the scars  are  precisely  delineated.
             They only occur in one area of the Appellant's body, his back.
             The Appellant does not claim that he  was  unconscious  during
             the assaults. Those scars resulting from wounds inflicted upon
             a conscious person might have been expected to be  blurred  as
             that person would move around. If  the  Appellant  was  moving
             around wounds on another parts [sic]  of  his  body  might  be
             expected. Instead there is a sequence  of  scars  all  in  one
             place on the  body.  Dr  McNulty  does  not  deal  with  these
             matters. The above country guidance case [KV] suggests that he
             should have done."

      9. And at [42] the judge stated,

             "For these reasons whilst I accept that Dr McNulty  found  and
             recorded the scarring described I do not  accept  his  opinion
             that they are highly  consistent  with  the  assault  alleged.
             There are other obvious ways in which  the  scars  could  have
             been applied to the Appellant's back  which  did  not  involve
             arrest and torture by the Sri Lankan authorities.  Dr  McNulty
             did not deal with these."

     10. The judge then noted the PTSD symptoms found by Dr McNulty and  his
         diagnosis. The judge noted that the expert was not in a position to
         comment upon the  origin  of  the  symptoms,  and  noted  that  the
         population of Sri Lanka had lived through the closing stages  of  a
         brutal civil war  in  which  government  troops  fought  their  way
         through civilian areas in the  north  of  the  country.  The  judge
         stated that atrocities were committed by both sides in the conflict
         and it was not difficult to imagine other causes of trauma to a Sri
         Lankan man who was in the country when this occurred.

     11. The judge was not satisfied the Appellant  would  be  targeted  for
         persecution if removed to Sri  Lanka  and  refused  his  protection
         claim, his claim under Article  3  and  Article  8  ECHR,  and  his
         Humanitarian Protection claim.

The grant of permission

     12. Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fisher  stated,  in  granting
         permission,

             "The  lengthy  ground  seeking  permission  raise  5   issues.
             Firstly, they assert that the judge's  adverse  findings  over
             the Appellant's ability to leave the country with his own,  or
             a false, passport, were  contrary  to  the  country  guidance.
             Secondly, it is said  that  there  was  irrationality  in  the
             judge's conclusion that a Sinhalese man would have been chosen
             to harbour two high-profile members of the LTTE.  The  grounds
             go on to claim that the judge's  conclusion  on  the  lack  of
             documentary evidence was  irrational.  The  remaining  grounds
             relate to the medical evidence  and  the  judge's  failure  to
             treat  the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness  as  he  was
             suffering from PTSD.

             There is merit in grounds 1, 4 and  5.  The  country  guidance
             does indicate that it is possible for wanted persons to  leave
             Sri Lanka via the airport. In paragraph 41  of  his  decision,
             the judge states that he is not qualified to comment upon  the
             cause or nature of scarring, but then goes on to do so.  There
             is merit in the point raised in  the  grounds  concerning  his
             findings on the medical evidence. In paragraph 50,  the  judge
             appears to accept that the Appellant was suffering from  PTSD,
             but there was nothing in his decision to indicate that he made
             any allowance for that fact. In respect of grounds 2 and 3,  I
             would merely observe that the standard  for  irrationality  is
             high, and that the judge was perfectly entitled  to  make  the
             point that there was no documentary evidence in  circumstances
             where it might reasonably have been expected."

Submissions of the parties

     13. Mr Mannan relied on the grounds upon which permission  was  granted
         and expanded those grounds at the hearing. It had been accepted  in
         the Respondent's  Rule  24  response  that  the  judge  misdirected
         himself  regarding  the  Appellant's  exit  on  his  passport.   My
         attention was drawn to the medico-legal report. At [28] Dr  McNulty
         noted the Appellant's account relating to his alleged assault using
         a heated rod. It was submitted that Dr McNulty had this in mind  in
         his assessment of the scarring and when he reached his  conclusion,
         at paragraph 44  of  the  report,  that  the  scarring  was  highly
         consistent  with  the  Appellant's  account  of  this  assault.  My
         attention was drawn to paragraphs 43 and  45  of  the  medico-legal
         report where Dr McNulty had considered alternative causes for other
         scars. At paragraphs 49  and  57  of  the  medico-legal  report  Dr
         McNulty had considered whether the Appellant had been  feigning  or
         exaggerating his symptoms. At paragraph 50  Dr  McNulty  considered
         that the  discrepancies  in  the  Appellant's  account  could  have
         resulted from the effect of PTSD on his recollection of events.  It
         was submitted that the failure by the judge to  take  into  account
         the possible consequences of the Appellant's PTSD, and  his  status
         as a vulnerable individual, rendered unsafe the adverse credibility
         findings based on discrepancies at paragraphs  28  and  25  of  the
         decision.

     14. In accordance with the Respondent's Rule  24  response  Mr  Bramble
         accepted that the judge misdirected  himself  in  relation  to  the
         Appellant's ability to exit on his own or  a  false  passport,  but
         submitted that the error was not material. Mr  Bramble  pointed  to
         the other adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  the  judge.  Mr
         Bramble accepted that Dr McNulty had, in respect  of  some  of  the
         scarring, considered alternative causes.  No  attempt  however  had
         been  made  to  consider  alternative  causes  for   the   scarring
         identified in paragraph 44 of the medico-legal report.  KV  was  an
         important and relevant case and the judge was  entitled  to  attach
         limited evidence to the medico-legal report given  the  absence  of
         any reference to the possibility of Self-Infliction By Proxy (SIBP)
         as a possible cause of the scars. It was submitted that there  were
         sufficiently strong credibility findings  to  render  the  decision
         sustainable. Mr Bramble recognise that paragraph 43 of the decision
         could  be  potentially  problematic  as  the  Respondent  was   not
         asserting that the Appellant had any involvement in the conflict in
         Sri Lanka and, given that he was Sinhalese, there was no reason why
         he would have been involved. It was however submitted that this did
         not materially undermine the judge's conclusions.

Discussion

     15. In her Rule 24 response the  Respondent  accepted  that  the  judge
         misdirected himself regarding the Appellant's ability to leave  Sri
         Lanka at the airport using either  his  own  passport  or  a  false
         passport. The grounds relied on extracts from GJ  (post-civil  war:
         returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  which  indicated
         that a person's ability to exit the country using their  own  or  a
         false passport was not necessarily indicative of a  lack  of  state
         interest (see, for example, paragraphs 146 and 275). To the  extent
         that the judge failed to take account of the evidence given in  GJ,
         and the conclusions reached by that Tribunal, the judge  failed  to
         take account of a relevant consideration. The judge's  findings  in
         relation to the  Appellant's  ability  to  leave  via  the  airport
         without coming to the adverse  attention  of  the  authorities  was
         however just one factor amongst several upon  which  he  relied  in
         concluding that the Appellant  was  not  credible.  The  Respondent
         maintains that this error cannot be regarded as material given  the
         other adverse credibility findings independently made by the judge.

     16. At [29] of his decision the judge did not find it  plausible  that,
         as a Sinhalese man, he would have been chosen to harbour two  high-
         profile LTTE members rather than sympathetic  Tamils.  The  grounds
         contended that this conclusion was irrational as being harboured by
         a Sinhalese  was  less  likely  to  attract  suspicion  then  being
         harboured by a Tamil. Permission was not however  granted  on  this
         ground. Whilst I accept  the  logic  supporting  this  ground,  the
         judge's conclusion was undoubtedly one he was  rationally  entitled
         to reach for the reasons given. The grounds  further  contend  that
         the judge was not entitled to drawn an adverse inference (as he did
         at [30]) reliant on the absence of a statement from the Appellant's
         father. Permission was not granted on this ground either. Whilst  a
         judge may well have attached little weight to a statement from  the
         Appellant's father (given that  he  was  not  available  for  cross
         examination) it cannot be said that this judge  acted  irrationally
         in holding against  the  Appellant  the  complete  absence  of  any
         statement from his father or any satisfactory  explanation  why  no
         statement was available.

     17. It is clear from paragraphs 33  to  43  that  the  judge  did  give
         detailed  consideration  to  the  medico-legal  report.  The  judge
         however found there were  a  number  of  significant  factors  that
         reduced the value of the report [35]. At [36] and  [37]  the  judge
         noted that the Appellant's medical records did not appear  to  have
         been provided to Dr McNulty. The judge noted that the Appellant did
         have a GP and that he had undergone a hernia operation. I find  the
         judge was entitled to reduce some weight to the medical  report  in
         the absence of any evidence that the medical records were  provided
         to Dr McNulty.

     18. Although somewhat obliquely, the judge also attached reduced weight
         to the medico-legal report because Dr McNulty did not consider  the
         possibility that the scarring present on the Appellant's  back  and
         shoulders may have been the result  of  SIBP.  In  KV  (scarring  -
         medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC) (at [294])  the
         Tribunal gave some guidance as to the best practice in  respect  of
         preparation of medico-legal reports for use in  asylum  cases.  The
         Tribunal indicated that doctors should indicate in their assessment
         that SIBP as a possible cause had been considered even  when  there
         were no presenting features to suggest it. Having read the  medico-
         legal report Dr McNulty makes no reference to  the  possibility  of
         SIBP. I am satisfied that the failure to make  any  such  reference
         entitled the judge to attach reduced  weight  to  the  medico-legal
         report.

     19. I do however have concerns with respect to  other  aspects  of  the
         judge's approach to the  medico-legal  report.  At  [41],  although
         stating that he is not qualified to  comment  upon  the  nature  or
         cause of any scar, it seems to me that the  judge  proceeds  to  do
         precisely that.  The  judge  notes  that  the  photographs  of  the
         scarring showed them to be precisely delineated. Having noted  that
         the Appellant did not claim to have  been  unconscious  during  the
         assaults, the judge states, "...those scars resulting  from  wounds
         inflicted upon a conscious person might have been  expected  to  be
         blurred as that person would move around". The judge  then  states,
         "If the Appellant was moving around wounds on another  parts  [sic]
         of his body might be expected."  In  my  judgement  the  judge  has
         engaged in impermissible speculation in relation to the  appearance
         of the scars and their likely causes without having  the  necessary
         expert background to entitle him to do so. It  is  clear  from  the
         medico-legal report that Dr McNulty was aware of the  circumstances
         described by the Appellant in which a heated rod was said  to  have
         been applied to his body [28]. Having described the various  scars,
         and with reference to the Istanbul Protocol, the  expert  concludes
         (at paragraph 44  of  the  report)  that  the  scars  were  "highly
         consistent" with the Appellant's account of being assaulted with  a
         heated rod. Whilst it is ultimately for  the  judge  to  accept  or
         reject the Appellant's account, the judge is not permitted, without
         cogent reasons, to substitute his own view for that of  the  expert
         in concluding that, as a result of the  appearance  of  the  scars,
         they were not highly consistent with the assault  alleged  (as  the
         judge did at [42]).

     20. At [42] the judge also states, "There are  other  obvious  ways  in
         which the scars could have been applied  to  the  Appellant's  back
         which did  not  involve  arrest  and  torture  by  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities. Dr McNulty did not deal with these."  The  judge  does
         not however identify what these "other  obvious  ways"  are.  Other
         than having been caused through SIBP, it is not apparent what other
         obvious ways might have cause the scarring. I further note that  Dr
         McNulty does in fact consider alternative causes  for  two  of  the
         injuries investigated by him (at  paragraph's  43  and  45  of  his
         expert report), although no alternative consideration was given  to
         lesions L2 to L16.

     21. Although the judge appears to have accepted Dr McNulty's  diagnoses
         of PTSD, it is not apparent that the judge took this diagnosis into
         account when assessing inconsistencies in the Appellant's  account.
         Dr McNulty (at paragraph 50) did indicate that  some  discrepancies
         may have been the result of the effect of PTSD on  the  Appellant's
         recollection of  events,  and  that  inconsistent  recollection  of
         events in successive interviews was recognised as being  associated
         with the condition. At [28] the judge drew an adverse inference  in
         respect of an inconsistency relating to  the  Appellant's  location
         when first  detained  in  2009.  Although  noting  the  Appellant's
         explanation, when queried about this  discrepancy  by  Dr  McNulty,
         that he was "stressed at the asylum  interview",  the  judge  found
         this to be a substantial discrepancy. The  judge  has  not  however
         made any reference to the possibility that the Appellant's PTSD may
         have been a cause of this discrepancy. Whilst the  judge  may  have
         been ultimately entitled to conclude that  this  discrepancy  could
         not be attributed to the Appellant's PTSD, his failure to  consider
         the possibility does render unsafe this particular conclusion.

     22. The same can be said in respect  of  a  further  adverse  inference
         drawn by the judge at [25] where the Appellant mentions being shown
         photographs  during  his  interrogation  of  his  attendance  at  a
         demonstration in the United Kingdom. This had not been mentioned in
         his asylum interview or in his witness statement. The  judge  draws
         an adverse inference based on the lateness of  this  assertion.  No
         consideration  however  had  been  given  by  the  judge   to   the
         possibility that the late assertion could have been  attributed  to
         the Appellant's PTSD.

     23. At [43] the judge, quite properly, stated that Dr McNulty  was  not
         in a position to comment upon the origin  of  those  symptoms.  The
         judge then noted that the population of Sri Lanka had lived through
         the closing stages of a brutal civil war in which government troops
         fought their way  through  civilian  areas  in  the  north  of  the
         country. As atrocities were committed by both  sides  it  was  not,
         according to the judge, difficult to imagine other causes of trauma
         to a Sri Lankan who was in the  country  when  this  occurred.  The
         Appellant did not however hail from the North of Sri Lanka, and  he
         was not Tamil. There was nothing in his background to indicate  any
         involvement in the  civil  war  or  its  closing  stages,  a  point
         accepted by Mr Bramble. The judge has proposed that the Appellant's
         PTSD could be attributed to his presence in the country during  the
         closing stages  of  the  civil  war  but  this  hypothesis  is  not
         supported by any evidence that was before the judge.

     24. For the reasons set out above I am satisfied that the  decision  is
         vitiated  by  a  number  of  legal  errors  that,  when  considered
         cumulatively, are material. In the circumstances, when  there  have
         been unsafe findings of fact, it is appropriate to remit the appeal
         back to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing,  all  issues
         open, before a judge other than judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Row.



Decision:

The First-tier Tribunal's decision is unsafe as a result of material  errors
of law. The matter is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
complete rehearing, before a judge other than judge Row.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellants  in
this appeal are granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]    21 November 2016
Signed:  Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
