
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02626/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 11 November 2016                  |on 14 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   M B [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by McGlashan
                    MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as a citizen of Eritrea,  born  on  20
    July 1985.  He says that if he returned there he would be at risk as  a
    Pentecostalist, and for having left illegally.

 2. The respondent rejected his claim by  letter  dated  30  October  2015,
    accepting that he is a Pentecostalist, but  rejecting  his  account  of
    habitual residence in Eritrea, and holding that in any event by his own
    account he would be a national of Ethiopia, having been  born  in  that
    country to Ethiopian parents, and not having provided evidence that  he
    has been deprived of or would no longer be entitled to his nationality.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Agnew dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    decision promulgated on 11 July 2016.

 4. Permission to appeal to the UT was granted on an application which sets
    out  7  grounds  (paragraphs  2  -  7  of  the  9  paragraphs  of   the
    application).  In view of concessions made by  the  respondent  at  the
    hearing, the grounds may be dealt with briefly.

 5. Paragraph 2 argues that the judge had no good reason for  holding  that
    the claimed financial assistance given to the appellant by his aunt for
    his exit from Eritrea did  not  sit  well  with  her  unwillingness  to
    support his education.  Paragraph 3 says there  was  no  basis  for  an
    adverse  inference  from  failure  to  mention  at  an  earlier   stage
    additional reasons for non-attendance at school.

 6. The appellant  was  interviewed  on  19  October  2015.   His  previous
    solicitors prepared a letter dated 23 October 2015 (prior to receipt of
    the refusal letter and so without knowledge of the  respondent's  case)
    seeking to correct certain errors "in the  recording  of  some  of  the
    answers".  This letter was not included among the documents provided by
    either side to the FtT.  The grounds at paragraphs 4 and 8 are based on
    the judge not having before that letter before her, and so being misled
    into discounting the appellant's explanations that he had named a place
    near Assab (his claimed place of former residence in Eritrea), and that
    he was permitted to re-enter Sudan on return  from  Greece  because  he
    paid a bribe.

 7. The appellant's current solicitors had a copy of the letter  and  could
    have provided it to the judge, but the Presenting Officer, very fairly,
    was prepared to let that point pass.  There were  thus  two  issues  on
    which the Judge, through no fault of her own, might  have  fallen  into
    error and which played some part in the outcome.

 8. Paragraph 5 submits that the judge  made  too  much  of  the  appellant
    booking a trip by bus to visit the Ethiopian Embassy  in  London  which
    involved an unnecessary overnight stay.

 9. Paragraph 6 says that the judge had  no  basis  for  finding  that  the
    appellant and his witness Mr [H] might not have recognised  each  other
    again after many years, and that there was no good reason why they must
    have been familiar with each other's family situation, if circumstances
    were as they claimed.  Paragraph 7  is  directed  against  the  judge's
    findings that the evidence from the appellant and from Mr [H] contained
    crucial discrepancies, when no such discrepancies are identified.

10. Mrs O'Brien said that it  might  have  been  possible  to  analyse  and
    compare the evidence from the appellant and from Mr [H] to show why  it
    lacked credit, but she conceded, again fairly and correctly, that  such
    analysis is missing from the decision.

11. Mr Devlin acknowledged that this was a case where none  of  the  errors
    identified might be sufficient on its own to  undermine  the  decision.
    Some of the grounds are relatively weak.  However, the matters  arising
    from the unfortunate absence in the FtT of the letter dated 23  October
    2015 (a copy of which was attached to the grounds of appeal, so that it
    is now on file) and from the treatment of the evidence of  the  witness
    Mr [H] are of  such  force  that  the  decision  cannot  safely  stand.



12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside  for  error  on
    points of law as summarised  above,  and  as  conceded.   None  of  its
    findings are to stand.  The nature of the  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of
    Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the  FtT  for  an  entirely
    fresh hearing.

13. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case or not to  include
    Judge Agnew.

14. An anonymity direction was made in the FtT, although  for  no  apparent
    reason.  No such direction was sought in the UT, so this  decision  has
    not been anonymised.


         [pic]

         11 November 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




