
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                        Appeal   Number:
PA/02683/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 July 2017                        |    On 08 August 2017                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Rahmati Abdollah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing an appeal by the applicant on asylum and
    humanitarian protection grounds but allowing it, in form at  least,  on
    human rights (article 8) grounds.  In this decision, I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, the  applicant
    as the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1 January  1993.   He
     arrived in the UK on 3 September 2016  and  applied  for  asylum.   His
     application was refused on 2 March 2017 for the reasons set out in  the
     respondent's detailed reasons for refusal.  He appealed to  the  First-
     tier Tribunal and his appeal was heard on 19 April 2017.  The judge did
     not accept that the appellant would be at real risk of  persecution  or
     serious harm on return to Afghanistan for the reasons set out fully  in
     his decision.  He went on to consider article 8  in  [69]  -  [70]  and
     concluded that any interference with the appellant's private and family
     life would not be disproportionate to the need  to  maintain  fair  and
     effective immigration control, saying in terms that for  these  reasons
     the appeal was dismissed on article 8 grounds.

3.   However, in the formal notice of decision at the  end  of  his  written
    decision the judge, whilst confirming that the appeal was dismissed  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds, said that  the  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights grounds.

4.   The respondent was granted permission to  appeal  on  the  basis  that,
    although the judge appeared to have made a slip, it was not the sort of
    slip that could be corrected by operation of the First-tier  Tribunal's
    slip rule.

5.   At the hearing before me there was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of
    the appellant.  His representatives have written to the Upper  Tribunal
    indicating that they are no longer acting.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    notice of hearing was properly served both on  the  appellant  and  his
    representatives and that the  proper  course  is  for  the  hearing  to
    proceed.

6.   In the light of the Upper Tribunal decision in Katsonga  ("Slip  Rule";
    FtT's general powers) [2016] UKUT 228, the slip rule in Rule 31 of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules  cannot  be  used  to  reverse  the
    effect of a decision.  In these circumstances, the error  can  only  be
    corrected on appeal.  I am satisfied that it was the intention  of  the
    judge to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds:  this  is  crystal
    clear from what he has said in [69] - [70].   I  am  equally  satisfied
    that the decision  allowing  the  human  fights  appeal  was  simply  a
    clerical error.  To this extent the judge erred in law and  the  proper
    course is for the human rights decision to  be  set  aside  and  for  a
    decision to be  substituted  dismissing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Decision

7.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  The decision  is  set  aside  in
    relation to human rights grounds.  I re-make  the  decision  dismissing
    the appeal on human rights grounds in addition to confirming that it is
    dismissed on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.  No  anonymity
    direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   H J E Latter                            Date: 7 August 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
