

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/02945/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields Hearing Centre       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 December 2017                          |On 7 December 2017             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    B S S
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the appellant:        Ms M Cleghorn, counsel instructed by Halliday
Reeves Solicitors
For the respondent:      Ms R Petterson, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



                               Anonymity Order


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I continue an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to   contempt   of   court
proceedings.




                           Decision and Directions

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   refuse him refugee protection, humanitarian protection or leave to remain
   in the UK on human rights grounds.

2. The First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  was  sent  to  the  parties  on  29
   December 2016 and the basis of the grounds of appeal is  that  the  judge
   failed properly to apply the country guidance of the Upper Tribunal in AA
   (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).

Background

3. The undisputed facts in this appeal are that the appellant  is  an  Iraqi
   Kurd from Kirkuk and is a Sunni Arab.  He is not originally from the  IKR
   and has no sponsor in that area of Iraq. Kirkuk is not in the IKR.

4. The appellant  has  at  present  no  travel  document,  having  lost  his
   passport in the waters off Greece when travelling to Europe, but he  says
   he has an uncle in Kirkuk who  still  has  his  CSID,  though  he  doubts
   whether it could be posted to him from there.

First-tier Tribunal decision

5. At [55] of his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that  the
   appellant could not be returned to Iraq via Baghdad, for the reasons  set
   out in the refusal letter, that is, because he is a Sunni  Arab  with  no
   CSID or passport.

6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the asylum  claim  on  credibility
   grounds, with reference to the low credibility of the appellant's account
   of a feud in the home area and/or of the appellant having been  kidnapped
   by Daesh/ISIS in that  area  before  coming  to  the  UK.   There  is  no
   challenge to that part of his decision.

7. When refusing the claim under  Article  15(c),  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge stated that he was guided by the 2015 country guidance of the Upper
   Tribunal in AA (Iraq). He did not set out that guidance before purporting
   to apply it.

8. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  entire  reasoning  on  AA  (Iraq)  and
   Article 15(c) is as follows:

    "55.  ...In  terms  of  humanitarian  protection,  I  am  guided,  with
       particular reference to Kirkuk, to the Upper Tribunal decision in AA
       Iraq CG , to which I have already made reference.  In that regard, I
       accept that [internal] relocation should be considered.  It is clear
       from paragraph 31  of  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  the
       Respondent would not propose to return  the  appellant  to  Baghdad.
       The reality of relocation would therefore be to the  Kurdish  region
       of Iraq, administered by the KRG. ...

    57.  ...I further find that it is reasonable to expect the appellant to
       be able to relocate within Iraq, to  the  Kurdistan  Region,  rather
       than being returned to Baghdad.  In forming that view, I  also  find
       that the requirement  would  not  be  unduly  harsh.   A  system  of
       government is in operation within the  Kurdistan  Region,  including
       the provision of state protection. ... "

9. The Judge went on also to dismiss the human rights claim.

Permission to appeal

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kopieczek  who
   considered it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  in
   that the Judge's conclusions arguably failed fully to reflect the country
   guidance decision in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).

Rule 24 Reply

11. The respondent's reply asserts that the First-tier  Tribunal  considered
   AA (Iraq) at [55]-[57] of his decision and that the judge  gave  adequate
   reasons for finding that it would not be unduly harsh for  the  appellant
   to return to the IKR.

12. That is the basis on which this appeal  came  before  me  today  for  an
   error of law hearing.  I am required to assess  whether  the  grounds  of
   appeal identify a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
   Tribunal, such that the  decision  should  be  remade.   If  so,  I  must
   consider whether to remake it or to remit it to the  First-tier  Tribunal
   for further findings of fact and, where appropriate, credibility.

Upper Tribunal hearing

13. At the hearing today, I heard oral submissions from Ms Petterson and  Ms
   Cleghorn. For the respondent, Ms Petterson  relied  on  the  respondent's
   Country  Information  and  Guidance  for  Iraq  in  September   2017   as
   demonstrating that Kirkuk today is  no  longer  a  contested  area.   She
   argued that any error by the First-tier Tribunal was immaterial  on  that
   basis, as there is no risk to the appellant in Kirkuk today.

14. For the  appellant,  Ms  Cleghorn  relied  on  country  guidance  in  BA
   (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT  18  (IAC)  which  confirmed  an
   enhanced risk for Sunni Arab men in Baghdad  on  which,  presumably,  was
   based the  respondent's  concession  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
   returned to Baghdad.  Ms Cleghorn argued that the appellant could not  be
   returned to Erbil in the IKR as he is not originally from there  and  has
   not been pre-cleared for admission to the IKR.

15. Ms Cleghorn asked me to consider allowing the appeal  outright,  on  the
   basis that the appellant would be disadvantaged on Devaseelan grounds  if
   he were to have his appeal reheard in the First-tier Tribunal, because of
   the negative credibility findings made in  respect  of  his  core  asylum
   claim.

The AA (Iraq) guidance

16. The country guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in AA  (Iraq),  so  far
   as relevant to this appeal, is as follows:

         "Note: References to Iraq herein  are  to  the  territory  of  Iraq
         excluding  the  autonomous  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  ("IKR")  unless
         otherwise stated.

         A. INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ: ARTICLE 15(C) OF THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

      1. There is at present a state of internal armed conflict  in  certain
         parts of Iraq, involving government security  forces,  militias  of
         various kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL. The  intensity
         of  this  armed  conflict  in  the  so-called  "contested   areas",
         comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min),
         Ninewah and Salah Al-din, is such that, as a general matter,  there
         are substantial grounds for believing that  any  civilian  returned
         there, solely on account of his or her presence there, faces a real
         risk of being subjected to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to
         serious harm within the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification
         Directive. ...

         B. DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)

         5. Return of former residents of the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.

      6. No  Iraqi  national  will  be  returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents. ..."

         E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION

         17. The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if P originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with the IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer...."

17. On 14 February 2017, the Upper Tribunal gave further guidance  in  H,  R
   (on the application of) v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department
   (application of AA (Iraq) CG) [2017] UKUT 119 (IAC), as follows:

         "A proper reading of the Upper Tribunal's decision in AA  (Article
         15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) reveals  the  importance  of
         making findings of  fact  regarding  P's  circumstances,  in  order
         properly to apply the country guidance in that case. A finding that
         P cannot currently be returned,  owing  to  a  lack  of  particular
         travel documentation, will not be determinative  of  P's  claim  to
         international protection if P faces a real risk  of  serious  harm,
         otherwise  than  (solely)  by  reason   of   P's   lack   of   such
         documentation."

18. Doubt was thrown on the HF guidance in AA (Iraq) v  Secretary  of  State
   for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 779 (21 July 2016).

19. In AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA
   Civ 944 (11 July 2017), the Court  of  Appeal  considered  and  partially
   recast the AA (Iraq) guidance. The recast  guidance  cannot,  of  course,
   establish an error of law in a decision promulgated in December 2016, but
   it does go to materiality if an error is found.  The revised part of  the
   guidance reads as follows:






         "B.  DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)


         5.   Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.


         6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.


         7.   In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
         and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
         Civ 1276, an  international  protection  claim  made  by  P  cannot
         succeed by reference to any alleged risk of harm  arising  from  an
         absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer,
         if the Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible  on
         account of a lack of any of those documents.


         8.   Where P is returned to Iraq on a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport.


         C.   The CSID


         9.   Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
         necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain
         one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A  CSID  is  generally
         required in order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance  from
         the  authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;  and   medical
         treatment. If P shows there are no family or other  members  likely
         to be able to provide means of support, P is in general  likely  to
         face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if,  by
         the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State  or  her
         agents to assist P's return have been exhausted, it  is  reasonably
         likely that P will still have no CSID.


         10. Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID,  P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.


         11. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely  hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear."

20.  That is the history of the country guidance in relation  to  return  to
   Iraq, within and outside the IKR.

Discussion

21. The decision by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to equate Kirkuk with  the
   IKR is a plain error of both fact and law.  The appellant is not from the
   IKR because Kirkuk is not, and never has been, within the IKR.  The error
   is material, because the relevant findings of fact have  not  been  made,
   and the Judge did not grapple with how the appellant  was  to  return  to
   Kirkuk, given that the respondent accepted that he could not be  returned
   to Baghdad because he is a Sunni Arab, and as a Kurd  who  did  not  come
   from the IKR or have any relative living there, there being  no  evidence
   that he had been pre-cleared  for  admission  to  the  IKR,  the  country
   guidance in December 2016 did not suggest that he could be  returned  via
   that route.  That is a technical obstacle, but a serious one.

22. I have examined the respondent's Country Information  and  Guidance  for
   August 2016 and September 2017.  The  August  2016  guidance  deals  with
   religious  minorities,  but  defines  them  as  non-Muslim  groups.   The
   appellant is a Sunni, and is a Muslim.

23. The September 2017 report, which post-dates the decision  of  the  Court
   of Appeal in July 2017 that Kirkuk remained a contested area, says this:

    "3.  Policy summary

    3.1  Internal relocation
    3.1.1    A person cannot be returned or relocated to the areas of  Iraq
    which meet the threshold of Article 15(c) (Anbar (except the parts that
    Daesh  do  not  control,  including  the  Fallujah,  Heet  and   Ramadi
    districts), Ninewah, the parts of Kirkuk in and around Hawija, and  the
    north, west and east parts of the 'Baghdad Belts').

    3.1.2    In general, a person  can  relocate  to  Baghdad  (except  the
    north, west and east parts of the 'Baghdad Belts'), the parts of  Anbar
    governorate that Daesh does not control (including the Fallujah, Ramadi
    and Heet districts), Diyala, Kirkuk (except  the  areas  in  an  around
    Hawija), Salah al-Din and  the  southern  governorates  (Babil,  Basra,
    Kerbala, Najaf, Muthana, Thi-Qar, Missan, Qadissiya and Wassit).

    3.1.3 A person who does not originate from the Kurdistan Region of Iraq
    (KRI) will be returned to Baghdad in the first instance.  There  is  no
    real risk of harm to ordinary civilians travelling from Baghdad to  the
    southern governorates.

    3.1.4    In general, a Kurd or a person who originates from the KRI can
    relocate to (or within) the KRI. Non-Kurds generally cannot.

    3.1.5    Decision makers need to assess each case on its merits.

    3.2  Feasibility of return
    3.2.1    A person can only be returned (to Baghdad)  if  they  have  an
    Iraqi passport (current or expired), or a laissez-passer.  If  they  do
    not have one of these documents then return is not 'feasible'.
    3.2.2    A lack of these travel documents is a  technical  obstacle  to
    return, and is not a reason itself to grant protection.
    3.2.3    People who originate from the KRI who have been pre-cleared by
    the KRI authorities are returned to Erbil Airport and do not require  a
    passport or a laissez-passer."

   There are no findings in the original refusal letter or in the First-tier
   Tribunal's decision which indicate whether the appellant comes  from  the
   area of Kirkuk around Hawija.  Nor is there any evidence to suggest  that
   Kirkuk in December 2016 had divided into two areas, one contested and one
   uncontested.

24. The decision must therefore be set aside.  I have considered  whether  I
   can remake it today.  I am not satisfied that I can properly do so.

25. The decision in this appeal cannot be remade based on the  situation  as
   it was at the date of the First-tier Tribunal decision last December.  It
   must be remade on  the  basis  of  the  position  today.  The  respondent
   contends that there has been durable change both in Baghdad  and  Kirkuk,
   such that the appellant could now be returned to Kirkuk via  Baghdad,  if
   he had a CSID, and that he could get a CSID  via  his  uncle  in  Kirkuk.
   That will be a matter for further findings of  fact  and  credibility  in
   relation to Article 15(c) by the First-tier Tribunal in due course.

26. The decision in  this  appeal,  limited  to  whether  the  appellant  is
   entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  under  Article   15(c)   of   the
   Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC  will  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

DECISION

27. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision in so far as it relates to whether  the
   appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection.


   The decision in this appeal will  be  remade  afresh  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, limited to the issue of humanitarian protection.

Date:     5 December 2017               Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


