
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/02863/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27th February 2018                     | On 20th March 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    a A s
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION is made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes instructed by Howells Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  O'Hanlon
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 7th February 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 11th May 1969.  He was  born
    into the Sabean faith and grew up in Baghdad.  He converted to Islam in
    2007, and his parents objected. His wife is  a  Sunni  Muslim  and  her
    family objected to the marriage. The appellant said that he suffered  a
    number of attacks from both his family  and  his  wife's  family  which
    resulted in serious injury.

 3. The respondent accepted that the  appellant  was  a  convert  from  the
    Sabean faith but not that he had had any difficulties with  either  his
    family or his wife's family.

 4. The judge agreed with the respondent and dismissed the appeal.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds both that  the
    judge had not properly considered his claimed risk as  a  convert  from
    the Sabean religion.

 6. Judge Scott-Baker granted permission to appeal on that basis, and  also
    observed that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    sufficient weight to the medical  evidence  which  was  before  him  in
    finding that he was not credible as to his past ill-treatment.

 7. On  10th  July  2017  the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

 8. Mr Holmes submitted that it was clear from the determination  that  the
    appellant had argued that he would be  at  risk  as  a  Sunni  convert,
    particularly since his identification documents all showed that he  was
    originally Sabean, but the judge had  not  properly  engaged  with  the
    argument which was put before him.  He also argued that the  judge  had
    erroneously failed to give any weight to the medical evidence.

 9. Mrs Petterson submitted that the determination was sustainable and that
    the judge's conclusions in relation to past maltreatment were  open  to
    him.  There would be no enhanced risk to the  appellant  since  he  had
    been a Sunni convert for over ten years. The judge was not  obliged  to
    outline every piece of evidence before him.

Findings and Conclusions

10. So far as the observation made by Judge Scott-Baker is concerned, I  am
    not persuaded that the judge made any error in  his  treatment  of  the
    medical evidence.

11. The evidence was considered in the light of his findings in relation to
    the threats from the families.  The judge set out clearly  why  he  did
    not consider those threats to be plausible, and none of those  findings
    per se are under challenge.  Moreover it is wrong to suggest  that  the
    judge put no weight upon the medical evidence.  What  he  did  say  was
    that he could not place  great  weight  upon  the  medical  reports  in
    considering the appellant's overall credibility.  He was entitled to do
    so, particularly since, as the judge pointed out, there is no reference
    in the medical reports to the doctor's opinions on the causation of the
    injuries.

12. There is more merit in the challenge to the  judge's  consideration  of
    risk on return as a Sunni whose identity documents would  identify  him
    as Sabean.  It is quite clear from  the  determination  that  this  was
    specifically argued before him.  The judge accepted that the  appellant
    was credible in his evidence as having  been  formally  of  the  Sabean
    religion. He was able to give sufficient details  of  it  both  in  his
    asylum  interview  and  before   the   Tribunal,   and   his   identity
    documentation  described  his  religion  as  Sabean.   The  judge  also
    accepted that the appellant did convert to Islam in 2007  and  accepted
    that he continued to practise his religion as a Sunni Muslim.

13. So far as the risk on return on that basis is concerned, the judge said
    that he applied the case of BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT
    0018 which indicated that Sunni identity alone would not be  sufficient
    to satisfy the requirements of a real risk of serious harm.   The  fact
    that the appellant was a Sunni Muslim was not of itself a reason why he
    would not be able  to  return  to  Baghdad.   He  then  said  that  his
    conversion to Islam was not, on the basis of the country guidance  case
    of HM & Others (Iraq) CG [2012] UKUT 00409, a  reason  for  considering
    that he would be at an increased risk.

14. What he did not do was engage with the specific arguments made  on  the
    appellant's behalf.  The appellant is not a  person  who  is  returning
    simply as a Sunni Muslim.  The judge does not say why he  rejected  the
    submission that his former Sabean faith would not put him at risk.

15. Failure to make a decision on a  ground  of  appeal  which  was  argued
    before him is an error of law.

16. Mrs Petterson argued that the error was immaterial because there was no
    evidence that of an enhanced risk.

17. However there was some evidence in the respondent's Country Information
    Report on Iraq dated 26th July 2016.

18. At paragraph 4.5.1 it states:

         "USSD 2014 noted 'Estimates of  the  size  of  the  Sabean  Mandean
         community vary.  According to Sabean Mandean leaders about 1,000 to
         2,000 remain in the country, predominantly in southern  Iraq,  with
         small pickets in Kurdistan and  Baghdad.   The  Heartland  Alliance
         Report noted that, since 2003, almost 90% of  Iraqi  Mandeans  left
         the country.  They are concentrated in Baghdad  and  southern  Iraq
         (Amarah City in particular).

         The World Directory of Minorities  and  Indigenous  Peoples,  dated
         October 2014, noted Sabean Mandeans face extinction  as  a  people.
         As their small community is scattered throughout the world,  Sabean
         Mandeans' ancient language, culture and religion faces  the  threat
         of extinction ... Since the  outbreak  of  violence  in  2003  most
         Sabean Mandeans have either fled the country or been killed.  Today
         there are fewer than 5,000 remaining in Iraq'."

19. In BA, the Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that,  whilst  individual  Sunni
    identity alone was not sufficient to  give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm, the evidence indicated that Sunni men are more likely  to
    be targeted as suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups  such  as
    ISIL.  Moreover individual characteristics, which do not in  themselves
    create a real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad,  might  amount
    to a real risk for the purpose of the Refugee Convention Article  15(c)
    of the Qualification Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR if assessed  on
    a cumulative basis.

20. The assessment will depend on the facts of each case.

21. Mr Holmes referred me  to  the  Finnish  Immigration  Service  security
    situation in Baghdad.  The Shia Militias Report dated 28th  April  2015
    recorded that at that point there were approximately 200 checkpoints in
    the streets of Baghdad.  Sunnis were  inspected  more  thoroughly  than
    Shi'ites.  AAH members have been seen at the  checkpoints  helping  the
    security forces to check identities  and  vehicles,  and  it  was  very
    difficult to make a distinction between armed militias and the security
    forces.  There was also  an  increasing  risk  of  kidnap.  Indeed  the
    Tribunal in  BA  stated  that  kidnapping  remains  a  significant  and
    persistent problem contributing to the breakdown of law  and  order  in
    Iraq, although there was not a real risk to a returnee  in  Baghdad  on
    this ground alone.

22. This is a difficult case.   The  appellant  has  been  found  partially
    credible, although not in  relation  to  the  specific  causes  of  his
    decision to leave Iraq.  He has suffered significant injuries, but  the
    judge has sustainably found that  they  were  not  caused  in  the  way
    described by the appellant.  On  the  other  hand  he  undoubtedly  has
    Sabean identity documents and he would  not  be  returning  to  Baghdad
    simply as a Sunni Muslim.

23. The Tribunal in BA made it clear that they considered that risk must be
    considered cumulatively.  Whilst  Sunni  identity  in  itself  was  not
    sufficient, individual characteristics might amount to a real risk  for
    the  purpose  of  the  Refugee  Convention.   There  is   very   little
    information  indeed  about  the  Sabean   minority   other   than   the
    respondent's own information, which states that 90% of them  have  been
    killed or have fled.  That in itself must be  an  indication  of  risk.
    Fewer than 5,000 remain in Iraq today.

24. The appellant's Sabean lineage is likely to be disclosed  either  at  a
    checkpoint or when  the  appellant  would  have  to  use  his  identity
    documents to  get  work  or  housing.   In  these  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant has established that he would be  at  real
    risk of persecution on return since it is most unlikely that  he  would
    be able to conceal his Sabean heritage.

25. The original judge erred in law.   His  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    appellant's appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed                              Date 19 March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
