
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02379/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th August 2021 via Teams        |On 23rd September 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     SOA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs J Heybroek, Counsel instructed by Leonard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who made an application to remain in the
UK on protection and human rights grounds.  His appeal against the refusal
of his claim on 23rd February 2020 by the Secretary of State was dismissed
by First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond on 18th January 2021.  The appellant
appeals against that decision on the grounds:

          i) that the judge failed to comply with the Surendran guidelines.



It was not the role of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to "descend into the
arena" by cross-examining an appellant or raising matters in cross-
examination which had not been challenged in the respondent's decision.
The challenges to the appellant's asylum narrative and credibility were set
out in the Secretary of State's reasons for refusal as follows:

      a) An inconsistency in the appellant's account of when he was
         apprehended by the authorities is "noted" at paragraph 29.

      b) The plausibility of the appellant telling hospital staff he had
         attended a demonstration is challenged at paragraph 31.

      c) The lack of objective evidence of demonstrations in August 2018 is
         "noted" at paragraph 33.

      d) The lack of objective evidence that the authorities were arresting
         and questioning low level protesters and children following the
         demonstrations is also noted at paragraph 34.

      e) The respondent therefore does not accept that the appellant was of
         interest to the authorities at paragraph 35.

      f) The inconsistency in relation to the appellant's bullet wound is
         noted at paragraph 37.

      g) The respondent concludes that the appellant's perceived risk on
         return is based on speculation at paragraph 40.

      h) At paragraph 42 the respondent concludes that even if the appellant
         did attend the demonstrations he will not be of interest to the
         authorities upon return.

Further, in response to the appellant's skeleton argument the respondent
stated in her review dated 29th September 2020:

      i) The appellant's account of events before he left home were not
         credible and continued to be maintained as per the reasons in the
         reasons for refusal letter.

      j) The photographs supplied will be examined in more detail during the
         hearing, paragraph 4(v).

      k) Inconsistencies with regard to the dates of protests will be
         subject to cross-examination - paragraph 5(ix).

      l) The appellant will be cross-examined on the whereabouts of his CSID
         (paragraph 5(x)) and his ability to obtain a CSID from the Iraq
         authorities.

The respondent did not attend the video hearing before the First-tier
Tribunal and it was submitted in the grounds for appeal to the Upper
Tribunal that the judge went beyond his duties as an independent
adjudicator and adopted the mantle of the absent Home Office Presenting
Officer, his questions going beyond mere clarification.  In particular,
attention was drawn to paragraphs 14, 56, 70 and 71.

          i) There were irrational findings in respect of the appellant's
             interview.

At the end of the appellant's substantive interview his social worker
raised an issue as to the way in which it had been conducted.  The
respondent noted on the final page of the SEF Form "social worker - may be
legal reps correspondence regarding the appropriateness of having an adult
interview for someone who has just turned 18 after two weeks."

The social worker, Mr Jacob McKay, had provided a letter outlining his
concerns and those instructed contacted the respondent by email on 15th
January 2020.

The judge's findings were irrational in relation to the interview at 77 to
81 in relation to the state of mind and reasoning behind Mr McKay's opinion
that the interview was conducted in an overly oppressive manner for an
Unaccompanied Asylum-Seeking Child ("UASC"), particularly as the finding is
that Mr McKay believed the appellant's account,

There were multiple and quick-fire questions in the interview and questions
within questions that had been recorded in what seemed an annotated form.

It was submitted that these errors of law were material, particularly where
the entire case turned on the credibility of the appellant's account.

    The Hearing

At the oral hearing before me Mrs Heybroek expanded on her written grounds.

Mr Lindsay submitted that there were clear credibility issues and had the
judge not asked for clarification he would have been criticised.  Given the
judge had concerns about the appellant's case, he was merely seeking to
explore or clarify the issues raised and he was giving the appellant every
opportunity to address those issues.  He proceeded without any procedural
impropriety.

Mrs Heybroek pointed out that the First-tier Tribunal decision reflected
that the appellant had given his evidence-in-chief and further questions
were asked at that stage, and see paragraph 56.  It was clear from the
record of the proceedings within the decision that the appellant struggled
to understand, and she again stated that she had previously, at the start
of his evidence, asked questions for clarification and an explanation of
the discrepancies had been put in the statements.  Further, as stated in
her grounds, there were questions on the photographs.

Mr Lindsay responded by submitting that the questions could not be
characterised as cross-examination and were sensitive and non-leading and
open-ended questions and appeared extensive because the judge was careful
to set out all the questions that had been asked.  There are two
possibilities, either the appellant was nervous and could not get the words
out or not telling the truth.

In relation to ground (ii), the judge dealt with care with the status of
the interview and did consider the concerns raised and took a fair
approach.  He had due regard to the fact that the appellant was a minor, as
could be seen at paragraph 95 of the decision, and I was referred to
paragraphs 78 and 80.

Mrs Heybroek responded that it was rare for a social worker to make the
comments that were made in relation to the interview.

Analysis

The Surendran guidelines specifically at paragraph 4 state:

"4.  Where matters of credibility are raised in the letter of refusal, the
special adjudicator should request the representative to address these
matters, particularly in his examination of the appellant or, if the
appellant is not giving evidence, in his submissions.  Whether or not these
matters are addressed by the representative, and whether or not the special
adjudicator has himself expressed any particular concern, he is entitled to
form his own view as to credibility on the basis of the material before
him.

5.   Where no matters of credibility are raised in the letter of refusal
but, from a reading of the papers, the special adjudicator himself
considers that there are matters of credibility arising therefrom, he
should similarly point these matters out to the representative and ask that
they be dealt with, either in examination of the appellant or in
submissions.

6.   It is our view that it is not the function of a special adjudicator to
adopt an inquisitorial role in cases of this nature.  The system pertaining
at present is essentially an adversarial system and the special adjudicator
is an impartial judge and assessor of the evidence before him.  ..."

As identified above there were clear issues of credibility raised by the
Secretary of State in her refusal letter.  The respondent's review prior to
the First-tier Tribunal hearing clearly confirmed that the appellant's
credibility was central to this appeal and confirmed "this will be explored
further and subjected to cross-examination at the oral hearing (sic)".
That review also confirmed that the enquiries were made of the decision-
making team who confirmed that the interviewer and decision-maker of the
substantive asylum interview were both "minors-trained" and that Section 55
of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act was taken into
consideration when the refusal decision was made.  The same burden of proof
applied to the appellant as would be to an adult although greater
dispensation was given to the appellant throughout the asylum claim as a
result of the understanding that he was a minor.  It was also confirmed
that the photographs would be explored during further cross-examination at
the oral hearing.

In the event, there was no attendance by the Home Office Presenting Officer
at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  The Record of Proceedings show that
the judge asked in total 28 questions between evidence-in-chief and re-
examination by Mrs Heybroek and many of these questions are recorded at
paragraphs 56, 70 and 71.  The judge was clearly in a difficult position
because he was left with no Home Office Presenting Officer and First-tier
Tribunal Judges are aware of the need to avoid delay in dispensing justice.
 Nonetheless, in the context of this appeal the extent of the questions
trespassed on areas which the Secretary of State had specifically
identified as being questions on which the appellant would need to be cross-
examined fall outside the scope of the Surendran guidelines.  The
guidelines were approved in NS (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2009] EWCA Civ 914, particularly at paragraph 9:

"9.  Ms Patel's submission is based upon the Surendran guidelines.  Those
were guidelines issued by the tribunal with the case of MNM v SSHD [2000]
INLR 576, dated 31 October 2000, the judgment of Collins J.  The submission
is that the tribunal should not have made those adverse findings on
credibility without itself having questioned the applicant on the matters
about which findings were made.  Particular importance is attached to
paragraph 6.  Paragraph 6 begins with the sentence: 'It is our view that it
is not the function of a special adjudicator [or the judge] to adopt an
inquisitorial role in cases of this nature'; that is, when the Home Office
presenting officer has not appeared.  There is, however, a qualification to
that later in the paragraph.  Having stated:

'...nor is it his function to raise matters which are not raised in it
[that is, representations], unless these are matters which are apparent to
him from a reading of the papers, in which case these matters should be
drawn to the attention of the appellant's representative who should be
invited to make submissions or call evidence in relation thereto.'"

The First-tier Tribunal judge from the decision appears not to have
referred the matters to the representative to clarify.  I can understand
that it is for the judge to clarify issues but the nature, subject and
extent of the questioning appear to fall within the realm of cross-
examination.  For example, at paragraph 56 the judge recorded:

"56. After the appellant had given his evidence-in-chief I asked him why
his brother would be reluctant to help him obtain the medical records?  He
replied that he did not remember exactly, the wound was not serious.  I
asked if he could help me understand why his brother was reluctant?  He
replied because he provided his full name to the hospital.  I asked if he
had asked his brother to get the medical records?  The appellant replied
that his brother got him a cream.  I explained the question to the
appellant and observed it was a simple one?  He replied that he had asked
his brother.  I asked what his brother had said to this?  The appellant
replied that he asked his brother but he could not get it.  I asked why his
brother was unable to get it?  The appellant replied that he went to the
hospital and asked, and they said they did not have the file anymore,
because it was old.  I asked the appellant why then he said that his
brother was reluctant to get the medical records?  The appellant replied
that he still did not understand what is meant by medical records of what
happened.  I observed to the appellant that these would be medical records
of his having been treated for a bullet wound?  He replied that he asked
his brother, but he did not know, his brother has not answered his query
yet, and he did not know if his brother had been to the hospital yet.  ..."

Not least, the observation that the question the judge was asking was a
simple one may indeed have been justified had it emanated from a Home
Office Presenting Officer, but it has an overlay and tone of cross
examination.

A further example is at paragraph 70:

"70. After his evidence-in-chief I asked the appellant who had taken the
photograph of the demonstration (17)?  He replied that he could not
remember if it was from Shaho, or other people.  I asked if the appellant
could not remember how it is that he has this photograph?"

The reason for the Surendran guidelines is to ensure that the judge appears
impartial and although the questioning suggests that the judge was
understandably enthusiastic about the efficiency of the hearing the extent
and nature of the questioning indeed suggests that the judge "descended
into the arena".

The critical issue is that the system pertaining at present is essentially
an adversarial system and it is important that the judge remains and is
perceived to remain as an impartial judge and assessor of the evidence
before him.

Owing to my finding on the first ground, which is fundamental to the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  and the consequent disposal, it is
not necessary for me to proceed to the second ground, but I wish to set out
my findings for the benefit of any future tribunal.

I am not persuaded the second ground is sustainable in relation to the
criticism of the asylum interview and the judge's approach thereto.

The judge pointed out that the appellant was in fact 18 before the date of
the asylum interview and he had made reference to the Children's asylum
claims dated 31st December 2020, which stated that the best practice for
children's claims is that the interview be conducted by someone who has
completed a minors' training where a child has claimed asylum but has
become legally an adult before the substantive asylum interview was
concluded.  The judge did note from paragraph 77 onwards, that the frequent
use of "why?" as a question was said not to constitute sensitive
questioning and reliance was placed on the view of the social worker who
attended that the appellant also felt overwhelmed with all the questions,
that his mind was really confused and that the representatives asserted
that they had been informed that the questioning was relentless.

The judge recorded the objections and observations of Mr McKay, the social
worker, but it was open to the judge to find that the concerns of the
social worker turned upon an explicit assumption that the appellant
provided a credible and true account of what he claimed to have
experienced.  The judge was right to point out that the question of
determining whether his asylum narrative was credible rested with the
Tribunal on the appropriate standard of proof and the letter from the
social worker tended to pre-empt that exercise.  The judge accepted that
his observations were in keeping with his role as a social worker but that
these did not undermine the interview overall.  It was open to the judge to
find at paragraph 80, where inconsistencies arose which resulted from what
would seem to be conflicting strands to the same asylum narrative, that

"it seems almost inevitable that the question 'why?' is used in making a
claimant aware of difficulties that may need to be addressed, and by those
representing his or her interests as well.  With the avoidance of
questioning that could be oppressive being a constant in any case, although
more so with younger persons".

The judge reasoned that in his view there was a proper use of the
interrogative adverb "why?" because of obvious discrepancies in the asylum
narrative and it would have been unfair of the interviewer not to make the
appellant aware of those questions.

The judge also noted that the interviewer enquired into the health and
mental health of the appellant at the outset but there was a pause after
145 questions, that the appellant was a young adult who was accompanied by
a social worker and the appellant confirmed that he was fit and well at the
close of the interview.   I conclude the judge was entitled for the reasons
which he gave, and which were sound, to find there was no substance to the
concerns raised in connection with the substantive asylum interview.
However, because of the fundamental nature of the error found and its
impact on the credibility findings overall, none of the decision can be
preserved.

For those reasons, and on the first ground alone, I find that the decision
contains a material error of law and should be set aside, and the matter
referred to the First-tier Tribunal.  No findings are preserved.



Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the  reasons  identified.  I  set  aside  the
decision  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals   Courts   and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and  extent  of
the findings to be made the matter should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2  (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Directions

          i) Any further evidence should be filed and served  at  least  14
             days prior to any further substantive hearing.

         ii) The parties must file and serve composite  skeleton  arguments
             at least 7 days prior to the substantive hearing which  should
             comprise no more than 6 pages of A4.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Helen Rimington                    Date 20th September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
