
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02110/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st April 2019                             |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  MR N M G
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge L Bristow, promulgated on 26th March 2018, following a hearing at
    Birmingham on  13th  March  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Sudan,  and  was  born  on  1st
    January 1974.  He is 45 years of age.  The Appellant  appealed  against
    the decision of the Respondent dated 5th February  2018,  refusing  his
    claim  for  asylum,  and  for  humanitarian  protection,  pursuant   to
    paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is in the UK  with  his
    son, who was born on 21st June 2006, and is aged 12 years now. Together
    they had left Sudan in June 2016  and  travelled  to  Libya,  remaining
    there for ten days, following which they travelled  through  Italy  and
    France.  They then arrived in the UK on 13th September 2016.  The  have
    claimed asylum.  They cannot return.   The  reason  for  the  claim  of
    asylum is that the Appellant is a member of the Nyimang  tribe,  he  is
    not a non-Arab Darfuri, but has been linked with the National  Movement
    for the Liberation of Sudan  (North).   His  problems  arose  when  his
    father in February 2016  was  minding  the  family's  herd  of  cattle,
    whereupon he fell asleep under a tree, only to wake up and to  discover
    that 71 of his cows were missing, having  walked  off  and  arrived  at
    military barracks, where the Appellant eventually discovered them, only
    to be arrested by the military  authorities.   Subsequently,  the  next
    day, the Appellant's cousin telephoned him to say that the  cattle  had
    been taken and that his father had been arrested.  A  day  after  that,
    the Appellant travelled to the barracks.  He asked about his father and
    the cattle.  He was beaten up.  He was  hit  with  truncheons  and  the
    butts of guns.  He was then detained at the barracks for one and a half
    months.  He was mistreated.  He was beaten daily.  After six  weeks  he
    fell ill.  He was told that if the cattle  belonged  to  him  then  his
    captors would take that as a confession that he belonged  to  an  anti-
    government movement.  Hearing this, the Appellant told  them  that  the
    cattle were not  his.   He  was  released  on  25th  March  2016.   The
    Appellant then spent three days in hospital.  He was arrested again  by
    security.  He was taken to  another  detention  centre  and  beaten  up
    again.  Eventually he was smuggled out of Sudan with his son, and  that
    is how he came to seek sanctuary eventually in the west.

The Judge's Findings

 4. In a well-structured and careful determination, the judge,  having  set
    out the facts, concluded (at paragraph 34) that the  Appellant's  claim
    was not credible for five specific reasons.  These were  that,  it  was
    not credible that such a large number of cattle would just  wander  off
    or be herded away, "without considerable disturbance" being caused,  it
    was not credible that the Appellant had failed  to  provide  any  other
    evidence to substantiate his claim given that he  remained  in  contact
    with his family in Sudan; it was not credible that he had  been  beaten
    up for around six weeks and yet was not able "to produce  any  evidence
    of scarring or other injury; it was not credible  that  if  he  was  at
    risk, then his family, including his wife and  father  and  cousin  and
    other children, remained in Sudan "without  encountering  trouble  with
    the authorities"; and that it was not credible that if he was at  risk,
    he would not have afforded  himself  of  the  opportunity  of  claiming
    asylum in Italy or in Germany, having travelled through those countries
    before coming to the UK.

 5. The claim was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that in  assessing  persecutory  risk,
    the Appellant failed to apply the country guidance cases of IM  and  AI
    (risks - membership of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress  and  JEM)  CG  [2016]
    UKUT 188.  Secondly, the judge failed to make findings  as  to  whether
    internal flight to Khartoum would be unduly harsh for the Appellant  if
    he were required to return there.  Third, the judge had failed to  give
    adequate reasons as to why it was not  credible  that  the  Appellant's
    father could not notice the cattle wandering off.   Fourth,  the  judge
    failed to take into account the fact  that  the  Appellant's  wife  had
    moved address and the authorities had gone to the earlier family  home.
    Finally, the judge failed to take  into  account  the  implications  of
    Section 55 of the BCIA [2009] given that the Appellant had arrived here
    with an 11 year old child.

 7. On 19th April 2018, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that,
    given that it was accepted that the  Appellant  was  a  member  of  the
    Nyimang clan, the judge had failed at paragraph 34 to  explain  whether
    this in itself would have exposed the  Appellant  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution.

 8. On 26th June 2018 a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that the
    judge had set out the adverse credibility findings  perfectly  well  at
    paragraph 34 of  the  determination.   In  particular,  the  judge  had
    explained that the Appellant's family remained  in  Sudan  without  any
    difficulty, and that this  was  despite  the  Appellant  being  of  the
    Nyimang tribe.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 1st April 2019,  Mr  Howard,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the grounds of application, and in
    particular on Grounds 1 and 2.  He submitted that the  core  aspect  of
    the application before this Tribunal lay  in  the  recognition  of  the
    Appellant's ethnicity, as a member of the Nyimang tribe,  because  once
    this was accepted (at paragraph 14B), it was then  incumbent  upon  the
    judge  to  deal  with  this,  as  an  aspect  of  a  possible  risk  of
    persecution, specifically.  This the judge failed to  do  at  paragraph
    24, where he had given five specific reasons for why  the  claim  could
    not succeed.

10. What this meant was that, whereas the judge may well have been entitled
    to conclude that the Appellant's claim was not credible, insofar as  it
    related to a large number of cattle simply wandering off,  without  the
    Appellant's father  becoming  aware  of  this,  paragraph  34  was  not
    comprehensive insofar  as  it  failed  to  deal  with  the  Appellant's
    ethnicity, as a basis of persecution.  This was important  because  the
    Upper Tribunal was presently in the process  of  considering  precisely
    this issue in a case known as KM v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.

11. Mr Howard handed up a Amnesty International document,  dated  24th  May
    2018, which makes it clear that it  is  the  considered  view  of  this
    particular organisation that,

         "As is well-known, long-standing conflicts in both Darfur and South
         Kordofan, where the Nuba Mountains are located, have led to serious
         and  widespread  human   rights   abuses,   pervasive   insecurity,
         humanitarian crisis and much force displacement" (see page 1 of 5).



12. In this regard, submitted Mr Howard, it was relevant to point out  that
    Amnesty International had taken the view that

         "It is in light of this context, including  the  dire  humanitarian
         situation that our organisation  considers  that  individuals  from
         South Kordofan, including those of Nuba ethnicity, would be at real
         risk of serious human rights violations if they were to be returned
         to Sudan and expected to try to re-enter South Kordofan." (See page
         4 of 5).

13. Furthermore, whilst Mr Howard would readily accept that the cases of IM
    and AI (referred to in the grounds of application at paragraphs 2.1 and
    2.2) are not directly applicable insofar as they do not deal with black
    African Nubans, on which there is currently no country  guidance  case,
    the fact remained that the case of  KM  was  slated  to  be  a  country
    guidance case, and it was of presently under consideration  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  That meant that I should make a finding of an error of
    law by the judge, and remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal,
    so that the judge can  consider  the  issue  of  whether  ethnicity  in
    itself, of the Nyimang clan,  would  be  enough  to  raise  a  risk  of
    persecution, which the judge had failed to do at paragraph  34  of  his
    determination.

14. I asked Mr Howard, as he came to the end of  his  submissions,  whether
    the concerns of Amnesty International, in relation to membership of the
    Nyimang tribe alone, creating a risk of persecution, had actually  been
    put before the judge below.  Mr Howard drew my attention to page 140 of
    the Appellant's bundle,  where  there  was  the  Amnesty  International
    Report, and this was to the effect that no one should  be  returned  to
    Khartoum.  Mr Howard did not specifically suggest  to  me  that,  aside
    from objections to return to Khartoum, the  specific  point  about  the
    return of Nyimang tribe members to Sudan, had actually been put  before
    the judge below.

15.  For  her  part,  Mrs  Aboni  submitted  that,   although   there   was
    documentation now provided before this Tribunal referring to  the  case
    of KM v Secretary of State for the Home Department, which it  was  said
    was before the Upper Tribunal, these documents were  not  relevant,  to
    the question of whether the judge below had erred in  law.   The  judge
    had heard this appeal on 13th March  2018.   The  letter  from  Amnesty
    International that Mr Howard had referred to was dated  more  than  two
    months' later on 24th May 2018.  Second, that  being  so,  the  judge's
    conclusions at paragraph 34, addressing five  specific  scenarios,  was
    perfectly in order.  The judge had  also  added  that  the  Appellant's
    entire family  remained  in  Sudan.   Finally,  as  things  stood  both
    presently before this Tribunal, and before Judge Bristow  below,  there
    was no country guidance case in relation to the return  of  members  of
    the Nyimang tribe, and this being so, he could  not  have  fallen  into
    error.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  I  come  to  this  conclusion  notwithstanding  Mr  Howard's
    measured and well-crafted submissions before me.

17. This is a case where the judge did not make a finding that was contrary
    to an existing country guidance case.  He at the outset  set  out  what
    the issues were (see paragraph 14) recognising that the Appellant was a
    member of the Nyimang tribe, and that he was a non-Arab  Darfuri.   The
    burden and standard of proof were thereafter correctly  set  out.   The
    factual issues were described.  At the end of that, the conclusion  was
    arrived at on each of the specific questions that were raised.

18. The grounds of application are unfortunate in their  terminology.   The
    suggestion that the judge's  reasons  at  paragraph  34  are  "woefully
    scant" (paragraph 3.1) do the  drafters  of  those  grounds  no  credit
    whatsoever.  Equally, it is simply not the case that the judge did  not
    give adequate reason as to why it was not credible that the Appellant's
    father failed to notice the cattle wandering off.  To simply state that
    "the Appellant's father had fell (sic) asleep at the  time"  (paragraph
    3.2) overlooks the fact that the judge in terms addressed this scenario
    and stated that "such a large herd would not have moved or  been  moved
    without considerable  disturbance"  (paragraph  34A).   The  issue  was
    addressed.  The reasons were given.  The judge was entitled to conclude
    as he did.  In the same way, the judge was entitled to  draw  attention
    to the fact that this was an Appellant who "remains in contact with his
    family in Sudan" and that the  family,  together  with  other  children
    "remain in Sudan  apparently  without  encountering  trouble  with  the
    authorities".

19. That left, of course, the question of the  Appellant's  ethnicity.   Mr
    Howard, who is an experienced advocate in these Tribunals, did well  to
    focus on this single issue.  That is he submitted,  however,  that  the
    judge ought to have referred to the Appellant's ethnicity, as  a  basis
    for possible persecution, at the  time  of  the  hearing  itself,  this
    specific issue was  not  put  to  the  judge.   It  is  true  that  the
    Appellant's  bundle  (at  page  140)  does   refer   to   the   Amnesty
    International Report.  What this report states, however, is that no one
    should be returned to Khartoum.  There is no country guidance  case  to
    this effect.  There is also, insofar as the Appellant's ethnicity as  a
    member of the Nyimang tribe is concerned, no country guidance  case  in
    relation to this question.

20. If there is now an appeal before the Upper Tribunal in the name of KM v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department, that  is  considering  this
    question,  this  simply  confirms   that   the   usual   processes   of
    jurisprudential development are taking place, and that cases are  being
    considered  on  a  fact  by  fact  basis.   The  letter  from   Amnesty
    International is dated 24th May 2018.  This letter draws  attention  to
    the case of KM v Secretary of State for the Home Department.  The judge
    below heard the appeal in March 2018.  At the time, the  judge  had  no
    notion of this being the case.  Even if it had been put  to  the  judge
    below, all it demonstrated was that the Upper Tribunal was  as  yet  to
    promulgate a case that may become a country guidance case.

21. What the outcome of the hearing in KM would be is anyone's  guess.   It
    is not a basis upon which it can be said that the judge below erred  in
    law, because he failed to consider whether ethnicity would be an issue.



22. For what it is worth, having  looked  at  the  judge's  conclusions  at
    paragraph 34, set out in five specific sub-paragraphs, it  is  entirely
    deducible from those conclusions that the Appellant  would  not  be  at
    risk on the basis of his ethnicity alone of ill-treatment were he to be
    returned to Sudan, because a large number of his family members  remain
    there, and he  remains  in  contact  with  them.   The  judge  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant had ever been ill-treated  (see  paragraph
    34C).  All in all, therefore, the decision reached  by  the  judge  was
    entirely open to him.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

24. An anonymity direction is made.

25. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019



