
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/02525/2020
                                                               PA/02527/2020
                                                               PA/02529/2020
                                                               PA/02532/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC by a remote hearing |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On the 25 August 2021                     |On the 6 October 2021            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                     ELE
                                     AE
                                     OE
                                     UE
                         (ANONYMITY directions made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E. Fitzsimmons, Counsel instructed on behalf of
the appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction:

      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turner, hereinafter  referred  to
         as the "FtTJ") who allowed their  protection  appeals  against  the
         decision of the respondent in a decision promulgated  on  27  April
         2021.

      2. Whilst this is the appeal brought on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
         State, for sake of convenience I intend to refer to the parties  as
         they were before the FtT.

      3. The FtT did make an anonymity order and no grounds have been raised
         by the Secretary of State for the order  to  be  discharged  during
         these proceedings. I therefore continue the anonymity direction set
         out at the end of this decision as the appeal involves a protection
         claim and also the interests of minor children.

The background:

      4. The background is set out in the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  and  the
         evidence in the bundle. The 1st appellant is the mother  of  the  3
         other appellants who are her dependent children. All are  nationals
         of Nigeria.

      5. The main appellant's claim is that she and  her  youngest  daughter
         are at risk of harm should  they  return  to  Nigeria  due  to  the
         appellant's husband's family's  demand  to  perform  FGM  upon  the
         appellant's daughter.

      6. The appellant is married and has  4  children.  The  appellant  had
         another daughter who died in July 2006 having been subjected to FGM
         at the age of 5 months. The appellant had not been subjected to FGM
         although her older relatives had. The appellant's  claim  was  that
         the elder in the community was a strong  believer  in  FGM  however
         there was a new leader in place when the appellant and her  younger
         sisters were due to undergo the procedure and he was not supportive
         of FGM. The appellant's husband's female  family  members  had  all
         been circumcised and believed in  FGM  and  that  the  process  was
         undergone by her youngest daughter due to pressure from her husband
         and his family. The event of their  daughter's  death  changed  her
         opinion of the practice and that of her husband.

      7. In relation to her 2nd daughter, the appellant did not wish for FGM
         to be carried out and persuaded the  family  members  to  agree  to
         postpone this until she was  10  years  of  age.  The  in-laws  had
         arranged a date for a meeting for the purpose of arranging FGM, but
         the appellant did not take it up. The family were angry about  this
         and as a result she was attacked on 19 May 2019, and she  sustained
         a number of injuries requiring  medical  treatment.  The  appellant
         reported the attack to  the  police,  but  the  complaint  was  not
         pursued.

      8. The appellant left Nigeria travelling with her 3 children  arriving
         on 9 August 2019. She initially came to the UK using a  visit  visa
         to see her sisters and had intended to leave her daughter with  one
         of her sisters and return to Nigeria so that she could protect  her
         daughter from FGM. The appellant made a claim for asylum.

      9. The appellant's husband was attacked on 19  of  August  2019  short
         time before the appellant was due to return back to Nigeria and  he
         also needed medical treatment. The appellant feared  that  she  and
         her family would be unable to seek the  protection  of  the  police
         from further attack or from FGM upon their daughter  and  that  the
         family elder had connections to politicians and people in positions
         of authority in Nigeria. Their complaints about the attacks on  the
         appellant's husband were not actioned due to the elders connections
         and because of the issue of FGM and that intrafamilial attacks were
         "family matters".

     10. The appellant's husband was further attacked on 27 June 2020 by the
         family. The elders made demands that she return to Nigeria for  the
         procedure to  take  place  and  threats  had  been  issued  to  the
         appellant whilst in the United Kingdom.

     11. The appellant in the UK had been referred to social services and an
         assessment been undertaken. An FGM protection order was granted  by
         the High Court and served in Nigeria.  The  appellant  has  ongoing
         health issues as a result of the previous attack upon her  and  her
         fear for her daughter and other family members.

     12. The respondent refused the appellant's claim in a  decision  letter
         of 28 February 2020.  The  decision  was  also  summarised  in  the
         decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs 28 - 47  of  her  decision.  The
         decision letter did not accept the  appellant's  account  that  the
         appellant's daughter would be at risk of FGM . The  respondent  did
         not accept the death certificate relating to  the  appellant's  1st
         child who died nor had the appellant given a reasonable explanation
         for the delay in FGM to her daughter until she attained the age  of
         10.  As  to  the  attack  on  19  May  2019,  the  appellant   been
         inconsistent about the detail of how she been attacked but this had
         not been put to her in the interview and  therefore  was  not  held
         against her. However it was accepted that the appellant  had  given
         an internally  detailed  account  about  the  attack.  The  medical
         evidence appeared to be  genuine,  but  it  was  noted  there  were
         spelling mistakes and  format  errors  on  the  document  therefore
         little weight was placed on it. As to the police  report  similarly
         little weight should be attached to it. The appellant was  able  to
         remain in Nigeria following her  attack.  The  appellant's  husband
         remained Nigeria that it was not consistent that  he  would  remain
         there if he had a genuine and well-founded fear of  his  family  in
         Nigeria. Photographs as to his injuries could not be  verified  and
         the threats from the Elder whilst in  the  UK  also  not  verified.
         Overall it was not accepted that the appellant was under threat due
         to her refusal to have her daughter circumcised. In  the  light  of
         the lack of challenge to the FtTJ's decision that  the  appellant's
         daughter was at a real risk of FGM, and the lack  of  challenge  to
         the factual assessment of  the  appellant's  claim  insofar  as  it
         related to the events in Nigeria  and  the  UK  and  summarised  at
         paragraphs [72]-[73], it is not necessary to set out in any further
         detail the points in the  decision  letter  which  related  to  the
         credibility of her account in Nigeria.

     13. As to the issue of internal  relocation  this  was  considered   at
         paragraphs 57 - 64 of the decision letter and it was concluded that
         the fear related to only one state in Nigeria and that based on her
         circumstances of being a Christian which was the  primary  religion
         in the south of Nigeria, that she spoke English  and  was  in  good
         health and that the health conditions that she  did  have  she  had
         already accessed medical assistance for a Nigeria, in the light  of
         her husband who had a degree and employment, the appellant had  the
         ability to move and travel and therefore it  was  not  unreasonable
         for her to internally relocate in Nigeria. Consideration was  given
         to the particular individuals that were named by her but  that  she
         had failed to demonstrate that they had any influence or  power  to
         locate her in other states in Nigeria.

     14. The appellant appealed that decision, and the  appeal  came  before
         the FtT and in a decision promulgated on 27  April  2021  the  FtTJ
         allowed the appeals.

The decision of the FtTJ:

     15. The FtTJ set out the evidence before the tribunal at paragraphs [52
         - 55], which  included  documentary  evidence,  an  expert  report,
         medical evidence and the oral testimony from the appellant and  her
         sister.

     16. At paragraphs [56 - 71] the FtTJ set out her factual  findings  and
         assessment of  the  evidence.  Within  those  paragraphs  the  FtTJ
         considered the core account of the  events  in  Nigeria.  The  FtTJ
         accepted the appellant's account concerning  the  circumstances  of
         her 1st daughter who  had  been  subjected  to  FGM  but  had  died
         (paragraphs [56 - 58]). The FtTJ found as a fact that the appellant
         had been  attacked  by  her  in-laws  and  sustained  injuries  (at
         paragraphs [60 - 61]) and further accepted the inaction on the part
         of  the  police  (at  paragraph  [62]).  The  FtTJ  set   out   the
         circumstances  in  which  the  FGM  protection   order   was   made
         (paragraphs [63 - 64]) and accepted  the  appellant's  evidence  in
         this regard. The FtTJ also accepted that her husband had  been  the
         subject of a physical attack whilst in Nigeria (at paragraphs [66 -
         67]) and that the appellant had experienced continuing threats made
         against her in the UK from her relatives (paragraphs [68 - 69]).

     17. At [69]-[70] the FtTJ set out her analysis of the issue of internal
         relocation. The FtTJ considered  the  appellant's  claim  that  her
         family  relatives  had  connections  with  the   police   and   the
         authorities  and  thus  would  be  located  upon  return  and   the
         submission made by the respondent that the appellant had failed  to
         evidence those connections. The judge set out the evidence  of  the
         appellant's  sister  that  she  had  seen  the   family   relatives
         associating  with  people  in  positions  of   authority   at   the
         appellant's wedding. The judge acknowledged there was  no  evidence
         in support of that but questioned what could have been produced  as
         the appellant had stated she could not return to Nigeria to  obtain
         witness statements about this. The judge found that  in  any  event
         those witnesses would only have confirmed the same as the appellant
         and  her  sister  and  that  whether  the  appellant  in-laws   had
         connections with the authorities would be determined based  on  the
         overall credibility assessment of the appellant.

     18. At [70] the judge made reference to the country expert report which
         concluded that a person did not need power or influence to be  able
         to seek assistance from the police to locate a person, where  there
         is intention to do so. The expert also referred to a high level  of
         bribery and corruption with the police. The judge acknowledged  the
         presenting Officer's point that the expert  made  no  reference  to
         external sources (although  earlier  at  [62]  had  made  the  same
         observation but had found that the expert's report was supported by
         the respondents CPIN on the issue of  high  level  of  bribery  and
         corruption). The judge also took into account the  expert  evidence
         that  the  police  could  locate  a   person   using   registration
         information provided at the doctors, at  schools  and  when  buying
         property and cars and that every person has to  register  with  the
         police station. The judge found that this made "logical sense" that
         the authorities would hold records  of  a  person's  location.  The
         judge found that the appellants were unlikely to go underground  as
         they would be reliant  upon  official  forms  of  work  to  support
         themselves and overall on the evidence the FtTJ  found  the  expert
         conclusion to be credible that the family as  a  unit  would  leave
         some form of "digital footprint" for the purposes  of  location  by
         the police.

     19. At [71] the FtTJ set out conclusions that  overall  she  found  the
         appellant to have given a truthful account of events that  led  her
         and her children to leave Nigeria and  claim  asylum  and  at  [72]
         concluded that on the evidence the appellant faced a real  risk  of
         persecution on return to Nigeria by reason of the ongoing  risk  of
         FGM upon the appellant's daughter and the harm that that  would  be
         caused to the appellant by witnessing the  procedure.  The  factual
         findings were further summarised at [73] and [74] and set  out  the
         conclusions reached that the  appellant,  nor  her  family  members
         could internally relocate and that the judge accepted that  due  to
         links between the in-laws and the police and  the general level  of
         bribery and corruption, they could easily trace the  appellant  and
         the family to where they  relocated. The family  would  be  reliant
         upon income that would require registration that  would  make  them
         easily traceable by the police and authorities. At [75]  the  judge
         took into account in addition that the appellant had evidence of an
         ongoing medical condition in relation to her mental health and that
         despite having support from her husband  on  return,  it  would  be
         unreasonable to expect her to return in the circumstances when  her
         mental health was fragile, and she was living in constant  fear  of
         being attacked and her daughter being taken for the purpose of FGM.
         The FtTJ therefore allowed the appeals.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

     20. Permission to appeal was issued on behalf of the Secretary of State
         and on 26 May 2021 permission was granted by FtTJ Easterman.

     21. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face-
         to-face hearing.

     22. Subsequently, the appeal  was  listed  for  a  remote  hearing  via
         Microsoft teams. The Tribunal listed the  hearing  to  enable  oral
         submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     23. The hearing took place on 25 August 2021, by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a  remote  hearing.  I  was  present  at  Court.  The
         advocates  attended  remotely  via  video.  There  were  no  issues
         regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical  problems   were
         encountered during the hearing, and I am satisfied  both  advocates
         were able to make their respective cases by the chosen means. I  am
         grateful for the clear and helpful submissions from the advocates.

     24. At the outset of his submissions Mr Kotas stated that  he  did  not
         seek to advance ground 1. In respect of ground 2, he  directed  the
         tribunal's attention to the written grounds where the risk  factors
         of FGM to the appellant's daughter were summarised and he sought to
         withdraw the grounds from that paragraph onwards. He explained that
         it was open to the FtTJ on the evidence before her to conclude that
         the appellant's in-laws practised FGM,  and  that  the  appellant's
         daughter would be at a real risk  of  harm  of  FGM  on  return  to
         Nigeria. Thus he submitted  the  only  ground  that  he  sought  to
         advance was that which related to internal relocation.

     25.  He submitted that the appellant had claimed that her in-laws  were
         connected to the police and  therefore  she  would  be  located  on
         return. However there was no evidence of who those people were, and
         no names were given  or  their  connections.  Therefore  the  judge
         conflated issues of ability to corroborate her account at paragraph
         69 with the basic duty to establish the claim.  The  appellant  had
         simply given vague assertions of people being  positions  of  power
         but that even  on  the  lower  standard  the  appellant  could  not
         establish that and  therefore  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  this
         respect.

     26. The 2nd point  made  in  behalf  of  the  respondent  was  that  at
         paragraph  [70]  the  FtTJ  acknowledged  the  presenting  officers
         submission that the expert had made no reference  to  any  external
         source to support his opinion. However the judge went on to find at
         [74] that the appellant and her family members could not internally
         relocate and that due to links between the in-laws and  the  police
         and the general level of bribery and corruption, the in-laws  could
         easily trace the appellant and the family wherever  they  relocated
         to, and that the family would  rely upon income that would  require
         registration and that it would make them easily  traceable  by  the
         police and the authorities. Mr Kotas submitted that  the  appellant
         had provided no evidence to support the claim and that the FtTJ did
         not draw the threads together or deal with  the  consequences  that
         the expert report was not supported. It was therefore  unclear  why
         the judge found the appellant could not internally relocate.

     27. Mr Kotas  therefore  submitted  that  the  assessment  of  internal
         relocation was unsound and should be set aside.

     28. Ms Fitzsimmons on behalf of the appellants relied upon the  written
         submissions that had been sent to the tribunal on 8 August 2021. In
         those written submissions  it  was  stated  that  the  respondent's
         grounds (ground 2) amount to no more than a disagreement  with  the
         findings of the FtTJ and that it was not accepted that the decision
         disclosed an inadequacy of reasoning on internal relocation  citing
         the decision of Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]
         UKUT 85 and that inadequate reasoning is not a ground for  allowing
         an appeal if on an analysis the approach is justified.

     29. By reference to the decision of the FtTJ, it is submitted that  the
         material paragraphs on internal relocation are set out at [69]  and
         [70]. The written submissions also cite paragraphs [73],  [74]  and
         [75].

     30. It is further submitted that it  was  of  relevance  to  take  into
         account that there was evidence before the FtTJ in the form of  FGM
         protection  orders  issued  by  the  High  Court  against  7  named
         individuals in Nigeria including a chief and a high priest and that
         the order named a particular chief with 2 addresses in 2  different
         States in Nigeria. In examination in chief, the appellant confirmed
         that the other family members named in  the  FGM  protection  order
         were based in a state in Nigeria. Thus  it  was  submitted  it  was
         relevant to the sustainability of  the  findings  of  the  FtTJ  on
         relocation because it demonstrated that the risk of  harm  was  not
         confined to just one state but also to  another  central  state  in
         Nigeria. In addition,  it  was  supported  by  the  fact  that  the
         appellant's husband was attacked  in  a  third  named  state  which
         demonstrated the reach, capability and willingness of  the  in-laws
         to pursue the appellant and her daughter.

     31. As to the expert report, the written grounds cite conclusions 3 and
         4, and against that background summarised the factual  findings  of
         the FtTJ as to the appellant's inability to relocate as follows:

          1) the judge found the appellant's evidence credible that her in-
             laws were connected to powerful individuals  in  positions  of
             authority (69 and 74) findings which wrote  to  the  judge  to
             make as matter  of  credibility  and  not  challenged  by  the
             respondent.

          2) The appellant had been attacked by the  in-laws  in  the  home
             area of X  (at 73);

          3) the appellant's husband was attacked away from the  home  area
             in a number state (paragraphs 66 and 73);

          4) the appellant accepted that  the  appellant  and  her  husband
             continue to face threats from in-laws  particularly  following
             the service of the FGM protection order (at paragraph 73);

          5) the judge accepted the expert evidence about the ability to be
             traced informally by bribery and the high levels of corruption
             in the context of compulsory registration (paragraphs  70  and
             74);

          6)  the  judge  accepted  the   appellant's   medical   position,
             particularly in relation to  her  fragile  mental  health  and
             living in constant fear of being  attacked  and  her  daughter
             being subjected to FGM, which would mean that  even  with  the
             support of her  husband  on  return,  that  it  would  not  be
             reasonable  for  the  appellant  to  internally  relocate  (at
             paragraph 75).

     32. In her oral submissions Ms Fitzsimmons referred to  the  naming  of
         the individuals in the  FGM  order  and  also  their  positions  in
         society. She submitted that this evidence was relevant to the reach
         of the nonstate actors given that the judge had  also  accepted  an
         attack on the family members across 2 states in Nigeria and with  1
         of the named individuals having an address in a further  named  3rd
         state. She submitted  that  whilst  the  factual  position  may  be
         different if dealing with one person  in  one  particular  province
         there was a different scenario here where a number  of  individuals
         in 3 states in Nigeria that had been identified and  it  was  clear
         that the judge's finding was that she accepted that the family  had
         positions  within  the  tribe  and  across  parts  of  Nigeria  and
         therefore it was open to the judge to accept that the appellant had
         given a credible and consistent account.

     33. In addition, she submitted that the FtTJ identified evidence in the
         CPIN which  supported  the  expert  opinion  as  to  the  level  of
         corruption and bribery in Nigeria in the police force and therefore
         any criticism made by the respondent fell away because  the  expert
         evidence was consistent with the respondent's own CPIN.

     34. Ms Fitzsimmons also submitted that at [70] the  FtTJ  set  out  the
         relevant circumstances of the appellant and that the appellant  and
         her family members were unlikely to go under the radar and that the
         conclusion reached the family would be registered with  the  school
         and with employers was plausible and a finding open to the FtTJ  to
         make. Thus she submitted the judge's reasoning as to the ability to
         trace the family was sustainable.

     35. A further point  made  was  that  the  CPIN  made  clear  that  the
         individual circumstances of  the  person  need  to  be  taken  into
         account when assessing internal relocation and that on the evidence
         the  judge  accepted  the  appellant's  medical  circumstances   in
         relation to her fragile mental health which was supported by the GP
         evidence. The  appellant  had  been  started  upon  medication  and
         referred to the psychology service and that return to Nigeria would
         be detrimental  to  her  mental  health  alongside  her  living  in
         constant fear of being attacked and her daughter being subjected to
         FGM which would mean that even with the support of her  husband  it
         would not be reasonable for her to internally relocate (see [75]).

     36. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.

Decision on error of law:

     37. There is now one ground of challenge  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent and that ground seeks to challenge the FtTJ's assessment
         of internal relocation. The overarching submission made by Mr Kotas
         in behalf of the respondent  is  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
         adequate reasons for reaching her decision on this issue.

     38. I have carefully had regard to the submissions made by each of  the
         advocates and have done so in the light of the decision of the FtTJ
         and the material before the tribunal.

     39. The obligation on a tribunal judge is to give reasons in sufficient
         detail to show the principles upon which the tribunal has acted and
         the reasons that have led to the decision.  Appellate courts should
         not rush to find a misdirection  simply  because  they  might  have
         reached a different conclusion on the facts or  express  themselves
         differently, and in my judgement and on a careful reading, the FtTJ
         did give adequate reasons for her decision.  I  shall  set  out  my
         reasons for reaching that conclusion.

     40. In a very careful and detailed decision the FtTJ considered all the
         evidence, both documentary and oral, and undertook her analysis  by
         assessing that evidence in the light of the points raised  by  each
         of the advocates. It is plain from reading the  decision  that  the
         FtTJ engaged with  all  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         Secretary of State concerning issues of  credibility,  plausibility
         and the reliability of the documents  provided  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant to support her case.

     41. In particular, the FtTJ considered the core account of  the  events
         in Nigeria which included the circumstances of her 1st daughter who
         had been subjected to FGM but had died (paragraphs [56 - 58]),  the
         attack upon the appellant by her in-laws (at paragraphs [60 - 61]),
         the inaction on the  part  of  the  police  (paragraph  [62]),  the
         circumstances  in  which  the  FGM  protection   order   was   made
         (paragraphs [63 - 64]) , the attack upon her husband in Nigeria (at
         paragraphs [66 - 67]) and the threats the appellant experienced  in
         the UK from her relatives (paragraphs [68 - 69]).

     42. When reaching her assessment on those issues,  the  FtTJ  carefully
         considered the evidence in support. In particular, the  documentary
         evidence and in light of the submissions made by the respondent  as
         to the provenance and the reliability of those  documents.  However
         for the reasons set out in her decision, the FtTJ gave  sustainable
         reasons for reaching the decision she did  and  ultimately  finding
         firmly  in  favour  of  the  appellant  and  reaching  the  overall
         conclusion at [71] that the appellant had given a truthful  account
         of events in  Nigeria  and  the  risk  to  her  daughter  of  being
         subjected to FGM.

     43. The grounds do not seek to challenge the FtTJ's assessment  of  the
         appellant's credibility  or  the  FtTJ's  assessment  of  the  core
         elements of her claim  and  the  factual  findings  made.  This  is
         relevant in my judgement when considering the Secretary of  State's
         grounds. As the FtTJ stated at [69] when considering the assessment
         of the evidence as to whether the in-laws had connections with  the
         authorities, the overall credibility of the appellant was plainly a
         relevant consideration as supporting her evidence on the  issue  of
         her family relatives.

     44. Dealing with the 1st point raised, Mr Kotas submits that  the  FtTJ
         simply accepted the  appellant's  account  that  her  in-laws  were
         connected to powerful/influential people but that the appellant had
         not even sought to identify them. However that submission is not in
         accordance with the evidence before  the  FtTJ.  As  Ms  Fitzsimons
         submits, when the appellant  sought  a  FGM  protection  order  she
         identified by name and position those she  feared  in  Nigeria  and
         clearly identified them as two tribal chiefs  and  a  high  priest.
         They are set out by name in the court documents and therefore it is
         not necessary to set out those  names  in  this  decision.  In  the
         context  of  Nigeria  the  description  of  those  individuals   as
         "influential" is both credible and reasonable.

     45. In so far as it has been argued on behalf of  the  respondent  that
         the FtTJ conflated the issue of corroboration  with  the  appellant
         establishing her case, I do not consider that that is reflected  in
         the FtTJ's decision.

     46. At [62] the FtTJ considered the evidence as to the  connections  of
         the appellant's in-laws.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
         account the evidence of the appellant's sister, whose evidence  the
         judge  had  accepted  as  both  credible  and  supportive  of   the
         appellant's account. In that evidence the judge recorded that  this
         witness had stated that she had seen the appellant's family members
         associating with people in  positions  of  authority  at  a  family
         wedding. Whilst it is submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
         support the appellant's account  of  her  family  relatives  having
         connections to influential  people,  that  submission  ignores  the
         evidence of the appellant's sister and  that  was  evidence  in  my
         judgement that the FtTJ was  entitled  to  consider  alongside  the
         appellant's evidence as supportive of her factual account.

     47. Whilst the judge acknowledged that there was no other evidence  and
         that other witnesses would only have confirmed what  the  appellant
         and the appellant's sister had stated, in my judgement that did not
         mean that the FtTJ was wrong to place weight on the  evidence  that
         she did have before her and the evidence that she had found  to  be
         credible from both the appellant and the appellant's  sister.  This
         is plainly what the FtTJ was referring  to  when  she  stated  that
         whether the in-laws had connections with the authorities  would  be
         determined on the overall credibility assessment of  the  appellant
         (at paragraph [69]) and was thus a relevant consideration.

     48. At paragraph [71] the FtTJ stated that she had "stood back from the
         detail and considered the evidence in  the  round,  weighing  those
         matters that tell both for and against the appellant's  credibility
         as a truthful witness." Having done so, the  judge  concluded  that
         there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant  had
         given a truthful account of the events that  led  to  her  and  the
         children leaving  Nigeria  and  claiming  asylum.  Thus  the  judge
         carefully concluded after having undertaken an  assessment  of  all
         the evidence in favour of the appellant and the overall credibility
         of her account which was supported by documents and oral  evidence,
         that she was a witness of truth. I see no error of law  in  placing
         weight on the evidence given from witnesses who have been found  to
         have given truthful evidence.

     49. Mr Kotas also challenges paragraph  [70]  of  the  FtTJ's  decision
         which dealt expressly with the issue of internal relocation. It  is
         right as he points out that the FtTJ made the observation  at  [70]
         that the country expert report concluded that  a  person  does  not
         need power and influence be able to seek assistance from the police
         to locate a person, where there is an intention to do so. The judge
         also noted the expert's opinion that there  was  a  high  level  of
         bribery and corruption within the police force. The  judge  further
         noted the presenting Officer's submission that  the  expert  report
         did not refer to an external source for this.  However  earlier  in
         the decision at paragraph [62] the judge made a similar observation
         when considering the  expert  report  but  found  that  whilst  the
         expert's report did not provide a source  for  the  issue  of  high
         level of bribery/corruption in the  police,  the  respondent's  own
         CPIN entitled Nigeria: Actors of Protection  dated  March  2019  at
         paragraph 5.2.2 did provide support for  the  expert's  opinion  in
         this regard referring to  the  prevalence  of  bribery  within  the
         police force. The judge also observed  that  the  respondents  CPIN
         provided support for the appellant's account of the inaction of the
         police.

     50. Therefore, it was open to the FtTJ to reach  the  conclusion  there
         was evidence to support the expert's opinion that the relatives did
         not need power influence to seek  assistance  from  the  police  to
         locate the appellant and her family  members  where  there  was  an
         intention to do so. When applied to the facts as found by the  FtTJ
         in  this  particular  appeal,   the   appellant's   relatives   did
         demonstrate an intention to take action. The judge found  that  the
         appellant's husband had been attacked (at paragraph [66]) and  that
         this had taken place in a different state of Nigeria and also  that
         since the service of the FGM protection order,  the  appellant  had
         received ongoing  threats  which  had  been  evidenced  before  the
         tribunal (at paragraph [68]).

     51. A further point relied upon by Ms Fitzsimons is the FtTJ's analysis
         at [70] where the FtTJ set out the expert's opinion that the police
         have the ability to locate a person using registration  information
         provided at doctors, schools and when buying property and cars. The
         expert referred to the fact that every person has  to  register  at
         the police station. The judge stated that it  made  "logical  sense
         that the authorities would hold records  of  a  person's  location"
         when registering schools  and  doctors  in  particular.  Given  the
         expert report concerning the issue  of  corruption  in  the  police
         force which was supported by the  respondents  CPIN  and  cited  at
         paragraph 62, it was open to the FtTJ to consider the likelihood of
         what information could be procured by the police from those with an
         intention to do so. It is therefore open to the FtTJ to  find  that
         it made "logical sense" that if a person was required  to  register
         at a police station or other official places, their location  would
         be available particularly also when registering at a school at  the
         doctors. The judge put this  in  the  context  of  the  appellant's
         factual circumstances and those of her husband and found that  they
         were unlikely to go underground as they were  reliant  on  official
         forms of work to support themselves. Thus the conclusion reached by
         the FtTJ that on the evidence, the expert's conclusion was credible
         that the family as  a  unit  would  "leave  some  form  of  digital
         footprint for  the  purpose  of  location  by  the  police"  was  a
         conclusion the judge was entitled to reach.

     52. Against that evidential background I am satisfied that the FtTJ did
         give adequate and sustainable  reasons  for  reaching  her  omnibus
         conclusion at [74] that the appellant and family members would  not
         be able to internally  relocate  in  safety  and  that  her  family
         members, which the judge found had taken steps to act  against  her
         even when not in Nigeria, and would seek to trace  and  locate  the
         family and that this would take place via registration which  would
         make the family traceable by the police and  the  authorities.  The
         FtTJ also was entitled to take into account the appellant's ongoing
         medical position which was supported by medical evidence  from  her
         GP which related to her fragile mental health and that it  was  not
         reasonable to expect her to return in the light  of  that  material
         and that she would be living in constant fear of being attacked and
         her daughter being taken for the purposes of FGM.

     53. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law. I therefore dismiss the appeal of the Secretary  of
         State. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law and therefore the decision of  the  FtTJ  to
    allow the appeals shall stand.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Dated: 26 August 2021




    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because
    the case involves protection issues. I find that it is  appropriate  to
    continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellants are granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them. This  direction
    applies both to the appellants and to the respondent. Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







         NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


         1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision
         must make a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such
         application must be received by the Upper Tribunal within the
         appropriate period after this decision was sent to the person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the way in which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


         2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention under the Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days if
         the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time that the application for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


         6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
         covering letter or covering email.

