
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02944/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC by a remote hearing |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 August 2021                         |On 04 October 2021               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    m F A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H. Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Schwenk, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Introduction:
    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because
    the case involves protection issues. I find that it is  appropriate  to
    continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Drake) (hereinafter referred to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated on the 9 March
    2021.

 2. Permission to appeal that  decision  was  sought  and  on  4  May  2021
    permission was granted by FtTJ Andrew.

 3. The hearing took place on 18 August 2021, by means of  Microsoft  teams
    which has been consented to and not objected to by the parties. A face-
    to-face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and  both
    parties agreed that all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.
     I was present at Bradford IAC  and  conducted  the  hearing  from  the
    tribunal centre. The advocates attended remotely via video. There  were
    no issues regarding sound, and no substantial technical  problems  were
    encountered during the hearing, and I am satisfied both advocates  were
    able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.

 4. Whilst the appellant in these proceedings is the  Secretary  of  State,
    for the sake of convenience I intend to refer to the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.



The background:

 5. The background to the appeal is set out in the decision letter and  the
    decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs 15-19. The appellant is  a  national
    of Iran (born in Iraq but of Iranian Kurdish ethnicity).

 6. The appellant claimed to have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  13
    January 2016 claimed asylum. It is recorded  that  he  was  invited  to
    attend a substantive interview on 17 June 2016 that he failed to do so,
    and his claim was refused for non-compliance on 27th of  June.  Further
    submissions were lodged in 2017 which were refused on 15 November 2017.

 7. The appeal came before the FtT on the 18 January 2018. The FtTJ did not
    accept the core of the appellant's account that he had an affair with a
    woman known as A or that her family had threatened to kill  or  assault
    him.

 8. The FtTJ accepted that the appellant could  not  be  returned  to  Iran
    based on the fact that he had never lived  there,  he  would  not  have
    family there and due to his father's role. However the FtTJ found  that
    he had support from his family in Iraq whom he was still in touch  with
    and that his family were in  Kurdistan.  The  appellant's  family  were
    residing in a village in the Sulaymaniyah province of the IKR. The FtTJ
    found that with the support of the family he would be able to travel to
    Kurdistan and join them.

 9. By reference to his identification card (refugee card) the  FtTJ  found
    that the appellant's own evidence was that  he  had  travelled  through
    roadblocks with that refugee card and whilst it stated "holder  is  not
    allowed to roam outside the centre of Al-Anbar province" it  would  not
    affect the appellant's ability to travel to the IKR via air or road and
    that once he was in the IKR there was no evidence to  substantiate  his
    claim that he would be removed. The FtTJ found that  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for him to relocate to the IKR as he had done in the  past
    with his family. The FtTJ therefore dismissed his appeal.

10. The appellant applied for permission to appeal that decision which  was
    refused by the FtT and also by the tribunal on 10 August 2018.

11. The appellant lodged further submissions in a letter dated  14  January
    2020.  The letter set out that his fresh claim for asylum was based  on
    his activities in the UK which post- dated the refusal of his  previous
    claim. The activities related to his support for  Kurdish  rights,  his
    attendance political meetings and demonstrations and his  dissemination
    of political information online.  It  was  further  asserted  that  the
    previous decision that the appellant would be able to obtain a  laissez
    passer to return to Iraq or that he  would  be  allowed  to  enter  and
    reside in Iraq was not correct. The appellant had been issued a refugee
    identity card when he was born based on his father status as a  refugee
    and because the appellant was born in a refugee camp. He had  not  been
    issued with any Iraqi identification documents or passport and  had  no
    residence permit to live in Iraq other than his former refugee identity
    card which was issued under the Political Refugee Act No. 51 1971.  The
    letter asserted that Article 17 of that  Act  stated  that  no  refugee
    shall leave the country without the prior agreement  of  the  Minister,
    the Minister may not allow refugee to leave the country for  more  than
    one month and that only the president may allow refugee  to  leave  the
    country for a period exceeding one month. The letter asserted that  the
    appellant had left the country without seeking permission  from  anyone
    to leave therefore he had  contravened  the  law  under  which  it  was
    granted. Therefore he had no right to reside living Iraq as a  refugee.
    Furthermore  the  refugee  identity  card  was  not  a  document  which
    permitted him to enter the country  as  distinct  from  reside  in  the
    country even if it remained valid. It was therefore  asserted  that  he
    was only  returnable  to  Iran  but  in  the  light  of  his  political
    activities in the UK, the appellant was at risk of return and would  be
    entitled to refugee status in the UK on that basis.

12. In a decision letter dated 6 March  2020  the  respondent  refused  his
    claim. The respondent set out the earlier decision of the FtT  and  the
    decision made that he could not return to Iran due to his father's role
    and the fact that he never lived there and  had  no  family  there.  In
    addition, the respondent accepted that all the evidence  taken  in  the
    round indicated that he did have a political profile,  that  his  views
    were pro-Kurdish and opposed the Iranian regime and whilst he  provided
    no evidence the authorities would be aware of any of the activities  in
    the UK, in the light of the guidance outlined in  the  decision  of  HB
    (Kurds) Iran CG [2018]UKUT 430, it was concluded that he would  face  a
    real risk of persecution in Iran given the fact  that  the  authorities
    would be likely to find out about his activities on return.

13. However, the respondent relied upon the previous decision of  the  FtTJ
    by reference to the refugee card that the appellant was  in  possession
    of, and that the appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  the  documents
    necessary to  return  to  Iraq  where  he  had  lived  previously.  The
    respondent took into account the report titled "the  Political  Refugee
    Act number 51 issued in 1971 and the claim that the report show that he
    no longer had the right to reside in Iraq as  a  refugee.  However  the
    respondent considered that the appellant had not attempted to go to the
    Iraqi  embassy  to  redocument  himself  and  evidence  that  this  had
    occurred. Taking into account the previous finding that once he was  in
    the IKR there was no evidence to substantiate that he would be  removed
    once there.

14. Whilst the appellant relied upon evidence  from  1971,  the  respondent
    gave consideration to the most  up-to-date  information  available.  In
    this context the respondent accepted that the  appellant  was  born  in
    Rumadi Iraq and that he  spoke  Kurdish  Sorani.  The  respondent  gave
    consideration to  SMO and others (Article 15  (c)  identity  documents)
    Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (hereinafter referred to as  "SMO").Based  on
    the CG decision the respondent considered that the  objective  material
    demonstrated there had been improvements in humanitarian  and  security
    situation and that nowhere  in  Iraq  reach  the  threshold  to  breach
    Article 15 (c )  of the Qualification Directive and therefore he  could
    return to his home area of Rumadi where he had lived for  most  of  his
    life where he was familiar with  the  traditions,  culture  and  social
    norms  of  the  area.  When  applying  the  decision  to  his  personal
    circumstances, the respondent considered that  there  was  no  evidence
    that he fell into any of the categories  likely  to  place  him  at  an
    individualised risk of harm. Thus it was concluded that he  would  have
    family support on return to in Iraq and would be able  to  utilise  his
    resourcefulness  and  support  himself  sufficiently  upon  return.  In
    addition he would be up to benefit from the assisted  voluntary  return
    program.

15. As to documentation this was considered at paragraphs 28 -  33  of  the
    decision letter. The respondent set out that in  view  of  the  current
    case law it demonstrated that there were viable  options  available  to
    the appellant to obtain the relevant documentation to enable his return
    to Iraq. He had not provided any evidence to suggest that he  had  been
    in contact with the Iraqi embassy in an attempt to  redocument  himself
    and thus he had not made any genuine attempt to  obtain  documentation.
    It was considered reasonable that he would be able to obtain  documents
    of his family and that they  would  be  supportive  of  an  attempt  to
    redocument him and help in any way that they could.

16. The respondents view was that he could seek assistance  from  the  Iraq
    embassy in London to obtain a Laissez Passer which would enable him  to
    travel to Iraq. The embassy could also assist in securing a replacement
    CSID card. Once he returned to Iraq he could present himself in  person
    at the relevant CSA office to enrol his biometrics in order to gain the
    new INID card. The appellant had failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  had
    tried to obtain this documentation through the embassy in  the  UK  and
    was unsuccessful. Upon obtaining a  replacement  CSID  from  the  Iraqi
    embassy in United Kingdom he would then be able  to  obtain  a  laissez
    passer which would enable him to travel to Baghdad  and  then  continue
    his onward journey. Thus there are several viable methods to obtain the
    required documentation.

17. As to internal relocation this was considered at paragraphs 34 - 41 and
    that the appellant would be able to obtain a replacement CSI the and  a
    laissez pass� enabling him to return to  Iraq.  It  was  considered  he
    could voluntarily relocate to the IKR via Erbil also Sulamaniyah as  he
    is of Kurdish ethnicity and there would be no barriers to his return.

18. The remainder of the decision letter considered Article 8 of the  ECHR.
    His claim was therefore refused.

Decision of the FtTJ:

19. The appeal came before the  FtT  on  11  February  2021  at  a  hearing
    conducted by CVP.

20. As to the basis of the appellant's claim, the FtTJ set out at [6]  that
    it was common ground that the appellant could not be returned to   Iran
    because of his association with pro-Kurdish  political  activities  and
    because he is recognised in Iraq as a refugee from Iran. The  FtTJ  set
    out that the main argument  raised  by  the  respondent  was  that  the
    appellant could be returned to Iraq, and that there had been a  finding
    by another judge in 2018 that he could gain a laissez passer to  return
    to Iraq, that he could enlist family support to travel within Iraq  and
    to what is now the family home area in the IKR  and  thereby  gain  the
    necessary documentation such as a CSID (at [7]).

21. When considering the appellant's claim the FtTJ recorded  that  it  was
    common ground that the appellant was born of an Iranian Kurdish  family
    in the refugee camp at Rumadi in the Al Anbar province of Iraq and  had
    a card identifying him as a refugee issued when he was 2 years old. The
    card has not been since that time amended or renewed but gave  him  the
    right to reside in Iraq. The appellant states that he does not  have  a
    CSID, or the new form of biometric-based identification known as  INID.
    The appellant claimed that he and his family  moved  from  the  refugee
    camp in 2003 to where the family lived in the Sulaymaniyah  governorate
    in the IKR where his family reside (his parents).

22. At [17] the FtTJ  recorded  the  appellant's  claim  as  follows;  that
    despite the past decision, he cannot return to Iraq as  he  is  not  an
    Iraqi citizen and cannot get documentation to enable him  to  enter  or
    travel within Iraq and that because of his sur place activity since the
    last hearing, he is at risk of serious harm or persecution if  returned
    to Iran where he is deemed to  be  a  citizen,  and  this  was  already
    acknowledged by the 1st judge. He cannot return to Iraq  so  he  cannot
    stay in the UK he would be returned to Iran where he  has  never  lived
    and would be persecuted or face  personal  violence  there  as  already
    determined.

23. The FtTJ summarised the respondent's case at paragraphs [21] - [23]  as
    set out in the decision letter as set out above and also summarised the
    relevant CG case law alongside the latest CPIN dated June 2020.

24. The factual findings made by the FtTJ are set out  at  paragraphs  [24-
    27]. The relevant passages of the FtTJ's decision are reproduced below:

         "25. The only issue then is relocation to and/or return to  a  home
         location  in  Iraq.   I  make  the   following   further   findings
         accordingly: -

               i) The only places which could be said to be  home  areas  to
                  which he could return are

                  25.1 1 Altash Camp in Rumadi which is in Anbar Province  -
                      or

                  25.1.2 The family home now at Darbandikhan which is in the
                      Sulaymaniyah Governorate;

              ii) SMO makes it clear that the security situation in Anbar is
                  still precarious and the  Appellant  being  a  Kurd  is  a
                  member of a minority in that area  and  falls  within  the
                  second bullet point in the headnote para  (5)  in  SMO  as
                  described above;

             iii) Return to Darbandikhan is more complex;  he does not  have
                  a passport or CSID and only has a  refugee  identity  card
                  which is long out of date and  cannot  be  readily  relied
                  upon at present as evidence of his identity since  it  was
                  issued within only months  of  his  birth;  I  accept  his
                  evidence that he has attempted to use his refugee card  to
                  verify his identity on many occasions and been told in  no
                  uncertain terms that it is not acceptable  as  it  is  not
                  possible to identify him from the photograph of him in his
                  early infancy; I have noted his testimony that  since  the
                  First Adjudication he has attended the  Iraqi Embassy  and
                  Consulates in the UK and heard his evidence  that  he  has
                  attempted to obtain (as opposed to replace) a CSID, but  I
                  accept his testimony that he has been refused  because  so
                  far as the Iraqi  authorities  are  concerned,  he  is  an
                  Iranian refugee and  does  not  qualify  for  a  passport,
                  laisser-passer, or any other identity documentation as  he
                  is not an Iraqi citizen - these are credible points;

              iv) I accept the Appellant's testimony, as is borne out by the
                  Respondent's own June 2020 Guidance, that he cannot obtain
                  identity documentation by proxy;  this  is  further  borne
                  out by the fact that the only way in which an INID can  be
                  obtained is by personally presenting oneself to a  CSA  at
                  his birthplace or family home office,  and  providing  his
                  own biometric data, which by definition cannot be provided
                  by proxy;

               v) I accept the Appellant's testimony that neither he nor his
                  family have ever had had CSIDs and therefore the  question
                  of replacing them is completely redundant; if  they  never
                  had a CSID, they could never get one without being able to
                  prove their identity, and they would need to  prove  Iraqi
                  citizenship which for them as refugees is impossible;

              vi) The Appellant prays  in  aid  certain  provisions  of  the
                  domestic  Political  Refugee  Act  No  51  of  1971  which
                  prohibits refugees leaving Iraq without prior agreement of
                  the authorities.  The Respondent argues that  reliance  on
                  such domestic legislation, enacted before the downfall  of
                  the Saddam regime, is misplaced. Nonetheless I  find  that
                  it is reasonably likely the Appellant would be regarded as
                  a refugee who had illegally left Iraq and would be treated
                  as such upon return. If, as I find, he has been unable  to
                  obtain the assistance of the Iraqi authorities here in the
                  UK, it is reasonably likely that he  will  face  the  same
                  practical difficulties on arrival in and  transit  through
                  Iraq to his home area.   Without CSID or passport,  he  is
                  unable to return direct to the IKR  and  therefore  return
                  would be to via Baghdad. Transit from Baghdad to  the  IKR
                  would also be impossible without a CSID.   He can only get
                  a CSID  (or  its  replacement/equivalent  INID)  by  going
                  personally to his local CSA, but he  cannot  travel  there
                  without identity evidence documentation, which makes  this
                  analysis a "chicken and egg" situation.

             vii) Taking the 2020 Guidance into account as described  above,
                  obtaining documentation by proxy  is  not  possible;   the
                  risk which the Appellant therefore faces  if  returned  to
                  Baghdad is that he would not be able to travel to the  IKR
                  from there, and would probably not be  accepted  in  Iraq,
                  but would risk then being sent to Iran which  has  already
                  concluded would breach his right  to  protection  and  his
                  Human Rights generally; being unable  to  obtain  identity
                  documentation means that inevitably he  would  risk  being
                  returned to Iran as an Iranian citizen even though he  has
                  never been there or lived there,  and  he  would  thus  be
                  exposed to the risk already identified and  recognised  by
                  the Respondent and the First Adjudication;

            viii) The situation now presented to me in this  appeal  differs
                  markedly from that  which  was  before  this  Tribunal  in
                  January 2018 at the time of the First Adjudication in that
                  SMO has since been decided by the Upper Tribunal, and  the
                  Respondent has issued  her  June  2020  guidance  to  meet
                  changed circumstances in Iraq;  though I  accept  that  my
                  starting point of analysis is the  First  Adjudication,  I
                  find that I can reach  a  different  decision  because  of
                  these changes in circumstances described above .

         26.  I am persuaded to accept the Submissions of Mr Schwenk despite
         the very well explained arguments  in  Mr  Tuff's  Submissions.   I
         therefore conclude that the Appellant has discharged  the  required
         albeit  modest  burden  of  proof  of  the  need   for   Convention
         protection, as on the subject of internal relocation  in  Iraq  (to
         which the bulk of the Respondent's arguments in the current  appeal
         is addressed) because relocation is impossible in  my  finding  for
         the "chicken and egg" argument reasoning set out above.

         27.  I  find  that  the  Appellant  has  established  that  if,  as
         suggested by the Respondent he could  seek  return  to  alternative
         locations of either Rumadi or Darbandikhan, or another area in  the
         IKR,  such  return  would  be  at  worst  impossible  and  at  best
         unreasonable.  This is because it would  be,  and  I  find,  unduly
         harsh for him to do so.  He would be returned first to Baghdad, but
         without a CSID and unable (in what I describe as the a "chicken and
         egg" situation) to get one or an INID without returning to his home
         area, he would not be able to return to his home area to do so."

25. The FtTJ therefore allowed the appeal.

26. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted by FtTJ Andrew on 4 May 2021 for  the  following
    reasons:

         "Having carefully considered both the ground and the decision I  am
         satisfied that there is an arguable error of law in respect of both
         grounds that have been raised. It is apparent from the decision  of
         the judges made no sustainable findings as to why  the  appellant's
         claims that he has never been documented in Iraq are credible given
         the evidence that the appellant has been educated in Iraq  and  has
         worked there, set against the background evidence. It follows  from
         this that the judge may well have made an error as to his  findings
         whether the appellant could be re-documented."

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

27. In the light  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
    directions that the error of law issue could be  determined  without  a
    face-to-face hearing and the hearing was  to  be  listed  as  a  remote
    hearing.

28. Both parties indicated that  they  were  content  for  the  hearing  to
    proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing  to
    enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

29. Ms Aboni relied upon the written grounds. They  can  be  summarised  as
    follows. Ground 1 asserts that the FtTJ failed to give adequate reasons
    for his decision. In her  oral  submissions  Ms  Aboni  submitted  that
    whilst the appellant was from  Iran  that  have  been  granted  refugee
    status he would have had  documents,  but  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for accepting the appellant's claim that  he  did  not
    have  any  documents  and  in  the  light  of  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant's family had been able to obtain employment and  relocate  to
    different areas in the IKR.

30. At paragraph 25.6 the judge found that the appellant would be  regarded
    as a refugee on return and had left Iraq illegally. Ms Aboni  submitted
    that this went behind the previous judge's decision where it was  found
    that he had not been in an illicit relationship with the girl  and  had
    not fled Iraq for that reason and therefore he had  no  need  to  leave
    Iraq illegally.

31.  Ms  Aboni  submitted  that  ground  2  related   to   the   issue   of
    redocumentation necessary to return to Iraq.  She  submitted  that  the
    judge appeared to accept that the appellant  had  tried  to  redocument
    himself in the UK and accepted that as an Iranian refugee, the  embassy
    in the UK would not document him.  However  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence before the judge to support this finding. She  submitted  that
    previously he indicated he was able to travel and therefore  failed  to
    establish that he did not have any  adequate  documents  to  return  to
    Iraq.

32. The written grounds challenge paragraph 25.7 where the judge found that
    obtaining a proxy in Iraq is impossible and that  the  appellant  could
    not be documented  and  stated  that  he  is  in  a  "chicken  and  egg
    situation". It was argued that the finding  does  not  align  with  the
    appellant's evidence that he was in regular contact with his family  in
    Iraq and if not  already  in  possession  of  identification  he  could
    utilise family to assist in gaining  citizenship  documents.  The  1957
    document referred to  in  the  June  2020  CPIN  states  that  that  is
    sufficient for the embassy to issue a laissez pass�. Ms Aboni submitted
    that as the appellant was still in contact with his  family  the  judge
    failed to consider if he had documents in Iraq which could be  provided
    to him by his family.

33. It is further argued that the judge found the transit  between  Baghdad
    and the IKR impossible for the appellant but made  no  comment  on  the
    submission that a laissez passer can be used for internal travel  which
    the UK can apply for on behalf of the appellant or could be applied for
    at the Iraq embassy. The judge simply accepted the oral  evidence  that
    the embassy refused to assist him.

34. Finally, Ms Aboni relied  upon  the  grounds  and  submitted  that  the
    finding that it would be unduly harsh for him to return to the IKR  was
    contrary to the earlier finding and the appellant's own  evidence  that
    he was employed in the IKR, had family there was a house and he was  in
    regular contact with them.

35. Ms Aboni therefore submitted that the appellant would be able to obtain
    relevant documents and return to his family in  the  UK,  although  she
    accepted that an INID could not be obtained by proxy, nor could  he  be
    re- documented in the UK.

36. Mr Schwenk on behalf of the appellant had not filed a Rule 24  response
    but made oral submissions. They can be summarised as follows.

37. He submitted the grounds were a disagreement with the  FtTJ's  findings
    and did not demonstrate any error of law. The findings took account  of
    the previous assessment made  by  Judge  Spencer  who  found  that  the
    appellant had been issued with a card as a child which  had  identified
    him as a refugee (see paragraph 36). Judge Spencer had  found  that  he
    had a refugee card  but  had  no  CSID.  Although  he  found  that  the
    appellant could go to Baghdad  and  use  his  refugee  card  to  travel
    onwards throughout Iraq, even if that had been correct at the  time  in
    2018 that was not the position on the evidence available now and it was
    open to Judge Drake on the facts as he found them  to  be  and  in  the
    light  of  the  current  CG  decision  to  reach  the  only  reasonable
    conclusion that he would be returned to Baghdad that would be unable to
    travel outside of that area without a CSID.

38. As to the finding that the appellant had left illegally, that  did  not
    go behind the early decision of Judge Spencer but relied upon the  more
    recent evidence that he  had  no  authorisation  to  leave  Iraq  as  a
    refugee.

39. As to paragraph 5 of  the  grounds  he  submitted  that  the  appellant
    provided documentary evidence in the form of photographs to demonstrate
    that  he  had  attended  at  the  Consulates  and  in  any  event   the
    respondent's own guidance demonstrated  that  it  is  not  possible  to
    document  in the UK. Similarly by reference to paragraph 6 it was wrong
    to assert that he would be able  to  redocument  by  way  of  a  proxy.
    Furthermore the reference to a Laissez Passer as used  as  an  internal
    travel document was not supported by the country guidance  decision  in
    SMO.

40. Whilst the grounds made reference to Annex I, the appellant had none of
    the document set out in that  annex  and  a  Laissez  Passer  would  be
    confiscated on arrival.

41. Mr Schwenk submitted that Judge Spencer  and  the  present  judge  both
    found that the appellant was someone who did not have a CSID  and  that
    the factual assessment of being unable to redocument was one  that  was
    open to him and thus will be at risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.

42. Ms Aboni by way of reply submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  assess
    adequately whether the family had any relevant documents and  thus  the
    overall assessment was flawed.

43. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.

Decision on error of law:

44. Ms Aboni in her submissions made it clear that the grounds advanced  on
    behalf the respondents were a "reasons challenge" and  that  the  judge
    erred in law by failing to give adequate reasons for the findings  that
    he had made.

45. The obligation on a tribunal judge is to  give  reasons  in  sufficient
    detail to show the principles upon which the tribunal has acted and the
    reasons that have led to the decision.   Appellate  courts  should  not
    rush to find a misdirection simply because they might  have  reached  a
    different conclusion on the facts or  express  themselves  differently,
    and in my judgement and  on  a  careful  reading,  the  FtTJ  did  give
    adequate reasons for his decision. I  shall  set  out  my  reasons  for
    reaching that conclusion.

46.  Ms Aboni concentrated her submissions on ground 2  and  the  issue  of
    redocumentation. It was argued that the FtTJ appeared  to  accept  that
    the appellant had attempted to redocument himself in the UK but was not
    able to. The grounds argue that there was no  documentary  evidence  to
    support the FtTJ's finding in this  regard  (see  paragraph  5  of  the
    grounds). In my view that submission is  plainly  wrong.  At  paragraph
    25.3 the judge set out his assessment of the  evidence  concerning  the
    appellant's identity. As the previous  judge  had  found,  the  present
    judge also found that the appellant did not have a passport or  a  CSID
    and only had a refugee card which the judge described as "long  out  of
    date" and "cannot be readily relied upon or presented  as  evidence  of
    his identity since it was issued within only months of his  birth".  It
    was open to the judge against that background evidence  to  accept  the
    appellant's testimony that he had attempted to use the refugee card  to
    verify his identity but told that it was not acceptable as it  was  not
    possible to identify him from the photograph  as  an   infant.  As  the
    refugee card was consistent with such  that  description,  the  judge's
    assessment that the appellant's evidence was credible was one that  was
    open to him.

47. The judge also assessed the appellant's account of his recent  attempts
    to redocument himself at the Iraqi  Consulate.  Whilst  the  respondent
    asserts  that  there  was  no  documentary  evidence  in  support,  the
    appellant's bundle included evidence in the form of photographs of  the
    appellant at each of the consulates in 2 locations alongside the  stamp
    of one Consulate (page 8) and see exhibits MFA2 and MFA 3).  The  judge
    was  entitled  to  take  into  account  that  evidence  alongside   the
    appellant's oral testimony that he had attended the  Consulate  but  as
    far as they were concerned he  was  an  Iranian  refugee  and  did  not
    qualify for any identity documentation. At  paragraph  25.4  the  judge
    found  that  the  appellant's  evidence   was   consistent   with   the
    respondent's  own  guidance  that  he   could   not   obtain   identity
    documentation by proxy and that it is not possible to redocument in the
    UK (see para  2.16).  In  my  judgement  the  FtTJ  gave  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons for accepting the appellant's  account  as  to  his
    attempts to redocument himself in the UK.

48. Similarly paragraph 6 of the grounds does not demonstrate any error  in
    the FtTJ's reasoning. The factual finding made by the judge is that not
    only did the appellant not have a passport or a CSID but  that  neither
    he nor his family had ever had a CSID card and therefore it was  not  a
    question of replacing them  and as  they  had  never  had  CSID's.  The
    appellant could not get one without being able to  prove  his  identity
    and would need to prove Iraqi citizenship and  as  they  were  refugees
    this was not possible (at paragraph 25.5). That was a finding  open  to
    the FtTJ to make on the evidence and was the earlier  finding  made  by
    Judge Spencer that the appellant had no CSID.  The  judge  had  earlier
    found that the refugee card and its  contents  was  not  likely  to  be
    sufficient evidence of his identity for present purposes given its  age
    and that the photo on the card was of the appellant as  an  infant  (at
    paragraph 25.3). Therefore it was open to the judge to  find  that  the
    appellant did not have evidence of any Iraqi citizenship or an  ability
    to prove his current identity. That being the case it was open  to  the
    judge reached the conclusion that it was not a case  of  the  appellant
    being able to redocument but to "document" and against this  background
    the family members were not likely to have documents  relevant  to  the
    appellant which could be provided to him.

49. Ms Aboni did not seek to explain ground one any further than  what  was
    written and did not point the tribunal to any evidence  in  support  of
    paragraphs 1 and 2. Whilst the importance of a CSID is set out  in  the
    CG decisions and at paragraph 336  of  SMO,  the  Upper  Tribunal  also
    accepted that there were a significant number of  people  in  Iraq  who
    were undocumented ( see paragraph 391). Consequently it was open to the
    FtTJ to accept the appellant's evidence that  the  appellant  had  been
    born in a refugee camp and had been given a  card  in  respect  of  his
    status which was not sufficient identification given its  age  and  its
    photograph of the appellant as an infant  and  that  he  had  no  other
    documentation available to him by his family or otherwise.

50. Whilst the grounds refer to obtaining documents by proxy (paragraph  6)
    the judge identified  at  paragraph  25.7  that  the  respondent's  own
    guidance precluded such a course and that obtaining documents by  proxy
    was now not possible.

51. Furthermore paragraph 7 of the grounds does not demonstrate  any  error
    of law. The Upper Tribunal in SMO expressly considered the issue of the
    use of Laissez Passer at paragraph 376 - 379 setting out  the  evidence
    of Dr Fatah who had not heard  of  any  person  being  able  to  use  a
    document for onward travel. The Upper Tribunal  found  the  reason  for
    this was that such a document was confiscated on arrival and  therefore
    could not be used for internal travel. Therefore the  decision  of  the
    judge that travel between Baghdad and the IKR would not be possible  by
    using a Laissez Passer was consistent with the decision in SMO.

52. Ms Aboni also sought to challenge the finding at paragraph 25.6 and the
    judge's assessment that the appellant will be regarded as a refugee who
    had left Iraq illegally.  She  submitted  that  this  went  behind  the
    earlier finding of Judge Spencer who found that he had not  established
    had been an illicit relationship with the girl  and  therefore  had  no
    need to flee Iraq. As Mr Schwenk submitted that  failed  to  take  into
    account the FtTJ's reasoning which plainly proceeded on  the  basis  of
    that earlier finding but that in light of the evidence of the  domestic
    provisions that prohibited refugees from  leaving  Iraq  without  prior
    agreement of the authorities, it was this which had led  the  judge  to
    find that there was a reasonable  likelihood  that  he  had  left  Iraq
    illegally. In any event, there was no dispute that  the  appellant  had
    left Iraq overland without a passport or any visas  or  paperwork  from
    the Iraqi authorities.

53. The last point raised in the grounds is that the FtTJ  made  a  finding
    that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to return  to  the  IKR
    and that this  is  inconsistent  with  the  evidence  of  family  being
    resident  there  and  having  previously  resided  there.   Again   the
    submissions failed to engage with the FtTJ's reasoning as a whole.  The
    judge had reached the conclusion from the evidence taking into  account
    both the CPIN and the decision in SMO that without a CSID he could  not
    travel beyond Baghdad and therefore could not travel to either his home
    area (in a former contested area) or where his family lived and that as
    summarised at paragraph [27] he would be returned  to  Baghdad  as  the
    place of removal without a CSID and unable to  obtain  one  in  Baghdad
    (consistent with SMO at paragraph 386, 388 and 393 ) and not being able
    to obtain an INID without returning to his home area.  It  was  against
    this background that the FtTJ found that it would be  unduly  harsh.  I
    consider that the judge was not using the term "unduly  harsh"  in  the
    sense of considering the personal circumstances of  the  appellant  and
    the circumstances of the place of  location,  as  consistent  with  the
    authorities such as Januzi but on  the  basis  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the appellant to return to  either  location  given  the
    lack of his CSID /INID and the ability to be re-documented.

54. Consequently it has not been demonstrated that  the  decision  involved
    the making of an error on  a  point  of  law  and  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed. The decision of the FtTJ shall stand.



Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and the decision of the FtT shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
                                Date:      19/ 8/ 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds








         NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


         1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision
         must make a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such
         application must be received by the Upper Tribunal within the
         appropriate period after this decision was sent to the person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the way in which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


         2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention under the Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days if
         the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time that the application for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


         6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
         covering letter or covering email.

