
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02574/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2018                         |On 06 April 2018              |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    IFII
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Davis instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal.

      2. The scope of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal related  to
         both protection and human rights grounds. The appeal was  heard  on
         the 9 May 2017 and the decision promulgated on the 17 May 2017.

      3. Since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal there has  been  a
         decision of the Upper Tribunal on the issue of  Article  15(c)  and
         risk in Libya: ZMM  (Article  15(c))  Libya  CG  [2017]  UKUT  263.
         Although decided after  the  promulgation  of  the  decision  under
         challenge the panel in ZMM considered  the  same  material  as  the
         Judge in the first  instance  in  this  case,  the  Upper  Tribunal
         hearing being dated 3 May  2017.  The  binding  nature  of  such  a
         decision was also considered by the Upper Tribunal  in  Adam  (Rule
         45: authoritative decisions) [2017]  UKUT  370.  In  light  of  the
         findings in ZMM relating to country conditions and associated  risk
         I find error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
         relation to its findings  concerning  Article  15(c)  Qualification
         Directive and set that aspect of the decision aside.

      4. I am satisfied that the appeal should be allowed on the basis  that
         substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for  believing  that   the
         appellant, if returned to Libya at this time,  would  face  a  real
         risk of suffering serious harm and are unable, or,  owing  to  such
         risk, unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country;
         and  that  he  is  not  excluded  from  a  grant  of   humanitarian
         protection.

      5. The appellant, however, asserts that on the findings  made  by  the
         Judge he is entitled to a grant of  asylum,  no  just  humanitarian
         protection.

      6. The findings by the Judge can, inter alia,  be  summarised  in  the
         following terms:


               a. The appellant is thirty years old and came to  the  United
                  Kingdom as a student in March 2006 where he remained until
                  October 2010 when he returned to Libya. Two years later in
                  September 2012 he returned as a visitor and  has  remained
                  since [57].


               b. The appellant does not fall within the range of categories
                  identified in AT and others [2014]  UKUT  318  whilst  his
                  father worked for the regime the  Tribunal  in  the  above
                  country guidance case made it clear that the  majority  of
                  the population work for the regime or had some association
                  with it [58 - 60].


               c. The Judge accepted the appellant's explanation for alleged
                  discrepancies in  a  death  certificate  relating  to  his
                  brother recording a death in Misrata [64 - 66].


               d. The Judge noted the appellant had provided no  documentary
                  evidence such as an arrest warrant to  support  his  claim
                  his other brother had  gone  missing  [67].  Documentation
                  provided by the appellant to support  his  assertions  was
                  found not to warrant weight being attached to  it  by  the
                  Judge [68 - 69].


               e. The Judge accepted one of  the  appellant's  brothers  was
                  killed during the ongoing fighting in Libya  but  was  not
                  satisfied that his other brother had gone missing or  that
                  there is an arrest warrant for him outstanding [70].

      7. The Judge notes that the appellant claimed to be a Libyan  national
         and part of the Bemi Walid Tribe and that he and  his  family  were
         Gaddafi supporters when he was alive. Ground 1 on which  permission
         to appeal was sought asserts that the core the appellant's case was
         that he had been a member of a  group  defending  Gaddafi  and  his
         regime against the revolutionaries and that although  discrepancies
         have been  identified  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  the
         question was whether the appellant will be perceived as a supporter
         of Gaddafi. Ground 2 claimed that the Judge  erred  by  failing  to
         engage with the relevant evidence, post-dating AT and others  which
         looked at the treatment of  those  who  are  or  are  perceived  as
         supporters of the Gaddafi regime. Although the Judge made reference
         to the most recent Country Policy and Information Note produced  by
         the respondent relating to the treatment of Gaddafi supporters (and
         perceived supporters) the Judge only made  reference  to  paragraph
         2.4.8  and  failed  to  look  at   other   sections,   particularly
         section.6.2 looking at Gaddafi loyalists.

      8. In AT and Others (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya  [2014]  UKUT
         318 (IAC), no longer a Country Guidance case on the  Article  15(c)
         risk but is still country guidance so  far  as  the  categories  of
         those entitled to asylum are concerned, it was held that:


               i) having regard to the generally hostile attitude of society
                  to the former regime, the following are,  in  general,  at
                  real risk of persecution or  Article  3  ill-treatment  on
                  return to Libya:  -  (a)  former  high  ranking  officials
                  within the  intelligence  services  of  that  regime;  (b)
                  others with an  association  at  senior  level  with  that
                  regime;


              ii) As a general matter, the closer an individual was  to  the
                  centre of power within the former regime, the more  likely
                  that the individual will be able to establish  a  risk  of
                  persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment on return;


             iii) The majority of the population of Libya either worked for,
                  had some association with, or has a member of  the  family
                  who worked for or had  an  association  with  the  Qadhafi
                  regime.  Such  employment  or  association  alone  is  not
                  sufficient to establish a risk of persecution or Article 3
                  ill-treatment on return;


              iv) In general, family members of those described in  (i)  and
                  (ii) above are not at risk of persecution or a  breach  of
                  their protected rights on return. It is possible, however,
                  that an individual will be able to establish such  a  risk
                  but this will need to be demonstrated by specific evidence
                  relating to the individual's circumstances. Mere assertion
                  of risk by association as a family  member  would  not  be
                  sufficient without fact-specific evidence of the  risk  to
                  that particular family member.

      9. In Naii (2016) CSOH 142 it was held that there was no error in  the
         Secretary of State's approach to the Claimant's fresh claim that he
         was at risk  if  returned  to  Libya  on  account  of  his  alleged
         membership of the Wershfana tribe and his father's  strong  support
         of the late Colonel Gaddafi. The Secretary of State could have come
         to no other rational view without disregarding the guidance  in  AT
         and Others (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318.



     10. The Judge specifically finds that the evidence did not  support  an
         assertion that the appellant fell into any of the  risk  categories
         identified. It is accepted  in  the  Country  Guidance  that  there
         remains a generalised  attitude  of  resentment  towards  perceived
         Gaddafi supporters and fighters and that given that they have  been
         subject to serious ill-treatment, including assassination committed
         with  impunity,  it  is  likely  that  a  person  who  was  closely
         associated with the Gaddafi  regime  -  particularly  at  a  senior
         level, such as ministers, officials and diplomats - will be at risk
         of persecution or serious harm.  Persons who had a  low-level  role
         in the regime and family members of  persons  associated  with  the
         regime, even at a senior level, are in general unlikely  to  be  at
         risk of persecution.

     11. It is accepted that this assessment is case specific with the  onus
         on the person to demonstrate that they are at risk  of  persecution
         or  serious  harm.  The  Judge  did  not  find  the  appellant  had
         discharged the burden of proof upon him to establish that he  faces
         a real risk of persecution as a result of his  tribal  or  previous
         associations with the regime. This has  not  been  shown  to  be  a
         finding outside the range of findings reasonably available  to  the
         Judge on the evidence.

     12. The section of the County  Information  Note  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant states:


             6. Treatment of Gaddafi loyalists


             6.1 Legal context and Political Isolation Law


             6.1.1 The United States Institute  of  Peace  explains  in  an
             August 2016 report: 'In May 2013, the passage of the Political
             Isolation Law provoked further  confusion  and  disruption  to
             policing (along with many other state  institutions).   Passed
             by the GNC under threat of violence from armed groups, it  was
             in essence a lustration law aimed at preventing members of the
             former Gadhafi regime from holding public  office  during  the
             country's  transition.   The  law  decreed  the   removal   of
             individuals who had held senior positions under  Gadhafi  from
             state institutions but provided little guidance on what  ranks
             qualified as a senior position and on how to remove individual
             from office.  Significantly, it did not take into account  the
             role played by numerous officials who had defected during  the
             revolution,  including  senior  police   who   brought   their
             knowledge and security training to bear in ousting the regime.
              Some of these officials had briefly been able  to  use  their
             revolutionary standing to extend legitimacy  to  local  police
             departments but the Political Isolation Law  undermined  this,
             field interviews reveal, painting with the same brush everyone
             who had occupied  a  government  post  under  Gadhafi.   In  a
             country where the government had been the largest employer for
             decades,  fingerpointing  and  even   trigger-pulling   became
             commonplace.'16 6.1.2 The International Commission of  Jurists
             (ICJ) published  a  study  on  the  challenges  facing  Libyan
             judges, in July 2016.  This stated that:  'Actions  undertaken
             thus far aimed at holding judges and  other  public  officials
             accountable for collaboration with the  corruption  and  human
             rights  violations  committed  during  the  rule  of   Colonel
             Gaddafi, have been  inadequate  and  not  in  conformity  with
             international  standards.   The  legislation   providing   for
             vetting  of  Gaddafi  era  public  officials,  known  as   the
             'Political  Isolation  Law',  failed  to  provide  for   clear
             criteria  for  those  being  vetted,  or  for  a  case-by-case
             analysis of each individual affected,  and  failed  to  ensure
             that  due  process  standards  would  be  applied  to  vetting
             proceedings.   'As a result, many  individuals  were  unfairly
             removed from their positions  and  statutorily  excluded  from
             holding public office for ten years from  the  date  of  their
             exclusion.  The extension of the 'Political Isolation Law'  to
             the judiciary in 2013 was met with protests and challenges  in
             Court and the GNC reportedly repealed the law in  early  2014.
             However,  given  the  complicated  political  and  legislative
             situation in Libya, its status in law  is  currently  unclear,
             with a challenge in the Constitutional Court pending.


             Thousands of Libyans perceived to be against the  regime  were
             detained without charge, and were often subjected  to  torture
             and mistreatment in detention. 'After the fall of the  Gaddafi
             regime, the Ministry of Interior (under  the  control  of  the
             NTC) issued Decree 388  (2011)  which  granted  local  Supreme
             Security  Committees  the  right   to   arrest,   detain   and
             interrogate suspects.  This decree provided a legal basis  for
             the arrest and detention of suspects by committees created  by
             civilian or military councils and militias at the local level.
              The 2012 report of the UN  Commission  of  Inquiry  on  Libya
             concluded militias executed and tortured  to  death  perceived
             Gaddafi loyalists, and were liable  for  charges  of  the  war
             crime of murder or arbitrary deprivation of life.  As  of  the
             date of publication, there were no known prosecutions  related
             to killings by militias.'18 6.2.2 The DFAT Report also stated:
             'DFAT assesses that those who were, or are perceived  to  have
             been, highranking officials in the  Gaddafi  regime  (such  as
             ministers,   senior   bureaucrats,   military   personnel   or
             diplomats), or who had close  associations  with  the  Gaddafi
             family, or those who were associated with the Libyan  security
             forces during the 2011 conflict, face  a  high  risk  of  both
             societal and official discrimination throughout  Libya.   This
             may include being  illegally  detained,  beaten  or  tortured;
             having  death  threats  made  against  themselves   or   their
             families; or being killed.  However, DFAT assesses that it  is
             unlikely that a Libyan who was employed by the government at a
             low level unrelated to the security establishment  would  face
             discrimination as a result'.19 6.2.3  A  joint  UNSMIL/UNOHCHR
             document  ('Torture  and  deaths  in  detention   in   Libya')
             reporting on torture  and  deaths  in  custody,  published  in
             October 2013 stated: 'Those  arrested  are  taken  from  their
             homes, workplaces,  streets  or  checkpoints.   Detainees  are
             frequently moved from one makeshift place of  detention  (some
             may even be officially recognized as being  under  a  specific
             ministry) to  another  before  being  transferred  for  longer
             periods to proper prisons.  They include individuals suspected
             of having fought on the side of or otherwise having  supported
             Qadhafi's regime, and their family members.   Some  have  been
             detained apparently on  the  basis  of  belonging  to  certain
             tribal or ethnic groups,  including  Warfalla,  Tawergha,  and
             Mashashia, as these groups are collectively perceived by  some
             as having supported the former regime.   Given  the  arbitrary
             nature of the arrests and lack of judicial oversight, cases of
             personal score-settling are not uncommon.'


             'Claims for international protection of  persons  having  been
             directly affected by developments since 2011 may  need  to  be
             given particular attention, including, inter alia, members  of
             tribes/families or individuals perceived to be in  support  of
             one of the conflict parties or the former  Gaddafi  regime.'21
             6.2.5 The February  2015  Special  report  of  the  Secretary-
             General on the strategic  assessment  of  the  United  Nations
             presence in Libya noted that: 'Benghazi has been plagued by  a
             wave of assassinations of former regime officials and  members
             of the judiciary, as well as armed  and  security  forces  and
             activists.'22 6.2.6 The  Human  Rights  Council  Investigation
             (A/HRC/31/CRP.3)    dated    15    February    2016,    noted:
             'Revolutionary armed groups have a significant distrust of any
             security apparatus or personnel who were active in the Qadhafi
             regime, and have been quick to act, including through the  use
             of force, when they have  felt  excluded  from  the  decision-
             making process or otherwise disgruntled. 'In addition  to  the
             difficulties internally displaced persons generally  encounter
             in enjoying their rights, groups perceived as having supported
             the Qadhafi regime during 2011 are at particular ongoing risk.
             OHCHR has received particular  complaints  of  violations  and
             abuses from members of the Tawergha community whose experience
             of mass displacement goes back to August 2011.  '...Most major
             groupings of armed actors have carried out unlawful  killings,
             in particular  executions  of  individuals  taken  captive  or
             detained, and the  assassination  of  those  voicing  dissent.
             'The assassination of perceived opponents to those  exercising
             power have been frequent, particularly in Benghazi.   In  most
             cases the assassinations were attributed  by  interviewees  to
             Ansar al-Sharia.  Those targeted included  political  figures,
             human  rights   defenders,   journalists,   judicial   actors,
             religious leaders, and alleged Gaddafi supporters...'23  6.2.7
             The Human Rights Watch  report  (Libya:  Stop  revenge  crimes
             against displaced persons) referred to a UN  Security  Council
             resolution 2095: 'On March 14, 2013, the UN  Security  Council
             passed resolution 209524, which expressed grave concern  about
             "reprisals,  arbitrary  detentions  without  access   to   due
             process,  wrongful  imprisonment,  mistreatment,  torture  and
             extrajudicial  executions"  in  Libya  and   called   on   the
             government  to  "accelerate  the  judicial  process,  transfer
             detainees to  state  authority  and  prevent  and  investigate
             violations  and  abuses  of  human  rights."   The  resolution
             underscored the government's primary  responsibility  for  the
             protection of Libya's population.'25   In  its  annual  report
             covering events in  2016,  Human  Rights  Watch  provided  the
             following  update:  ''In  what  amounts  to  a  crime  against
             humanity, militias and authorities  in  Misrata  continued  to
             prevent 40,000 residents of  Tawergha,  Tomina,  and  Karareem
             from returning to their homes in relation for  alleged  crimes
             during the 2011 revolution attributed  to  people  from  those
             cities against antiGaddafi activists and  fighters..'26  6.2.8
             The U.S. Department of State explains in its annual report for
             2015 that: 'There were  numerous  reports  government  forces,
             rebel groups, and some tribes committed arbitrary and unlawful
             killings of civilians.  Primary targets of  killings  included
             political opponents;  members  of  police,  internal  security
             apparatus,  and  military  intelligence;  and   also   judges,
             political activists, members of  civil  society,  journalists,
             religious  leaders,  and  Qadhafi-affiliated   officials   and
             soldiers.'27 6.2.9 Human Rights Watch's annual report covering
             events in 2015 noted that  'On July 28 [2015], Tripoli's Court
             of Assize convicted 32 former Gaddafi officials on charges  of
             alleged crimes committed during the 2011 uprising.  The  court
             sentenced Saif al-Islam Gaddafi in absentia  and  eight  other
             defendants  to  death,  including  former  intelligence  chief
             Abdullah Sanussi, and former Gaddafi-era prime ministers,  al-
             Baghdadi al-Mahmoudi and Abuzaid Dorda.  Serious  due  process
             violations, including denial of access to  legal  counsel  for
             defendants, undermined  the  trial.'28  6.2.10  Freedom  House
             reports  that  'In  August  [2015],  several   dozen   Qadhafi
             supporters staged a rally in Benghazi,  which  was  broken  up
             when opponents fired guns at the crowd.'29 6.2.11 Human Rights
             Watch recorded  that:  'In  June  [2016],  unidentified  armed
             groups killed 12 detainees upon their conditional release from
             al-Baraka prison in Tripoli.   All  12  were  members  of  the
             former Gaddafi government and had been accused of taking  part
             in the violence against anti-government  protesters  in  2011.
             According to the families, the bodies were  found  in  various
             locations  around   Tripoli.    At   time   of   writing,   no
             investigation had been conducted into these crimes.'

     13. The country material does not  show  that  all  returnees  who  are
         failed asylum seekers or of the appellant's tribal  group  or  from
         his home area face a real risk of serious harm on return sufficient
         to entitle them to a grant of refugee status. The Judge  was  aware
         of the nature of the appellant's case and the evidence provided but
         did not find, as a matter of established fact, that  the  appellant
         would face a real risk. Considering the evidence made available  to
         the Judge, submissions, and determination as a whole,  it  has  not
         been made out that the rejection of the asylum claim is outside the
         range of findings reasonably open to the Judge.

     14. The reality, in light of ZMM, is that the  appellant  will  not  be
         returned to Libya.

     15. I do not find it made out that the Judge erred in relation  to  the
         asylum claim. Findings in relation to the  aspects  are  preserved.
         The Upper Tribunal remakes the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal
         pursuant to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive only.

Notice of Decision

     16. The appeal is allowed on Humanitarian Protection grounds only.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed:                                 Date 4 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
