
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02222/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2017                            |On 19 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                   MR I M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna of Counsel, Montague Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with  leave  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fowell to dismiss his appeal against the refusal of  the
    respondent to grant him asylum and leave to remain  on  Article  8  and
    humanitarian protection grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on [ ] 1989.  He claims  to  be
    in fear of persecution as a convert to Christianity.

3.   He arrived in the UK on 25 August 2016 when he  was  rescued  from  the
    sea off Dover by a border patrol force while attempting to enter the UK
    illegally.  He had a screening interview on the same day,  that  is  25
    August 2016 and told Immigration Officers that he  was  afraid  of  the
    authorities in Iran because they killed his brother in 2005.

4.   The appellant was interviewed on 27 January 2017.   He  mentioned  that
    he became a Christian on 10 May 2016.   He  became  involved  in  house
    church meetings which culminated in a raid by  the  police  on  24  May
    2016.  The authorities also raided his home a few days later  and  took
    away a Bible and other religious material.   As  a  result  his  father
    arranged for an agent to take him out of  the  country.   He  explained
    that it was the death of his brother in 2005 which was a large part  of
    the reason for him to leave Islam.  His  brother  had  been  beaten  to
    death by the police for drinking alcohol.

5.   The respondent raised a point in the refusal letter which had not  been
    canvassed in interview, namely that the appellant was fingerprinted  in
    Greece on 27 December  2015,  before  his  claimed  conversion.   As  a
    consequence, his claim was rejected by the respondent in its  entirety.



6.   At the hearing, the judge had before him the  fingerprinting  evidence,
    photographs of the appellant  at  a  church,  a  letter  from  Reverend
    Richard Young, the Vicar at St Mathew's Church, Yiewsley, and a  letter
    from a Ms Mimi Javdan from the Church of the Ascension in London.   The
    judge also had reports about conditions in Iran for Christians and  two
    documents to evidence the fact that the appellant was in Iran in  early
    2016, after the fingerprinting  episode.   These  comprised  a  medical
    prescription and a legal contract for the sale of his house.

7.   In oral evidence before the judge the appellant said that  it  was  the
    death of his brother which  first  turned  him  away  from  Islam.   He
    started attending  house  churches  in  December  2015  and  left  Iran
    illegally later that month.  After a journey of about ten days on foot,
    he said he was fingerprinted in the  middle  of  the  night.   He  then
    decided it was too dangerous to go on, so he and his friend  went  back
    to Iran, where they arrived on 7 or 8 January 2016.  He maintained that
    he did mention Christianity when asked in his screening  interview  why
    he was afraid of the authorities in Iran.

8.   He explained that he attended two different churches  because  one  was
    nearby and the other one, the Church of the Ascension, taught in Farsi.
     That is where his friend Mimi, who  provided  the  supporting  letter,
    teaches.

9.   He stated that he started to lose faith in Islam since the time of  his
    military service in 2009 but the main  reason  was  the  death  of  his
    brother.

10.  When  asked  why  he  had  not  mentioned  the  fingerprinting  in  his
    interview, he said that the question was not put to him and that he did
    not think that it was significant.  He agreed that now  it  was.   When
    asked why when he was specifically asked the question at 3.2 whether he
    had ever been fingerprinted, he said no, he put this down to a  mistake
    by the interpreter.  The interview took place only a few hours after he
    was rescued from the water and the interpreter was  on  the  telephone.
    He thought he was only being asked about his most recent journey to the
    United Kingdom, not to his previous attempt.  When  asked  why  he  had
    left Iran in December 2015 he said it was to find out  more  about  his
    new religion and to be able to study it freely.

11.  With regard to his return journey to Iran, he said he got back  without
    any problems by lorry, car and on foot.  The documents he  provided  to
    prove his return had been emailed over by his brother  so  he  did  not
    have any originals.  He had been forced to sell the  house  because  he
    was not in a good financial situation.  He had  not  used  any  of  the
    money from the sale of his house to pay for his journey to  the  United
    Kingdom.  That was paid for with the help of his  brother  and  father.
    He had also used an agent the first time he left Iran and that had cost
    him 15,000,000 toman.

12.  Regarding his reasons for turning back from Greece and why it  was  too
    dangerous, he said that he found out from his friend, who was  Kurdish,
    that the agent who was also Kurdish, was trying to get them into danger
    by smuggling some things.  He did not know what things but  the  agents
    had guns and knives.  They arranged another agent to take them back  to
    Iran.

13.  The judge heard evidence from Reverend Young, the Vicar at St  Mathew's
    Church.  He described the congregation as quite multicultural, although
    there were only two Iranians  at  the  moment,  one  of  whom  was  the
    appellant.  He met the appellant shortly before his first  letter.   He
    could not at that stage  confirm  that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine
    Christian.  Now that he has got to know him better, over the  last  few
    weeks, when he has spent an hour or so with him on a few occasions,  he
    did think he was.  The appellant has little English  so  the  exchanges
    between him and the appellant had been carried out  with  the  help  of
    Google translate.  He added that the appellant has not been baptised.

14.  The judge's findings are set out at paragraphs 29 to 42.  His  findings
    at paragraph 30 and 31 have not been challenged.  At paragraph  30  the
    judge said he had no reason not to accept the appellant's account  that
    his brother was killed by the authorities  in  the  way  he  described,
    although that did not provide him with much assistance on the  question
    of whether he converted to Christianity,  since  the  two  events  were
    about ten years apart.  Another point the judge found  in  his  favour,
    which was not covered in evidence, related to his screening  interview.
    In answer to question 1.12 - "what is your  religion?",  the  appellant
    replied that he was a Christian.  The judge said his subsequent  answer
    that he was in fear of the authorities has to be seen in that  context,
    and so accepted that  he  did  mention  this  point.   The  judge  also
    accepted that the appellant  attempted  to  raise  this  point  at  the
    beginning of his asylum interview.

15.  The judge went on to hold as follows:

         "32.  However,  there  are,  it  has  to  be  recognised,   serious
             difficulties in reconciling his account  with  the  undisputed
             evidence that  he  was  fingerprinted  in  Greece  on  the  21
             December 2015.  The first and most obvious point  is  that  he
             did not mention this at his screening interview or later, even
             though asked about fingerprinting.  On that aspect, with  such
             a clear question, I cannot easily  accept  that  tiredness  or
             misinterpretation was the cause.  Indeed it  would  have  been
             the obvious time to  say,  if  true,  that  he  had  not  been
             fingerprinted on this journey but he had on a previous one.


         33.  It may be that he felt that this disclosure would  weaken  his
             case, since it indicates that serial  attempts  were  made  to
             leave Iran and travel to Europe.  It has now  been  disclosed,
             and it does in my view make it more difficult to  accept  that
             on the second occasion he was fleeing  persecution,  since  on
             the first occasion he accepts that he was not.  There  was  no
             suggestion by the appellant that he had come to the  attention
             of  the  authorities  in  December  2015.   On  that   'first'
             occasion, he says his father had paid an agent to get  him  to
             the UK so that he could study his new religion.  This  is  not
             simply implausible: it strikes me as a wholly far-fetched.  It
             is one thing to spend sums of this sort (15m toman,  or  about
             �3,750) and to incur the risks and hardships  of  an  overland
             journey through Europe, if the object is to  escape  death  or
             imprisonment, but quite another where no such risk exists.


         34.   It  was  also  difficult  to   understand   the   appellant's
             explanation as to why this first  venture  was  aborted.   The
             explanation given to me about the smugglers having knives  and
             guns, and of them trying  to  get  the  appellant  to  smuggle
             goods, was not mentioned in his witness  statement.   No  real
             details were provided of the smuggling,  or  why  he  felt  in
             danger, let alone how it was possible in view of  this  danger
             to retrace his steps to Iran."

              38. I bear in mind too that no documentary evidence  has  been
             produced  as  to  any  warrant  or  summons  relating  to  the
             appellant or to the search of his house.  It is clear from the
             country evidence that arbitrary arrests and detentions do take
             place, but equally the respondent's  Country  Information  and
             Guidance report from July 2016 Iran:  background  information,
             including actors of protection, and internal relocation, Iran,
             at section 12, does describe a judicial system in  which  such
             warrants and summonses are the norm.

16.  Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer  who  said  that
    it is arguable that  the  adverse  findings  reached  at  paragraph  33
    (ground 7) (see apparent failure to note consistencies in the  evidence
    because "this was not a matter explored  in  evidence"),  paragraph  38
    (ground 6) of the judge's decision contain errors of law.

17.  Ground 7 argued that the  judge  erred  in  his  understanding  of  the
    appellant's case which was that he first left  Iran  in  December  2015
    because he had become a follower of Christianity and wanted to practise
    such religion freely, not  merely  because  he  wanted  to  study  this
    religion.  Ms Patyna did not maintain  this  argument.   She  submitted
    that the judge rejected the appellant's claimed  two  journeys  because
    the appellant did not mention in his screening interview or later  that
    he had been fingerprinted in Greece and,  secondly,  that  it  was  not
    plausible that he had made two journeys out of Iran.

18.  Ms Patyna submitted that it is Home Office policy that any  conduct  by
    the appellant should be put to him at interview but it  was  not.   She
    said it was unclear  what  the  judge  meant  by  "later"  because  the
    appellant was never  asked  about  the  fingerprinting  evidence.   She
    submitted that the judge failed to take into account  the  failures  of
    the screening interview and relied on the appellant's answer to  reject
    the entirety of his claim.   The  earliest  opportunity  the  appellant
    could address the fingerprinting evidence was when he made his response
    to the respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter.   She  said  that  this
    caused  a  significant  procedural  disadvantage  to   the   appellant.
    According to the respondent's own guidance, Asylum Policy  Instruction:
    Assessing Credibility  and  Refugee  Status,  any  differences  between
    statements  made  at  screening,  in  any  written  statements  and  at
    interview should have been put to the claimant at interview, as  should
    any conduct prior to  the  claim  which  may  have  a  bearing  on  the
    claimant's general  credibility.   She  argued  that  as  a  matter  of
    fairness the case required a careful assessment in  the  round  of  the
    remainder of the  appellant's  account  and  the  supporting  documents
    rather than focusing on his failure to mention being  fingerprinted  in
    Greece in his screening interview.  This is especially so  because  the
    appellant did not conceal the fact that he had travelled through  other
    safe countries.  He confirmed that he had been arrested in France.

19.  I was not persuaded by Ms Patyna's argument.  Her argument  presupposes
    that  the  respondent  became  aware  that  the  appellant   had   been
    fingerprinted in Greece  prior  to  the  screening  interview  and  the
    substantive interview.  I note that the screening interview took  place
    on 25 August 2016, the same  day  the  appellant  was  rescued  by  the
    British authorities.   The  substantive  interview  took  place  on  27
    January 2017 and the refusal letter was written on  13  February  2017.
    The fingerprinting was revealed in the respondent's Reasons for Refusal
    Letter.  As pointed out by Ms Isherwood, the appellant was specifically
    asked at the screening interview at question 3.2 (B3)  "Have  you  ever
    been fingerprinted in any country including your own?".  The  appellant
    responded "No, but arrested previously in France".  At question 2 C7 of
    the substantive interview, the appellant was asked if he was  satisfied
    with  the  screening  interview.   He  made  three   amendments.    The
    fingerprinting evidence was not  revealed  by  the  appellant  at  that
    stage.  Whilst I accept that the screening interview took place on  the
    day he had been rescued and was conducted by telephone, I find that the
    evidence was crucial to the appellant's claim.  His failure to  mention
    this important evidence  either  at  the  screening  interview  or  the
    substantive interview, in my view undermined his claim.  I find in  the
    circumstances that the judge was entitled to consider  it.   I  do  not
    accept that the judge relied wholly or  heavily  on  that  evidence  to
    reject the appellant's account of events.  The judge  was  entitled  to
    find at paragraph 33 that it may be that the appellant felt  that  this
    disclosure would weaken his  case,  since  it  indicates  that  several
    attempts were made to leave Iran and travel to  Europe.   I  reject  Ms
    Patyna's  submission  that  the  judge's   approach   demonstrated   an
    overreliance on the previous fingerprinting, without due  weight  being
    given to the appellant's account in the round.

20.  The judge did accept at paragraph 30 that the appellant's  brother  was
    killed by the authorities.  Those events were ten years ago and did not
    provide him much assistance to link that event with his claim  to  have
    subsequently converted to Christianity in 2016. I see no error  of  law
    in the judge's findings at paragraphs 33 and 34.

21.  At paragraph 35 the judge considered the  two  documents  submitted  in
    support of the appellant's claim to have returned to Iran.   The  judge
    stated that the only purpose for which they are relied on  is  to  show
    that he was present in Iran on the dates given:  4  May  2016  for  the
    prescription and 29 February 2016 for the sale of  his  property.   The
    appellant's legal representative at the end of her submissions, invited
    him to notice the similarity between the appellant's witness  statement
    and his second document.  The judge said this was not a matter explored
    in evidence and he was unable to say that they  were  the  same  so  he
    could put no weight on that one way or the other.

22.   Ms  Patyna  argued  the  judge  erred  in  rejecting  the  appellant's
    representative's submission as to the consistency between the documents
    and  the  appellant's  written  evidence.   She  said  there   was   no
    requirement for the consistency to have been explored in oral evidence.
     The appellant's written evidence stood as his  evidence-in-chief.   It
    was  for  the  respondent  to  cross-examine  him  as  to  any  alleged
    inconsistencies.   I  have  looked  at  the  two  documents.   If   the
    consistency was the appellant's evidence that he had sold his  property
    on 29 February 2016 which placed him  in  Greece,  then  I  accept  the
    argument that that was his evidence-in-chief.  However, I fail  to  see
    the error committed by the judge in his conclusion.

23.  It was argued by  Ms  Patyna  that  the  judge  failed  to  assess  the
    documents in the round, and rejected them  because  he  had  found  the
    appellant's  account  regarding  his  journeys  in  and  out  of   Iran
    implausible.  I reject this argument.  Firstly, that was not the reason
    given by the judge in paragraph 35.   Secondly,  at  paragraph  37  the
    judge found in relation to the documents that  no  originals  had  been
    provided and it was difficult to place any real weight  on  them.   The
    judge went on to say that if they were genuine, they clearly  supported
    the appellant's claim to have returned in Iran, although  viewing  them
    against the background of what he regarded as the extreme  unlikelihood
    of the return trip, he could not accept that this was  the  case.   The
    judge's finding is sustainable in the light of his finding at paragraph
    34 that it was difficult to understand the appellant's  explanation  as
    to why the  first  venture  was  aborted.   I  find  that  the  judge's
    rejection of the documents was not solely  because  he  had  found  the
    appellant's  account  regarding  his  journeys  in  and  out  of   Iran
    implausible.

24.  Ms Patyna also challenged the judge's finding at paragraph 38  that  no
    documentary evidence had  been  produced  of  any  warrant  or  summons
    relating to the appellant or to the search of his house.  The judge had
    relied on country evidence and  the  respondent's  country  information
    guidance from July 2016 that such warrants and summonses are the  norm.
    Ms Patyna submitted that it is not the appellant's case that an  arrest
    warrant had been issued against him.  The issue  was  not  put  to  the
    appellant or raised  at  the  hearing.   Furthermore,  she  argued  the
    respondent's guidance was not relied upon by  the  party  and  was  not
    mentioned at  the  hearing.   The  appellant's  representative  had  no
    opportunity to make submissions in respect of such guidance.  Again,  I
    reject Ms Patyna's submission.   The  judge  is  entitled  to  look  at
    country information and  guidance  reports  which  are  in  the  public
    domain.

25.  At paragraph 39 the  judge  took  into  account  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's knowledge of Christianity shown in the asylum interview and
    said there was no real fault with those answers.   He  also  considered
    the evidence of Reverend Young and did not doubt that  factual  content
    about the appellant's participation in services and Bible classes.  The
    judge said as follows at paragraphs 40 to 42.

         "40. I am mindful of the guidance in SA (Iran) [2012] EWHC 2575  to
             the effect that tribunals are not windows into men's souls and
             should not attempt to do so; they should look at  the  balance
             of the evidence focussing on the extent  of  participation  in
             church activities.  It would however be a misreading  of  that
             case however to present this as the  principal  lesson  to  be
             drawn from it.  It was in fact an obiter or additional comment
             made at the end of the case, which  concerned  an  application
             for judicial review of the decision by the Secretary of  State
             to certify the appellant's case as clearly unfounded.


         41.  It also has to be recognised that knowledge of  the  Christian
             faith can be acquired, particularly if the  possession  of  it
             will  confer  asylum.   Attendance  at  a  church   and   full
             participation in its affairs may be  thought  to  be  a  small
             price to pay in such a case, to the extent that  it  would  be
             surprising for an appellant to fail to keep up his attendance.
              Tribunals have to assess all the evidence in the round and be
             vigilant to ensure that this avenue  of  appeal  is  not  used
             improperly.


         42.  Stepping back from this body of evidence and,  again,  viewing
             it in the round, it seems to me considerably more likely  from
             the evidence of fingerprinting in Greece, taken together  with
             the cost and difficulty of  the  journey,  that  in  fact  the
             appellant has only made one journey from Iran; that  it  began
             before his claimed conversion to Christianity or raid  on  his
             house church or home; and so his account is invented.   I  can
             see no real likelihood that it is  true  and  so  he  has  not
             proven his case to the required standard."

26.  Ms Patyna submitted that the judge did not properly  consider  Reverend
    Young's  evidence  because  the  judge  had  pinned   his   credibility
    assessment on the fingerprinting evidence.  Although the judge said  he
    had considered the evidence in the round, the judge had not done so and
    had breached paragraph 7 of MT (credibility assessment  flawed,  Virjon
    applied) Syria [2004] UKIAT 0037.  This was a case in which  the  Upper
    Tribunal said at paragraph 7:

         "In stating at paragraph 38 of his determination, 'in  view  of  my
         findings on the appellant's credibility, I give no weight to  these
         documents', the Adjudicator was plainly in the words of Mr  Justice
         Forbes, 'putting the cart before the horse'.  We give consideration
         as to whether his subsequent reference  in  the  same  paragraph  2
         'after looking at all the evidence in the round, I am not  prepared
         to place reliance on these documents' was sufficient to  show  that
         in arriving at his assessment, the Adjudicator had in fact  applied
         the correct approach. ... the damage had already been done by  that
         stage, and we  are  satisfied  that  the  Adjudicator's  subsequent
         reference to "looking at all the evidence in  the  round,  was  not
         sufficient to repair it."

27.  I reject Ms Patyna's argument.  The judge did not say that in  view  of
    the appellant's credibility he was giving no weight to  the  documents.
    I find that the judge considered the documents and made  findings  that
    were sustainable.

28.  Ms Patyna also relied on MK (duty  to  give  reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]
    UKUT 00641 (IAC).  In this case the Upper Tribunal considered that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was invited to receive and consider the original of
    the AMA letter and it refused to do so without proffering any  rational
    explanation for such refusal.  The Upper Tribunal considered that  this
    refusal and explained, infringed the  sacred  principles  that  justice
    must not only be done, but must manifestly and undoubtedly be  seen  to
    be done.  This refusal rendered the hearing unfair.

29.  I find that this was not the case in this appeal.  The  judge  received
    all the documents that were put before him and  considered  them.   The
    judge did not refuse to consider any document that was put before him.

30.  Having considered the submissions made by both  parties,  I  find  that
    the judge did not err in law in his decision.

31.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 18 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

