
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02212/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 22nd November 2017                 |On 29th November 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     KA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Anifowshe, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz , Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant with permission, appeal against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Manchester), who, in a  determination  promulgated
    on the 8th February 2017, dismissed KA's claim for protection.

 3. The appellant's immigration history is set out within the determination
    and the decision letter of the 10th February 2016. He  claims  to  have
    arrived in the United Kingdom in November 2001 on a  student  Visa  and
    applied for further leave to remain which was granted  but  expired  in
    May 2002. Further applications for leave to remain were  made  in  2002
    and refused in a number of decisions including one made on and  did  so
    in the light of the public interest considerations set out  in  section
    117B. The 28th of October 2003. In February  2010  he  was  encountered
    during  an  enforcement  visit  and  was  arrested  and   served   with
    documentation as an over stayer. He claimed asylum on 21 December  2010
    which was refused on 14 January 2011. He lodged an appeal against  that
    decision but that was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  28
    January 2011. Permission to appeal the decision was refused by both the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal and he became appeal  rights
    exhausted by February 2011. Further submissions were lodged  and  which
    were subsequently refused a further application was  made  in  2011  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 4. Further submissions were lodged in 2015. On the 5th of  February  2016,
    further  submissions  were  made  on  his  behalf  in  support  of   an
    application for asylum and  his  protection  claim  was  refused  in  a
    detailed reasons for refusal letter dated 10  February  2016.  In  that
    decision letter, the Secretary of State considered his protection claim
    in the light of the previous findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge in 2011. The Secretary of State also considered the new  evidence
    provided in support of his claim to be  at  risk  on  return  to  Libya
    including a documentary evidence in the  form  of  arrest  warrant  and
    newspaper articles. The Secretary of State concluded that he had failed
    to provide any new substantial evidence to demonstrate that he would be
    at risk on return to Libya  as  a  result  of  any  outstanding  arrest
    warrants relating to family relatives. The decision is also  considered
    Article 15 C but for the reasons set out at paragraphs 21 onwards,  the
    Secretary of State concluded that he was not entitled  to  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection. Article 8 was also considered at paragraphs 36
    - 53.

 5. The appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 13th  December  2016.
    The judge had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of the  Appellant
    and two witnesses and for that evidence to be  the  subject  of  cross-
    examination. His findings of fact relating to the protection claim  are
    set out at paragraphs 49 and 71. In summary,  the  judge  rejected  his
    factual claim in its entirety. It is not necessary for me  to  set  out
    those findings as there is no  challenge  to  the  judge's  credibility
    findings in this regard in the written grounds of appeal  or  challenge
    to his rejection  of  the  asylum  claim  (see  skeleton  argument  and
    grounds).

 6. At paragraphs 67-71 he considered the issue of humanitarian protection.
    He made reference to the Country Guidance decision  of  AT  and  Others
    (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT  00318  within  the
    determination at paragraph 67 and that  the  current  country  guidance
    case law of FA made it clear that the numerous changes in  Libya  since
    November  2013  were  sufficient  to  render  unreliable  the  previous
    guidance set out in AT and others (as cited). He also made reference to
    the current guidance that each case should be  determined  on  its  own
    evidence pending the publication of general up-to-date evidence.

 7. In this context he considered the argument advanced on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that the indiscriminate violence in Libya constituted a  risk
    which met the Article 15 (c) threshold. At paragraph 70, the judge made
    reference to the evidence at page 62  in  the  appellant's  bundle  but
    stated that he did not accept that the appellant would not have  family
    support available to him in  Libya.  Thus  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had not established that he would not be able to  access  the
    same support and protection from his brother's  wife  family.  He  also
    took into account the evidence from the first witness that he had  been
    able to travel to and within Libya without any particular  problems  as
    recently as Christmas 2015. Therefore at paragraph 71  he  reached  the
    conclusion that the appellant had not demonstrated that he would be  at
    risk of harm and that he was not entitled  to  humanitarian  protection
    under the rules.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in his consideration of
    Article 15 (c) and his consideration of Article 8 of  the  ECHR.  Those
    submissions stated that the judge erroneously  considered  whether  the
    appellant had family support in Libya instead  of  considering  whether
    the appellant would be at risk from "serious and individual  threat  to
    civilian life  or  person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    situations of international or internal armed conflict." It was further
    submitted that the judge  had  wrongly  devoted  his  findings  to  the
    appellant's immigration status rather than considering the  risk  which
    the appellant would face if returned to Libya.

 9. On an unknown date, First-tier Tribunal Judge Norton -  Taylor  granted
    permission to the appellant for the following reasons:

         "The grounds assert that the  judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of
         Article 15 C of the Qualification  Directive.  The  conclusions  on
         Article 8 are also challenged.

         It is arguable that in assessing Article 15(c) at  [70]  the  judge
         has focused on the presence of  family  members  in  Libya  to  the
         exclusion of other relevant matters. It is in turn arguable that he
         has not addressed the core issue of risk on return. To  the  extent
         that the judge applied AT and others, it is arguable that this  was
         an error, given that the country guidance had been replaced by  the
         decision in FA (Libya: Article 15 C (Libya) CG  [2016)  UKUT  00413
         (IAC).

         Another issue now arises in respect of ZMM. By a  letter  dated  10
         July 2017, the appellant's representatives have sought to amend the
         original grounds and rely on ZMM. Although he cannot of  course  be
         blamed for failing to consider ZMM, the issue of  the  judges  risk
         assessment under Article 15 c is now arguably flawed.

         The Article 8 challenge has little merit, but I do  not  limit  the
         grant permission."

10. Following the grant permission, a Rule 24 response was provided by  the
    respondent dated the 3rd October 2017. In that document it states  that
    the respondent does not oppose the application for permission to appeal
    and invited the Tribunal to determine  the  appeal  at  a  continuation
    hearing. The response also states that the consideration will be  based
    upon the decision of ZMM and on the basis that the  other  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal are retained.

11. The appellant's solicitors had sent by fax to the Tribunal  a  skeleton
    argument for the hearing. It made reference to the determination of the
    Upper Tribunal in ZMM and set out relevant parts of that  decision.  It
    submitted that the decision confirmed that the appellant as a  national
    of Libya would be at risk of  serious  harm  if  returned  contrary  to
    Article 15 c of the Qualification Directive. Thus it was  submitted  in
    the light  of  that  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judges  risk
    assessment under Article 15 C of the Directive is now flawed.  It  goes
    on to state "the  appellant  would  respectfully  request  that  he  be
    granted humanitarian protection as the respondent is not deemed him fit
    to qualify for refugee status. Also, he  is  not  excluded  from  being
    granted  humanitarian  protection  under  paragraph  339   D   of   the
    Immigration Rules."

12. Under the heading "Article 8 ECHR" it is submitted that in finding that
    the removal of the appellant would not be disproportionate at paragraph
    82, the appellant submits that the judge did not consider the  positive
    obligation to consider the private life established having lived in the
    UK for over 17 years.. He has no  criminal  record  and  is  unable  or
    unwilling to return to Libya as it is an unsafe and stateless  country.
    He relies on the guidance in Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546  and  the
    criteria  established  in  the  consideration  paragraph  276  ADE  the
    Immigration Rules."

13. Since  the  promulgation  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in
    February 2017, there has  been  a  further  Country  Guidance  decision
    issued by an Upper Tribunal presidential panel reported on 28 June 2017
    as ZMM (Article 15 (c) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 00263 (IAC).

14. The head note to that decision reads as follows :

         "The violence in Libya has reached such high-level that substantial
         grounds are shown to  believe  that  a  returning  civilian  would,
         solely on account of his presence on the territory of that  country
         or region, face a real risk of being subject to  a  threat  to  his
         life or person."

15. At the hearing before me, there was agreement between the parties  that
    there was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that the decision should be set aside and remade  by  this
    Tribunal by substituting a decision to allow the appeal on the basis of
    Article 15 (c) and allowing the appeal on that ground.

16. In the light of the submissions made by the parties  in  their  written
    grounds and in the agreement reached before the  Tribunal,  that  there
    was a material error of law in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it is the case that the decision  reached  cannot  stand  and
    must be set aside. I am satisfied that the judge did error  in  law  as
    both parties have submitted. It is plain from reading the determination
    and the grounds from each of the parties that there is no challenge  to
    the judge's finding that the Appellant had  not  demonstrated  that  he
    would be at risk of persecution for a Convention reason  and  thus  had
    dismissed his claim for asylum based  on  the  factual  account  given.
    However there was an alternative argument advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant which related to the issue  of  humanitarian  protection  and
    Article 15 (c). In this respect the judge appeared  to  find  that  the
    Appellant was not entitled to humanitarian protection.

17. In the light of the decision of the most  recent  country  guidance  as
    referred to in the preceding paragraphs, the Appellant's appeal will be
    remade. Both advocates submit that the correct course  and  outcome  is
    that the appeal should be allowed on the basis of Article 15 (c).

18. Ms Anifoshe also relied on Article 8 of the ECHR. I have set out  above
    the submissions that were set out in the skeleton argument. As set  out
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant had no  basis
    for any claim in terms of the existence of any partner or  child  under
    Appendix FM. Under paragraph 276 ADE of the Rules,  the  appellant  had
    lived in the United Kingdom for less than 20 years having lived in  the
    United Kingdom for 15 years. The judge set out at paragraph 73 that the
    question to be decided is whether  there  would  be  "very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Libya." In this context it took  into
    account that he had family remaining in Libya to whom we could turn  to
    for support and lived in that country for over 28 years  including  his
    formative years before coming to the United Kingdom.  The  judge  found
    that he had remaining ties in Libya and thus there would  not  be  very
    significant obstacles to  his  integration  into  the  country.  As  to
    Article 8 outside of the rules, the judge considered this at paragraphs
    76 - 82. In terms of proportionality, he considered that he could  keep
    in contact with friends that he had made and considered  the  issue  in
    the light of the public interest  considerations  set  out  in  section
    117B. In particular he weighed in the balance that the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is in the public interest and that little
    weight should be given to a private life  that  was  established  by  a
    person at a time when he was  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.  He
    recorded the appellant had been in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully  for
    very significant period  of  time  or  in  the  alternative,  when  his
    immigration status was precarious. He found that he had an  ability  to
    speak English but that he was  not  financially  independent.  Thus  he
    found the balance to be in favour of removal.

19. In the light of the agreement reached  between  the  parties  that  the
    appellant is entitled to  a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection  under
    Article 15 c, the reasoning must also apply to Article 8 of the ECHR on
    the same basis, namely, that there are very  significant  obstacles  to
    the appellant's reintegration to Libya as it is accepted that he  would
    face serious harm upon return for the reasons set out  in  the  country
    guidance decision. Whilst any human rights claim is made on  the  basis
    of whether removal would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act, the fact that  the  appellant  can  meet  the  rules  under
    Paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) is a  matter  of  significant  weight  in  the
    proportionality balance  against  the  public  interest  considerations
    identified by the judge. Consequently for those reasons  the  appellant
    succeeds in his appeal on human rights grounds.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision is set aside and remade as  follows;  I
    remake the decision in respect of Article 15 (c) by allowing the appeal
    on that ground and on Article 8 grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






Signed  [pic]                           Date 22 /11/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
