
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02886/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 October 2019                             |On 5 November 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                 Mr r a k p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Mutyambizi-Dewa, Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born on 5 May 1996.  He arrived  in
    the United Kingdom and claimed asylum on  12  July  2015.   His  asylum
    application was refused on 8 January 2019.  He  appealed  against  that
    decision and his appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi  for
    hearing on 31 May 2019.  In a decision and reasons dated 17 June  2019,
    the judge dismissed the appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was sought in time on the  basis  that  the  Judge
    erred materially in law in  that,  despite  being  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was a Kurd from the contested area of Zemar in Mosul province
    in Iraq, the judge expressed surprise  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    speak Arabic when the Appellant has consistently  maintained  he  is  a
    Kurdish Bahdini speaker.  It was submitted that this  was  material  in
    respect of the Appellant's ability to relocate to Baghdad in  light  of
    the country guidance decision in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944  and  in
    the Judge's assessment of the reasonableness of internal relocation.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer in
    a decision dated 18 July 2019 on the basis that  an  ability  to  speak
    Arabic is a material factor as set out in AA (Iraq) (op cit) because it
    means he will be less likely to find work [37] and could make it unsafe
    for him to return [42].

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr Mutyambizi-Dewa, on  behalf
    of the Appellant, submitted that the judge had made her decision  based
    on a belief that the Appellant should have been able to  speak  Arabic,
    that she makes this point a  number  of  times,  yet  this  finding  is
    clearly against the country guidance, see [34]  and  [38].   The  judge
    further failed to make any finding as to whether or not  the  Appellant
    was from a minority community despite the fact that he is  Kurdish;  no
    account was taken of his age and  the  Judge  imposed  a  duty  on  the
    Appellant to remember what happened when he was 4 years  old  when  his
    father was arrested and for his parents to have informed him  of  every
    aspect of their lives. The judge did accept the  Appellant  is  from  a
    contested area - Zemar (or Zummar, spellings vary) but went on to  find
    that he has an uncle in Turkey and it would be  likely  that  he  would
    receive family support.  The Judge finds he would be able to find a job
    and relatives in the IKR but the Appellant does  not  have  any  skills
    which would enable him to do this.  Mr  Mutyambizi-Dewa  submitted  the
    judge's findings were totally flawed.

 5. In his submissions, Mr Mills stated that he did  not  truly  understand
    the constant complaints about the ability of  the  Appellant  to  speak
    Arabic, in light of the fact that the judge clearly found the Appellant
    as a Kurd could relocate to the IKR, therefore the fact  that  he  does
    not speak Arabic does not matter and is not material because  he  could
    relocate to the IKR: see [42].  The judge also found that ISIS were  no
    longer in his region.

 6. I pointed out that the judge's  findings  in  this  respect,  that  the
    Appellant's area was no longer contested, were not in  accordance  with
    the country guidance. Mr Mills clarified his position, which  was  that
    the Appellant would be returned to Baghdad and  could  then  internally
    relocate from Baghdad to Erbil and the IKR.   Mr  Mills  accepted  that
    there had been no Presenting Officer present at the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing so perhaps this aspect was not  grappled  with.   He  submitted
    that the Appellant was not credible, even if he was a child when events
    took place the Appellant  had  been  inconsistent  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to disbelieve what he had said.  Mr Mills submitted that  even
    if one does not have  an  identity  card  the  effect  of  the  judge's
    findings is that he has the means or the family to assist in  obtaining
    one: see [40].

 7. Mr Mutyambizi-Dewa in reply  submitted  that  the  description  of  the
    Appellant as a fit young man at [40] does not reflect his claim he  has
    only an uncle in Turkey and no relatives in Iraq.

 8. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

     Findings and Reasons

9.   I have concluded that there are material errors of law in the  decision
and reasons of    First tier Tribunal  Judge  Obhi,  in  that  there  are  a
paucity  of  findings  on  matters   material  to  an  assessment   of   the
reasonableness of internal relocation.

10.  The Judge at [34] accepted that the Appellant is from the  Zummar  area
of Ninewah    governorate and that this is a contested region cf. AA  (Iraq)
[2017] EWCA Civ 944.   She went on at [35] to [42] to consider the issue  of
return to Iraq and internal     relocation,  concluding  at  [42]  that  the
Appellant could relocate to the IKR because  of    his  Kurdish  nationality
and  that  he  has  the  means  of  obtaining  a  CSID  and  no   particular
characteristics which will make it unsafe for him to return to Iraq.

11.  In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) the Upper
Tribunal held inter    alia as follows at [171], in a passage which was not
part of the remit of the appeal to  the Court of Appeal:

     "Relocation to the IKR

     171.     We have found at paragraphs 112 and 113 above that there is
no Article 15(c) risk to   an ordinary civilian in the IKR. What, though,
of internal relocation? So far as a Kurd is  concerned, the evidence of Dr
Fatah was not seriously challenged by the respondent and we,   in any
event, accept it (see esp. paragraph 24 above). The position of Iraqi Kurds
not from the  IKR is that they can gain temporary entry to the IKR; that
formal permission to remain can     be obtained if employment is secured;
and that the authorities in the IKR do not pro-actively   remove Kurds
whose permits have come to an end. Whether this state of affairs is such as
to   make it reasonable for an Iraqi Kurd to relocate to the IKR is a
question that may fall to be    addressed by judicial fact-finders, if it
is established that, on the particular facts, permanent   relocation to
Baghdad would be unduly harsh. In such circumstances, the person concerned
might be reasonably expected to relocate to the IKR. In this scenario,
whether such further   relocation would be reasonable will itself be fact
sensitive, being likely to involve (a) the   practicality of travel from
Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of
securing employment; and (c) the availability of assistance from friends
and family in the      IKR."

12.  The Judge did not find that the Appellant could reasonably be  expected
to relocate  to     Baghdad  but  rather  to  the  IKR,  given  his  Kurdish
ethnicity. At [41] she found that   there are direct  flights  from  Baghdad
to Erbil on a daily basis. However, I find that   there  is  an  absence  of
analysis  of  matters  material  to  factors  (b)  and  (c)  above  and  the
reasonableness of internal relocation, in particular:

13.  In respect of whether there are  family  members  in  Iraq,  the  Judge
found  at  [31]  that      the  Appellant's  claims  as  to   his   father's
involvement with the Ba'ath party were  vague and confused and she  did  not
find this aspect of the appeal to be credible. As      to  his  parents  and
siblings  whereabouts,  at  [32]   the   Judge   implicitly   accepted   the
Appellant's evidence that his parents had been killed but his siblings  were
still alive   but that this was an assumption arising from Daesh's  practice
of taking young people     and killing old ones [18] however, she  makes  no
clear finding on this, nor offers any   finding as to their whereabouts  and
importantly, whether they are older or  younger    than  the  Appellant  and
would be able to assist him in obtaining a CSID.

13.1. In respect of the Appellant's maternal uncle, his  evidence  was  that
he was in Owenat  in Iraq but travelled to Turkey  with  the  Appellant  and
remained there but he does      not know where he  is  now  [18],  [20].  At
[39] the Judge accepts this in finding: "at the  very least he has an  uncle
who resides in Turkey", however, she  then  goes  on  to  find  that      he
"probably also  has  relatives  in  Iraq  and  possibly  in  the  IKR."  The
difficulty  with  this    finding  is  that  it  is  lacking  any   apparent
evidential basis, no evidence or    consideration having been given  to  any
relatives other than the Appellant's parents     and siblings, last seen  in
Zummar, Ninewah and his paternal uncle, who she found     to be  in  Turkey.
Thus I find that this finding is unsafe and essentially speculative.

13.2.    There is, in addition, no finding as to whether or not the
Appellant has a CSID or any     Iraqi   identity documentation. I further
find that the Judge's finding at [42] that the   Appellant "has the means
of obtaining a CSID" if he relocated to the IKR is also lacking    in any
evidential basis and fails to consider the factors set out in AAH (Iraqi
Kurds -  internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC).

14.  Whilst at [38] the Judge  found  that  it  was  "surprising"  that  the
Appellant does not     speak Arabic if he lived in Iraq and his  father  was
involved in the Ba'ath party she    made no finding as  to  whether  or  not
she accepted that the Appellant does not speak   Arabic, but in any event  I
accept the submission of Mr Mills that this is  immaterial,      given  that
the issue is one of internal relocation to the IKR.

     Notice of Decision

15.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is  remitted  back  to  the
First tier Tribunal    for re-hearing,  solely  on  the  issue  of  internal
relocation. The Judge's findings at [31]     are preserved as they have  not
been challenged, however, further fact finding will be    required in  light
of the issues set out at [13] above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 1 November 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
