
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02444/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Oral determination given following hearing|                                 |
|On 12 December 2016                       |On 16th January 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                           mr Mohamed Sultan Abdi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of  Somalia  whose  claim  for
    asylum was rejected  by  the  respondent.   He  appealed  against  this
    decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Roopnarine-Davies sitting at Taylor House on  15  August  2016.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 26 August  2016  Judge  Roopnarine-
    Davies dismissed the applicant's appeal.

 2. The appellant now appeals against  this  decision  with  leave  granted
    first by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly and then subsequently (on  the
    remaining grounds concerning which Judge Kelly  had  initially  refused
    permission to appeal) by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker.

 3. The main plank of the appellant's appeal is that at the hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal the judge had  raised  for  the  first  time  a
    challenge to the identity of a person who was claimed to  be  a  family
    member of the appellant and whose evidence was arguably material as  to
    first the risk to the appellant in his home area (because it  was  said
    that his family had been forced to  flee  to  Kenya)  and  secondly  to
    whether or not  internal  relocation  would  be  available  to  him  in
    Mogadishu in any event (because if this evidence was correct, it  would
    throw in doubt the judge's finding that the appellant had family  whose
    assistance would be available to him in Mogadishu).

 4. In the course of her very persuasive submissions Ms  Foot  referred  in
    particular to the decision of the Court of Appeal in  SH  (Afghanistan)
    by Litigation Friend The Official Solicitor v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284
    where at paragraph 15 it was made clear that the issue which had to  be
    determined  when  considering  whether  there  had  been  a  procedural
    irregularity in the refusal to grant an adjournment was whether at  the
    time the adjournment decision was made it was conceivable that had  the
    adjournment been allowed material evidence  could  have  been  obtained
    which would have a bearing on the decision.

 5. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow very fairly said as follows:

         "Having heard Ms Foot's submissions, I cannot rely on the  Rule  24
         reply.  I think there is sufficient in this to say that at the time
         of the adjournment decision the evidence that [the appellant] could
         have obtained as to the relationship with the person who  gave  the
         telephone interview was [that the witness was]  in  fact  a  family
         member.  Given that, effectively this must go to  the  question  of
         fairness."

 6. In these circumstances Mr Tarlow did not seek to persuade the  Tribunal
    not to find that there had been  a  material  error  of  law  in  Judge
    Roopnarine-Davies' decision.

 7. Having given anxious scrutiny to the submissions which have been made I
    am obliged to accept  that  the  refusal  to  allow  the  appellant  an
    adjournment in order to seek DNA or  other  evidence  establishing  the
    identity of the family member on whose evidence he sought to rely was a
    material error.  I have in mind that this is  a  protection  claim  and
    also that  until  the  hearing  the  appellant  was  unaware  that  any
    challenge would be made to the  identity  of  the  witness  upon  whose
    written evidence (or rather evidence obtained over the telephone) might
    be in doubt.  In those circumstances if that evidence was or  might  be
    material, fairness required that the appellant be given an  opportunity
    to provide evidence which could allay any doubts as to  this  witness's
    identity the judge may have had.  That  evidence  was  in  my  judgment
    potentially material.  First, because if  it  was  the  case  that  the
    appellant's family had had to flee from their home area to Kenya  this,
    coupled with the other evidence, might have been sufficient to persuade
    the Tribunal that the appellant would be at risk on return to his  home
    area.  Secondly, part of the judge's reasoning  for  finding  that  the
    appellant could in any event relocate  to  Mogadishu  was  the  adverse
    credibility findings which she made and in particular her finding  that
    he would have family members in Mogadishu on  whose  support  he  could
    rely.  The evidence to which she attached little weight might have  had
    a material bearing on these findings.

 8. In light of Presidential guidance which has  been  given  repeatedly  I
    consider that the only fair  course  now  is  for  this  appeal  to  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before any
    judge other than Judge Roopnarine-Davies, when the issues would have to
    be considered afresh.  I would expect that in these  circumstances  the
    appellant will now obtain such DNA or other evidence as is available as
    a matter of urgency because without such evidence it may  be  difficult
    for him to persuade a Tribunal to make a different finding, but that is
    not a matter for me as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  now  have  to
    consider  this  appeal  afresh.   I  accordingly  make  the   following
    directions:

Directions

 1) This appeal will be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Taylor House to be reheard by any judge other  than  Judge  Roopnarine-
    Davies.

 2) No findings will be preserved.

 3) The appellant is given permission to file further evidence  in  support
    of his claim, and in particular evidence relating to  the  identity  of
    any witness on whose evidence he intends to rely.  Such  evidence  must
    be filed with the First-tier Tribunal and served on the appellant by no
    later than Friday 27 January 2017.  In the  event  that  the  appellant
    wishes to seek an extension of time in which to serve this evidence  on
    the respondent and file it with  the  Tribunal  she  should  make  such
    application to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4) This appeal should be listed (at Taylor House) on the  first  available
    date after Monday 6 February 2017.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date:  9 January 2017

