
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02925/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 5th September 2019                |On 12th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     HNS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan of Counsel instructed by WTB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision  of  Judge  A  J  Parker  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the  FtT)  promulgated  following  a
    hearing on 31st May 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born  1st  April  1995,  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity.  He claimed asylum, fearing  the  Iraqi  government  on  the
    basis that he would face execution  for  treason  and  failure  in  his
    duties when he served in the army in Mosul.  He also feared the KDP  in
    the Iraqi Kurdish Region (the IKR)  who  had  imprisoned  him  in  Iraq
    between January 2016 and April 2018.   He  also  feared  an  individual
    member of the KDP, KS, who had threatened to kill the Appellant because
    the Appellant's sister would not marry him.

 3. The claim for international protection was refused on 14th  March  2019
    and the Appellant appealed to the FtT.

 4. The FtT dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 5. The Appellant relied upon two grounds.

 6. Firstly, it was contended that the judge erred by failing to  give  the
    case the most anxious  scrutiny.   The  grounds,  settled  by  Counsel,
    describe the decision as "chaotic and confused".  It was contended that
    the decision had not been properly proof read and at times makes little
    sense.  Reliance was placed upon ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 844.

 7.  The  second  ground  contends  that  the  judge  erred  in   requiring
    corroboration of the Appellant's evidence.  At paragraph 26  the  judge
    had recorded "there is also the fact is a lack of corroboration in  the
    form of documentary evidence regarding his court case".

 8. It was submitted that the judge did not  acknowledge  in  the  decision
    that there was no requirement for corroboration and wrongly  held  this
    point against the Appellant.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 9. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms;

         "2.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against this decision
             on the grounds that the judge made arguable errors of law.  It
             is alleged that the judge failed to give the appeal 'the  most
             anxious scrutiny'.  The grounds allege that  the  decision  is
             'confused and chaotic and makes little sense'.  Further it  is
             alleged that the judge erred in not accepting the  Appellant's
             account without corroboration.

         3.   It is arguable that the judge's decision does not  make  clear
             findings of fact which are supported  by  adequate  reasoning.
             It is arguable that the judge's finding 'We have no  objective
             evidence  that  there  are  barbers  who  join  the  military'
             misunderstands the Appellant's evidence  as  recorded  in  his
             statement dated 23rd April 2009 at paragraphs 2 and  3.   This
             shows that the judge has  not  considered  the  evidence  with
             adequate  care.   An  error  of  law  has  been  made  in  the
             assessment of the evidence.  Further it  is  arguable  in  the
             reading of the paragraph 20  of  the  determination  that  the
             judge has failed to give adequate  reasons  for  the  findings
             made."

10. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Tan accepted that the FtT decision disclosed material errors of  law
    as set out in the grounds seeking permission to appeal,  read  together
    with the grant of permission.  Mr Tan accepted that  specific  findings
    had not been made on the Appellant's claim.  It was accepted that there
    appeared to be a lack of anxious scrutiny.  It was also  accepted  that
    the decision indicated a requirement of  corroborative  evidence.   The
    judge had not made any findings in relation to  the  Appellant's  claim
    that he had been threatened with death by KS which is why he  had  fled
    Iraq.

12. In the light of the concession made by Mr Tan, Miss Khan had no further
    submissions to make, except to agree that it would  be  appropriate  to
    remit the appeal back to the FtT to be heard afresh.

My Findings and Conclusions

13. In view of the concession made  by  the  Respondent  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the FtT.

14. In my view  the  FtT  did  not  make  adequate  findings  supported  by
    sustainable reasons.  I  set  out  below  the  headnote  to  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

15. In my view the judge did not comply with the guidance  set  out  above.
    As conceded by Mr Tan, there were no findings made in relation  to  the
    aspect of the claim, which related to KS and the threats made  to  kill
    the Appellant, which is the reason given by the Appellant  for  fleeing
    Iraq.

16. It does appear that  the  judge  misinterpreted  or  misunderstood  the
    Appellant's evidence  when  recording  at  paragraph  20  "We  have  no
    objective evidence that there are barbers who join the military".   The
    judge finds it implausible that the Appellant spent  his  time  in  the
    military as a barber, but gives no adequate reasons for the finding  of
    implausibility.

17. The decision records that findings and reasons  commence  at  paragraph
    16, but what is recorded thereafter does not in fact amount to findings
    of fact with reasons.

18. As accepted by the Respondent, the decision is unsafe, and needs to  be
    made again.  No findings of fact are preserved.

19.  Having  considered  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  at
    paragraph 7.2, I find it appropriate to remit the appeal  back  to  the
    FtT to be heard again.  This is  because  there  is  substantial  fact-
    finding to be undertaken.

20. The hearing will take place at  the  Manchester  Hearing  Centre.   The
    parties will be advised of the date in due course.  The appeal is to be
    heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge A J Parker.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT is set aside with  no  findings  preserved  and  the
appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to the FtT to  be  heard
afresh.

Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the  Appellant  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.
This  direction  is  made  because  the  Appellant  has  made  a  claim  for
international protection.  This direction is made pursuant  to  rule  14  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date         5th September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.  The issue of a fee award will need to  be  considered
by the FtT.


Signed                              Date         5th September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
