
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02088/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 July 2019                         |On 8 August 2019                     |
|                                        |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                   Mrs K J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       The appellant's husband.
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the anonymity direction deemed necessary but  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Chohan promulgated on 6 November 2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.




Background


3. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1983 and is a national  of  Iraq.  On
25 January 2018 the respondent refused the appellant's protection claim

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Chohan ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal.  Grounds  of  appeal  were
lodged and on 4 March  2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun   granted  permission
to appeal stating inter alia

      The grounds claimed that the Judge failed to consider a  large  number
      of documents, identified in the  grounds,  and  that  these  documents
      would have made a material difference to the  Judge's  decision.  What
      difference the documents would have made it is not  clear.  This  will
      (need) to be addressed at the hearing. It is arguable that  the  Judge
      failed to consider and make findings on the oral evidence given by the
      appellant's husband. It is also arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to
      consider the challenges the appellant's son will  face  in  (Iraq/IKR)
      because of his autism.

The Hearing

5. The appellant did not come to the hearing because of childcare  problems.
Her husband attended and wanted to represent the appellant. Mrs  Aboni  told
me that the decision  contains  a  material  error  of  law.  In  the  final
sentence of [2] of the decision  the  Judge  records  that  the  appellant's
oldest son was born in the UK on 2 November 2011. Although the hearing  took
place on September  2018,  the  decision  is  dated  2  November  2018,  the
appellant's oldest son's seventh birthday.

6. In the second sentence of [19] of the decision, the Judge says

      I note that neither of the children are qualifying children.

That is factually incorrect. On the date the Judge wrote that sentence,  the
appellant's oldest child  celebrated  his  seventh  birthday  and  completed
seven years residence in the UK. On the date the  Judge  said  that  neither
child was a qualifying child, the oldest child became a qualifying child.

7. Because one of the appellants children is a qualifying  child  the  Judge
had to consider whether or not it was reasonable for the child to leave  the
UK. There  is  no  consideration  of  the  test  of  reasonableness  in  the
decision. Mrs Aboni asked me to  set  the  decision  aside  and  remit  this
appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.  She  told  me  that  the  Secretary  of
State's position is that as permission to appeal has  been  granted  on  all
grounds the decision should be set aside in its  entirety,  and  a  de  novo
hearing in the First-tier Tribunal is necessary.

8. The decision is tainted by a material error of law. I set it aside.

9.   I consider whether or not I can substitute my own  decision.  There  is
an inadequacy of fact finding in the  First-tier's  decision.  I  find  that
none of the First-tier Judge's findings of  fact  can  be  preserved.  I  am
asked to remit this case the First-tier Tribunal. The material error of  law
in the  decision  relates  to  an  inadequacy  of  fact  finding.  I  cannot
substitute my own decision. A further fact-finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

10. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

12.  I  remit  the  matter   to   the   First-tier   Tribunal   sitting   at
Birmingham/Nottingham to be heard before any  First-tier  Judge  other  than
Judge Chohan.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

14. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  6  November  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.





Signed
              Date 5 August 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


