
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber                                    Appeal
Number: PA/02581/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 27th September 2017                      |On: 08th December 2017        |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     DVV
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Vietnam born in 1981.   He appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Brookfield)
    to dismiss his appeal against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order. The  Appellant  had  sought  revocation  on
    protection grounds.


    Anonymity Order

 2. The Appellant is a foreign criminal and would  not  ordinarily  benefit
    from an order protecting his identity. He has however been found to  be
    victim of trafficking.  Having had regard to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate
    to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Case History


 3. In the absence of objection from the parties I adopt  the  summary  set
    out in the First-tier Tribunal decision at paragraph 1.  The  Appellant
    first arrived in the UK in December 2003 when he was 22 years  old.  He
    claimed asylum. In April 2004 he lost his appeal against that decision,
    and in September of that year he was sent to prison for being concerned
    in the production of cannabis. The sentence of 12  months  imprisonment
    was passed on the 4th September 2004.  As  a  result,  and  after  some
    delay,  the  Respondent  took  deportation  action  against  him.   The
    Appellant lost his  appeal  against  the  decision  to  deport,  and  a
    deportation order was signed on the 20th March 2008. He was deported to
    Vietnam in April 2008.


 4. Sometime in 2010 the Appellant came back to the UK. In July 2011 he was
    arrested for possession of a Class B drug and  on  the  27th  September
    2011 he was once again deported.

 5. By the 1st August 2015 he was  back  in  this  country.  We  know  that
    because on that date he came to the attention of the  police.  He  said
    that he had escaped from traffickers who were forcing him to work in  a
    cannabis factory. He was arrested at Wood Green police station in North
    London on suspicion of immigration offences.  He  claimed  asylum,  and
    asked that his claim  be  treated  as  an  application  to  revoke  the
    deportation order in force against him.

 6. The basis of the Appellant's claim was:

           a) That he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  by  the
              Vietnamese government for reasons of  his  imputed  political
              opinion.  He  claims  to  have  been  involved  in  an  anti-
              government  demonstration   (relating   to   the   compulsory
              acquisition of land by the state)  and  to  be  wanted  as  a
              result. He fears that he will be arrested and ill- treated on
              return;


           b) That he has a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of
              his membership of a  particular  social  group  and/or  fears
              serious harm amounting to a violation of Article 3 ECHR. This
              part of the claim relates to the  Appellant's  fear  that  he
              will  be  re-trafficked  and/or  punished   by   his   former
              traffickers for escaping them and failing to repay the 'debt'
              which they consider to be owed.


 7. The claim was rejected on the 26th March  2016.  The  Respondent  noted
    that the Appellant had claimed asylum in 2004 and that he  his  account
    of political persecution had been rejected for want of  credibility  by
    both Home Office and Tribunal, the latter finding  his  account  to  be
    vague and implausible.  In 2008 a differently constituted Tribunal  had
    also made negative credibility findings, this time in  the  context  of
    his deportation appeal.  They  endorsed  the  assessment  of  the  2004
    Tribunal, and further found significant discrepancies  in  the  account
    advanced.  It perhaps goes without saying that both Tribunals concluded
    that there was not a real risk of harm to the Appellant if he  returned
    to Vietnam.  These decisions formed the backdrop to the  assessment  of
    the current claim for protection. As to that claim the Respondent noted
    that the Appellant had failed to make any mention of land  protests  or
    demonstrations in his initial interview. His account  of  being  wanted
    for  helping  to   organise   protests   is   rejected   for   internal
    inconsistencies. As to the claimed fear of traffickers, the  Respondent
    found there to be several discrepancies in the account  given.  If  the
    Appellant did not want to remain in his home area, either for a fear of
    local government officials or traffickers, he could relocate within the
    country.  His  claimed  fear  was  rejected  on  both  counts  and  the
    protection claim  refused.   The  Respondent  went  on  to  reject  the
    suggestion that a refusal to revoke the deportation order  would  be  a
    breach of Article 8, and the decision was maintained.




    Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


 8. When the appeal came before Judge Brookfield in January 2017 there  had
    been a significant development, in that the  Competent  Authority  (CA)
    had determined, in a decision dated the 25th October 2016,  that  there
    were conclusive grounds for believing that the Appellant was  a  victim
    of trafficking.  That became relevant to the Appellant's  case  in  two
    ways. First, it obviously confirmed, on  a  balance  of  probabilities,
    what he had claimed about his circumstances.  The  Appellant  therefore
    asked the Tribunal to give that decision considerable  importance  when
    assessing credibility  and  risk.  Second,  it  was  submitted  on  the
    Appellant's behalf that the Secretary of State's refusal letter was not
    a lawful decision. The Secretary of State had failed to have regard  to
    her own policy, which requires decision makers to  await  determination
    of trafficking claims before making decisions on protection.   Had  the
    Secretary of State known that the CA believed the  Appellant,  her  own
    decision may have been different.  Counsel therefore sought a Greenwood
    declaration that there had not been a lawful decision: Greenwood (No.2)
    (para 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 629 (IAC).   The  effect  of  such  a
    decision would have been that the matter was returned to the  Secretary
    of State to consider the matter afresh in light of  the  CA  conclusive
    grounds decision.


 9. The First-tier Tribunal proceeded to  conduct  its  assessment  on  the
    basis that the Appellant is a victim of trafficking.  At  paragraph  11
    the Tribunal notes that the Appellant had asked for the  matter  to  be
    returned (the determination says 'adjourned' but issue  is  taken  with
    that) to the Respondent so that a new decision could  be  taken.  Judge
    Brookfield did not see the point in that given that  she  accepted  the
    CA's conclusions.   She considered his claim to be  at  risk  from  his
    former  traffickers  because  of  a  'passage  debt'.  She  noted   his
    discrepant evidence about who  he  owed  money  to.  He  had  initially
    claimed that a friend of his in Vietnam had loaned him the money to get
    back to the UK. Then he said that it was  two  characters  in  the  UK.
    Judge Brookfield noted that there was no evidence that either of  these
    gentlemen had asked the Appellant for their money back.   If  they  had
    been unable to find him in the UK it was highly  improbable  that  they
    would be able to find him in Vietnam, with its population  of  over  90
    million people.  It was highly improbable that he would be at any  risk
    from these men. If the Appellant still owed his friend money  he  could
    get a job and pay him back. There was no indication that he was at risk
    from his friend, or his friend's family. The Tribunal further  directed
    itself  to  the  country  background  material  which   indicated   the
    Vietnamese government do pursue and  prosecute  traffickers:  they  are
    therefore willing and able to offer a sufficiency of protection.


10. As to the risk of re-trafficking  by  a  different  gang  the  Tribunal
    rejected the suggestion that the Appellant's history proved him  to  be
    at risk. It had been submitted on his behalf that the circumstances  in
    which he had found  himself  in  the  UK  on  previous  occasions  were
    strongly suggestive of him having been trafficked.  His  socio-economic
    circumstances were such that he would  be  vulnerable  to  exploitation
    again. Judge Brookfield noted that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had been trafficked in 2003 or 2010. She did not accept  that
    he had any particular vulnerability. He is fit and  well  and  able  to
    work. His uncle and girlfriend in Vietnam would support  him.   He  was
    not kidnapped off the street. He himself approached the traffickers and
    asked for assistance in getting to the UK. The solution would be not to
    do that again.

11. The account of the land dispute is  rejected  because  the  Appellant's
    evidence was at odds with that in the expert report and in the US State
    Department Report for 2013.   The  discrepancies  were  such  that  the
    Tribunal was unable to accept that the Appellant had  been  present  at
    said protest.  The Appellant's evidence about summonses he  claimed  to
    have received was inconsistent.  The Appellant had  failed  to  mention
    any of this in his asylum interview. Even  if  it  were  true,  by  the
    Appellant's own account it was not likely that  the  authorities  would
    still be interested in him 4  years  after  the  event:  the  Appellant
    himself had remained in the country for two years  after  the  incident
    and his uncle who is also  said  to  have  protested  has  remained  in
    Vietnam and there was no evidence that he had had any problems.



    The Grounds of Appeal


12. The Appellant  submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  the
    following material respects:


              i) In  declining  to  make  a  Greenwood  declaration.  It  is
                 submitted that fairness required  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                 Judge to declare the Respondent's decision  defective,  and
                 to remit the matter  to  the  Respondent  so  that  a  fair
                 decision could be taken;


             ii) In failing to apply the Secretary of  State's  guidance  on
                 the assessment of trafficking claims;

            iii) In failing to take the  country  background  evidence  into
                 account in making its credibility findings.  This  led  the
                 Tribunal to err in fact and in so doing the outcome of  the
                 appeal was materially affected;

             iv) In failing to address the expert evidence in its assessment
                 of risk on return from the Vietnamese state.



      Discussion and Findings

13. For reasons that will become clear I think it appropriate to deal  with
    the grounds in reverse order.


14. In respect of the alleged risk from the Vietnamese state the submission
    is this. That the Appellant has been deported twice before from the UK.
    He would be returned for a third time on this occasion and as a  victim
    of  trafficking  in  those  circumstances  would  present  "an  unusual
    proposition". Mr Karnik postulates that he would be likely seen by  the
    authorities  as  someone  who  needs  to  be   detained   for   further
    investigation. The difficulty with that submission became  apparent  at
    the hearing before me  when  Mr  Karnik  was  unable  to  identify  any
    objective country background material capable of supporting his thesis.
    The references I was given in the report of country expert Dr  Thi  Lan
    Ahn Tran did not assist, referring as they did to  violence  in  police
    stations and the possibility that the Appellant would be questioned  on
    account of his political activities. This ground is not made out.

15. The alleged error of fact arises from the Tribunal's  analysis  of  the
    Appellant's claimed attendance at an April 2012 protest against a  land
    grab. At paragraph 13 (iii) of her determination the Judge  notes  that
    the Appellant claimed that there were 1,000 protestors to approximately
    2000-4000 police officers in full riot gear; 20  people  were  arrested
    and tortured.  This is contrasted with the information appearing in the
    US State Department Report, which was that 300 protestors clashed  with
    between 1000-2000 local security officers; 20 people were arrested  and
    then released when they agreed to admit guilt. The Tribunal notes  that
    if those figures are to be accepted it is difficult to see  how  anyone
    escaped in the manner described by the Appellant. If they had wanted to
    arrest more people, they would have done. The determination goes on  to
    record Dr Tran's evidence on the incident.  It notes that  neither  the
    USSD or Dr Tran confirm the Appellant's evidence that the dispute arose
    - at least in part - because the land contained a burial ground.

16. The grounds contend that in making its findings the Tribunal failed  to
    have regard to country background material which was highly  consistent
    with the Appellant's version of events, namely a report on  Radio  Free
    Asia on  the  24th  April  2012  which  said  that  approximately  2000
    villagers  stood  against  approximately  3000  police   and   military
    personnel in a seven hour standoff. This showed that there was  not  in
    fact "significant outnumbering" of the villagers and that the  findings
    on plausibility of escape were flawed. It was that document  which  led
    Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam to grant permission to appeal.


17. Before me Mr Mills for the Respondent pointed out that in fact Dr  Tran
    also uses the figures cited by the State Department. At paragraph 28 of
    her report she states that 300 people attended the demonstration on the
    24th April 2012, and that there were 3000 police officers and  security
    personnel called in to  affect  the  evictions.    Dr  Tran  was  being
    advanced as an expert by the Appellant; she referred  to  a  number  of
    sources for her information.   I do  not  accept  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal can be criticised  for  making  an  error  of  fact  when  she
    described the villagers as being "significantly  outnumbered".  It  was
    open to the Judge to find the  Appellant's  account  of  escape  to  be
    inherently implausible, and his account of events  to  be  inconsistent
    with the  country  background  material.  I  am  satisfied  that  Judge
    Brookfield gave numerous cogent reasons for disbelieving  the  evidence
    about the land grab.

18. I now turn to consider the grounds relating to trafficking.

19. The substance  of  ground  (ii)  is  that  the  Tribunal  erred  if  it
    considered that traffickers only grab their victims  off  the  streets.
    Many, if  not  most,  victims  of  trafficking  find  themselves  being
    exploited in entirely different  circumstances,  as  the  Secretary  of
    State's guidance makes clear. The Appellant contends that he agreed  to
    travel to the UK on the understanding that he would  be  working  in  a
    nail bar. It was only when he got here that he understood that  he  was
    in fact to be held in a situation of forced labour. Mr Karnik submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal, in  failing  to  appreciate  this  point,
    erred in its assessment of risk. The Appellant would  be  returning  to
    exactly the same circumstances in Vietnam that he was in when he  left,
    except for the added disadvantage of having the current debt to  repay.



20. I reject this argument.   The Appellant is not facing such dire  socio-
    economic  disadvantages  that  he  would  be  compelled  to   turn   to
    traffickers in order to support himself.  As  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    found, he is healthy, willing and able to work. He has  family  members
    there who would be willing to assist him in getting back on  his  feet.
    Mr Karnik was unable to point to any  country  background  evidence  to
    indicate that a person with the Appellant's characteristics would  have
    no alternative but to allow himself to become exploited again. He could
    avoid traffickers by not  approaching  them  and  asking  for  help  in
    working in Europe.

21. Mr Karnik's principle argument is that the entire decision was vitiated
    by Judge Brookfield's refusal  to  declare  the  Respondent's  decision
    unlawful.  The grounds refer to the Secretary of  State's  guidance  on
    the issue 'Victims of Modern Slavery -  Competent  Authority  Guidance'
    and reliance is placed in particular on the following: "The Home Office
    should not make a negative decision on an asylum claim whilst a  person
    is being considered under the NRM process". In this case the  Appellant
    claimed asylum on the 1st August 2015. Protection was  refused  on  the
    1st March 2016. (I am prepared to accept, for the sake of  Mr  Karnik's
    argument, that the policy cited would in fact apply to  the  Appellant,
    although I note that the NRM referral was not made until the  13th  May
    2016 and so it cannot strictly be said that the decision to refuse  was
    taken whilst he was being considered  "under  the  NRM  process").   Mr
    Karnik submits that had the Secretary of State had the benefit  of  the
    Conclusive Grounds decision,  taken  on  the  25th  October  2016,  her
    decision might have been other than it was. In proceeding to  determine
    the claim in breach of her own policy (if indeed that was the case) the
    Secretary of  State  introduced  an  element  of  unfairness  into  the
    proceedings that could only properly be  remedied  by  starting  again.
    That unfairness further infected the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

22. I was not referred to any authorities on  the  question  of  procedural
    unfairness. Mr Karnik submitted, without  any  legal  support  for  the
    proposition, that it  was  the  procedural  irregularity  itself  which
    rendered the decision unlawful.   I do not agree. In assessing  whether
    there has been a breach of the  requirements  of  fairness  the  proper
    approach is  to  assess  the  decision-making  process,  including  any
    appeal, as a whole: Calvin v  Carr  [1980]  AC  574.    The  unfairness
    complained of here is that the Secretary of State reached her  negative
    findings  on  credibility  without  the  benefit   of   the   Competent
    Authority's view that the Appellant had in fact been exploited in  this
    country.    When the First-tier Tribunal came  to  make  its  findings,
    that information was before it, and indeed was accepted by  it  in  its
    entirety. The appeal was dismissed on grounds that could not  logically
    have been any different even if the  Conclusive  Grounds  decision  had
    been available to, and accepted by, the Respondent. The  findings  were
    that the Appellant has not told the truth about his involvement in  the
    land protests; no risk arises in Vietnam as a result  of  his  'passage
    debt'; he faces no risk of harm by the Vietnamese state; the  Appellant
    can avoid any risk of harm  from  traffickers  in  the  future  by  not
    approaching them and asking for their assistance in illegal  migration.
    Considering the process as  a  whole,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  any
    material unfairness has arisen.


      Decisions


23. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error
    of law and it is upheld.


24. There is an order for anonymity.
                                                   [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                  25th October 2017










