






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02627/2019


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th December 2019               |On 14th January 2020               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     SJ
                         [Anonymity Direction Made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THe Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fitzsimmons instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Carroll on  the  28th  August  2019  whereby  the  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  appellant
    to refuse the appellant's claims based on international protection  and
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. The appellant is a minor. I consider it appropriate  in  the
    circumstances to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer on 28th October May 2019. Thus the case  appeared  before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

         1. It is arguable as contended in the grounds of  appeal  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') failed to engage with  the  submissions
         (as  detailed  in  the  skeleton  argument  before  it)  that   the
         appellant's responses during interview were not  fairly  addressed,
         in light of the appellant's age and mental health.

         2. The grounds of appeal are arguable and permission to  appeal  is
         granted

    Grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal raise a number of matters. In the first  instance
    challenge appears to  be  made  to  the  manner  in  which  the  asylum
    interview was conducted with the appellant seeking to allege  that  the
    individual  who  interviewed  the  appellant  did  not  have   specific
    knowledge of the psychological, emotional and physical development  and
    behaviour of children. It is submitted that before coming to a decision
    the respondent had failed  to  consider  the  appropriate  approach  in
    relation to minors given the age of the appellant and his  maturity  as
    required by paragraph 215 of the handbook.

 6. The judge thereafter in assessing the credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account had failed to take into  account  the  procedural  failures  in
    relation to the appellant, who it is asserted was extremely young.  The
    judge it is alleged has failed to consider the arguments and failed  in
    particular to consider what if  any  weight  should  be  given  to  the
    respondent's assertions of inconsistencies given the failings.

 7. In effect the challenge was being made to the conduct of the interviews
    with the appellant and the approach of the judge to those interviews.

 8. In seeking to develop the arguments reference was made  to  the  policy
    document issued by  the  respondent  titled  Children's  Asylum  Claims
    version 3 and specific reference was made to the welfare  form  and  to
    the conduct of interviews.

 9. Within the decision the judge has noted that the appellant did not give
    evidence before him. The judge thereafter indicates that he takes  full
    account of the appellant's age. Prior to that the judge has  noted  the
    report of Mr T Green, the psychologist.   The  judge  has  specifically
    noted the comments by the psychologist and the formal diagnosis of post-
    traumatic stress disorder. The  psychologist  had  suggested  continued
    engagement of the appellant with the Child and Adolescent Mental Health
    Services team.

10. In considering the approach to be taken  to  the  appellants  evidence,
    which appeared in the interviews and in his  statement  the  judge  had
    clearly assessed and considered the appellant's age and the  report  by
    the psychologist.

11. Criticism is raised of the interview suggesting that  the  guidance  in
    the policy notes had not been  followed.  The  representative  for  the
    respondent suggested that the approach was effectively picking parts of
    the judgement to support a point, whilst ignoring others.

12. The examination of  the  appellant's  account  begins  with  a  witness
    statement which had been submitted by the  representatives.  The  judge
    examined  inconsistencies  within  the  witness  statement.  The  first
    reference to the interview comes at a stage where it has been discussed
    whether the appellant had referred to the weapon he was  being  trained
    with as the machine or as a Kalashnikov. The primary issue with  regard
    to that is that the representatives had written to  the  respondent  to
    indicate that the appellant wanted to say he had been taught how to use
    a Kalashnikov. That is the solicitors writing to the respondent not  an
    issue that was arising within the  interview  itself.  In  the  witness
    statement the inconsistency was explained by reason of the fact that it
    was the Home Office interpreter who had use the term Kalashnikov.

13. The judge points out that this is not correct. The name of  the  weapon
    had arisen from the appellant's solicitors, ostensibly as a  result  of
    instructions that they had. The judge had accurately noted  the  source
    of the evidence and the reason for questioning  whether  the  appellant
    was giving a consistent or credible account. It was a matter  that  the
    judge was entitled to take account of in assessing the  credibility  of
    the appellant's account.

14. Issue is taken with the fact that the judge had referred  to  parts  of
    the Welfare Form for  Unaccompanied  Children.  The  issue  related  to
    whether or not the appellant had had contact with members of his family
    since leaving Afghanistan.  In  the  welfare  form  the  appellant  had
    referred to his mother having remarried since he left  Afghanistan.  No
    issue had been taken with the document being in the Home Office  bundle
    and no effort to seek to correct anything that was wrong within it.  At
    the hearing the judge had sought clarification through counsel and  the
    appellant had challenged that he had ever said that. However the  judge
    went on to point out that the appellant's interview  and  what  he  had
    said to the psychologist were in any event not consistent.  Whilst  the
    solicitors  had  made  detailed  submissions  with  regard  to  matters
    challenged in the interview, no challenge should be made to the welfare
    form being included respondent's bundle or to  what  was  said  in  the
    welfare form. What the appellant said in his statement and what he said
    to his psychologist were in any event inconsistent and  the  judge  was
    entitled to take that into account in assessing the credibility of  the
    appellant.

15. The judge has  gone  on  to  make  other  points  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's credibility. These are  clearly  set  out  in  paragraph  9
    subparagraphs A to G. The judge has  carefully  examined  the  accounts
    given by the appellant both in interview, in his statement and  to  the
    psychologist. The judge has given valid reasons for  finding  that  the
    accounts were inconsistent.

16. In assessing whether or not the account  was  credible  the  judge  has
    taken account of the age of the appellant and  taking  account  of  the
    fact that the appellant as found by the psychologist was suffering from
    post-traumatic stress disorder. However even taking that  into  account
    the judge has given valid reasons for reaching the conclusions that  he
    has.

17. Within the grounds of appeal it is claimed that the  appellant  in  any
    event should be entitled because of the  circumstances  that  exist  in
    Afghanistan to protection  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  he  has  an
    unaccompanied minor. Reference is made within the grounds to  paragraph
    48 of the case of AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00016 (IAC). The conclusion arising it is claimed  from  that  is  that
    there is a bleak picture of the children who  returned  to  Afghanistan
    and do not have family that would care for them. The  judge  has  noted
    that the appellant has referred to an uncle that assisted him to  leave
    Afghanistan and who  also  has  assisted  the  appellant's  mother  and
    brother to move to a safe place.  The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant therefore had family members upon whom he can  rely  to  care
    for him. The judge having concluded that the  appellant  had  not  lost
    contact with his family was satisfied that the appellant should not  be
    considered as an unaccompanied  minor  returning  to  Afghanistan.  The
    judge has given valid reasons  for  finding  that  there  where  family
    members that would be able to meet him and care for him.

18. As a final matter issues have been raised with regard to the fact  that
    the appellant according  to  psychologist  report  should  continue  to
    receive support  and  that  his  mental  health  would  deteriorate  if
    returned to Afghanistan. In part however that  is  dependent  upon  the
    appellant being vulnerable  to  coercion,  manipulation  and  bullying.
    Given that the judge has found that family members would be able to  be
    care for the appellant and that would provide  him  with  accommodation
    and security, the judge has fully justified  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant was  not  entitled  to  international  protection  or  relief
    otherwise under the ECHR.

19. For the reasons for set out I find that there is no error of law in the
    decision and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

20. Notice of Decision

21. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.





Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 13th January 2020





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings






Signed      Date 13th January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

