
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02006/2015


                               IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 July 2017                              |On 21 August 2017              |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
                                     W W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Peters, instructed by Tim McQuoid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a  citizen  of  China,  appeals  with  permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly, promulgated
    on 30 June 2016, dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent made on 8 October 2015 to remove him from the United Kingdom
    consequent upon refusal of his asylum claim.

 2. The applicant's case is that he is a follower of Falun Gong  and  would
    be at risk on return because of that.  He was introduced to Falun  Gong
    by a friend [ML].   The  appellant  worked  in  a  shop  in  which  the
    documents were produced on the computer [Q43,  Q44].   The  police  had
    arrested [ML] and brought him to  the  shop  where  he  identified  the
    appellant as a person who worked there.  He  was  then  arrested,  ill-
    treated but later released.

 3. The appellant made arrangements  to  leave  China  by  applying  for  a
    student visa which was granted.  He then  left  and  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom where he claimed asylum in April 2015.

 4.  The  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a   Falun   Gong
    practitioner but did not accept  that  he  had  been  detained  by  the
    Chinese authorities or that he had been involved in the  production  of
    leaflets or documents for Falun Gong.  The respondent  did  not  accept
    that the appellant would be at risk on  return  relying  on  LL  (Falun
    Gong, Convention reason, risk) China CG [2005] UKAIT 00122.

 5. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept the  appellant's
    claim, considering it was false [38].  In particular, he did not accept
    the appellant's account of him coming to the adverse attention  of  the
    authorities for the production of leaflets, nor did he accept that  the
    appellant had been arrested and detained.  He did not accept either the
    reliability of evidence produced to show that the  Chinese  police  had
    seized a computer [37].

 6. At [39] the judge addressed the situation of the risk of the  appellant
    on return on the basis of the acceptance alone that he is a Falun  Gong
    practitioner having "not believed the index incident".   He  considered
    that a large majority of those who practise Falun Gong with  discretion
    did not experience problems with the authorities concluding that if the
    appellant were returned to China [42] his involvement with  Falun  Gong
    would be discreet and would not place him at risk from the authorities,
    such discretion not being out of fear of what  might  happen  but  from
    choice and consistent with his behaviour whilst here where there was no
    fear.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      i) in misunderstanding and misinterpreting  the  evidence  about  what
         [ML] had done and said in the shop, wrongly  concluding  that  [ML]
         was betraying him, the evidence being only that [ML] had identified
         him as an employee in the shop, this mistaken fact amounting to  an
         error of law;

     ii) in his assessment of the reasons given by  the  appellant  for  his
         delay in claiming asylum, taking account of irrelevant matters  and
         failing properly to address  the  main  explanation  given  by  the
         appellant;

    iii) in failing to consider the main element of claim  namely  that  the
         appellant was arrested on suspicion of  production  of  Falun  Gong
         printed materials, conduct the judge has  accepted  was  likely  to
         attract significant sanctions from the authorities [25].

 8. On 26 August 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission.

The Hearing

 9. Mr Peters, for the applicant, submitted that the applicant would,  even
    on the facts as found by the judge, be at risk on  return  as  a  Falun
    Gong practitioner.  He submitted that in  light  of  MSM  (journalists;
    political opinion; risk) Somalia [2015] UKUT  00251  (IAC),  upheld  on
    appeal to the Court of Appeal, and the decision of the  European  Court
    of Justice C-199/12, X, Y and Z, the  decision  of  HJ  (Iran)  v  SSHD
    [2010] UKSC 31.  In particular he drew attention to the fact  that  the
    Court of Justice had rejected the abstention  argument,  that  is  that
    essentially, if  the  applicant  is  required  to  abstain  from  doing
    something that is not  a  factor  which  can  properly  be  taken  into
    account.  The appellant cannot be required to modify his behaviour.

10. Mr Peters submitted also that the judge had erred  in  the  finding  of
    fact the appellant's friend had betrayed him.

11. Mr McVeety submitted that on the face of this case  the  appellant  had
    been found not likely to carry out his beliefs and accordingly that  he
    would not be abstaining from anything given that he had not done so  in
    the first place.  He submitted also that the issue whether or  not  the
    applicant had been betrayed or not was simply semantics,  when  viewing
    the evidence as a whole it was clear that [ML] had gone to the shop and
    had not said that he did not know the appellant but had identified  him
    as somebody who worked there.

    Discussion

12. I do not consider that the judge erred in stating at  [28]  this  would
    suggest his friend  was  betraying  him.   I  note  what  was  said  in
    interview in that the applicant has consistently maintained that  there
    was an agreement between him and [ML] [28] that they would not, whoever
    was arrested, admit that the other one was practising Falun Gong.   The
    appellant also said that it was [ML] who had told him  to  produce  the
    cards.  The appellant also said when describing the incident that  five
    people came to the shop, told the customers to  leave  and  then  three
    people came including [ML].  The person in charge asked  [ML]  "was  it
    here" and he said "yes".  He was then asked if he  knew  the  appellant
    and he said yes.  He is one of the staff here.

13. Whilst this might not have been identifying the appellant  as  somebody
    practising Falun Gong, it was clearly identifying him as a  person  who
    worked in the shop where it appeared that he had said the material  was
    produced.  I am not satisfied in the circumstances that this finding by
    the judge is contrary to the evidence.  On the contrary, the fact  that
    [ML] identified the appellant and said that he knew him and he was  one
    of the staff working in the shop  which  he  had  said  was  where  the
    leaflets were produced, is very clearly identifying him as a  potential
    person of interest to the authorities.

14. Whilst Mr Peters did not address me directly on the  other  credibility
    findings, they are still within the grounds of appeal  and  I  consider
    that I should address them.

15. In interview, at Q.88 the appellant was asked why he  had  not  claimed
    asylum until 2015.  He said that when he first arrived he did not speak
    English, that people had told him that if he claimed asylum he needed a
    solicitor and he could  not  afford  one  and  it  was  only  when  his
    girlfriend had applied for asylum he found out there was legal aid  and
    he applied.  Asked why, if his girlfriend had applied on 9  July  2014,
    he did not claim sooner, he said that by then he had a daughter and  by
    then she had told him about legal aid.  There is  no  mention  here  of
    what he later said in his witness statement.

16. For these reasons, I  consider  that  there  is  no  substance  in  the
    challenges to the judge's findings of fact or as to credibility.

17. With regard to the risk on return to China.  I accept that  it  is  now
    some twelve years since country guidance in LL was handed  down  but  I
    bear in mind also that LW (China) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  519  is  more
    recent and approved LL.  The reality is that the applicant has  nothing
    to abstain from.  I do not consider that X, Y  and  Z  is  inconsistent
    with HJ (Iran) - see LC Albania v SSHD [2017] EWCA  CIv  351  at  [51].
    There is simply no basis for the submission  that  simply  by  being  a
    member of Falun Gong he would  be  at  risk.   Accordingly,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error of law and I uphold it.


SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. I maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal


Signed                                  Date  18 August 2017

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
