
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02732/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 22nd February 2019              |On 18th March 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     GS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
         Tribunal Sorrell dismissing an appeal on protection and human
         rights grounds.

      2. The appellant is a national of Egypt.  His son, now aged nineteen,
         is a dependant on his appeal.  The appellant and his son maintain
         that in June 2016 they were each seriously assaulted by the
         security forces after entering El Tahrir Square when a protest was
         taking place.  The appellant was detained and released subject to
         threats of further harm to him and his family if he did not provide
         information about the Muslim Brotherhood.  In addition, the
         appellant's son claims to be at risk of harm on the basis of his
         sexuality.

      3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not find the evidence on
         which the protection claim was based to be credible.  So far as the
         appellant's son was concerned, she considered that it was for him
         to seek protection on the grounds of his sexuality by making a
         claim on his own account.

      4. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on only
         one ground, which was that the judge had arguably erred by not
         properly considering the issue of the appellant's son's sexuality
         and not taking this into account in making an Article 8 assessment
         for the appellant.  The application was renewed before the Upper
         Tribunal, which granted permission on the remaining grounds in the
         application.  These included whether the judge gave proper
         consideration to the appellants as vulnerable witnesses, whether
         the judge erred in her consideration of expert reports, including
         medico-legal reports, and whether the judge erred in finding
         aspects of the evidence for the appellant implausible.

      5. At the hearing before me the parties were agreed that the appeal
         should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.
         Mr Matthews explained that there were two issues arising from the
         judge's decision which were of particular concern to the
         respondent.  The first of these was that the judge described the
         medico-legal reports for the appellant and his son as not referring
         to the Istanbul Protocol, but this was incorrect.  The second was
         the lack of findings relating to the sexuality of the appellant's
         son.

      6. I indicated that I would remit the appeal with the consent of the
         parties.  In doing so, however, I drew the attention of the parties
         to paragraph 38 of the judge's decision, where she stated that the
         medico-legal reports had been prepared by doctors who were not
         shown medical correspondence from a consultant orthopaedic surgeon
         in the UK appearing to relate to the appellants' son.  I suggested
         that if the judge's observation as to this alleged omission was
         correct, then it ought to be addressed before any further hearing.

      7. I am satisfied that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in
         law for the reasons high-lighted by Mr Matthews in his submission
         and the decision should be set aside.  The errors affect the
         credibility findings made by the First-tier Tribunal.  In view of
         the extent of the fact-finding required, in accordance with
         paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement, the appeal is remitted
         to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before a differently
         constituted Tribunal with no findings preserved.



Conclusions

      8. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      9. The decision is set aside.

     10. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing
         before a differently constituted Tribunal with no findings
         preserved.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  In order
to preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is decided, I
consider that such a direction should be made in the following terms.
Unless or until a court or tribunal directs otherwise, no report of these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant or any
member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and the
respondent.  Failure to comply with the direction may give rise to contempt
of court proceedings.


M E Deans   13th March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
