
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02153/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th July 2019                    |On 2nd August 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     NQ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Hopkinson, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  refer  to  him.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Hanlon) (hereinafter referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who, in a determination promulgated on  the  17th  April  2019,
    dismissed his claim for protection.

The factual background:

 3. The background to the Appellant's protection claim is set  out  in  the
    determination of the FtTJ at  paragraphs  14-15  and  in  the  decision
    letter of the Secretary of State issued on 20th February 2019.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Iraq. He entered the United  Kingdom  on
    16 August 2018 and made an application for asylum  and/or  humanitarian
    protection. His claim was based on his assertion that he was at risk on
    return to Iraq as a result of political opinion imputed to him and that
    he had received threats from the KDP and  from  his  wife's  family  in
    Iraq.

 5. The appellant claimed that his problems began on 13 November 2017  when
    working at a company based in Erbil. He also been working as  a  nurse.
    On that day, he  was  requested  by  the  company  to  register  a  car
    purchased by his boss's wife and get the number plate. He attended  the
    traffic police to do this but there were  some  issues  at  the  police
    station because by another person jumping the queue. A  dispute  ensued
    between the appellant  and  members  of  staff  and  as  the  appellant
    attempted to leave, he was grabbed by three police officers and  beaten
    up by them. The appellant went to hospital and following receipt  of  a
    medical report made a police report against the treatment he received.

 6. Two days later police officers in the KDP came his place  of  work  and
    told him that if he carried on with the complaint made, they would kill
    him. He told them that he would not pursue it any further but following
    this, he believed his name was blacklisted. Incident arose at his place
    of business and a proposed transfer of part of the  business  into  his
    name did not go ahead. The KDP began interfering in his life  in  every
    way. It was told that he had to work full-time as a nurse and when  the
    appellant refused to do so he ended leaving his job.  He  believed  the
    KDP were responsible these problems.

 7. The second limb of his  claim  related  to  problems  with  his  wife's
    family. He claimed to have received threats from his wife's family  due
    to problems in his marriage. He claimed that as they were  not  getting
    on, he sent his wife to her parents' home in about December 2017.  They
    subsequently reconciled and that the  problems  continued  even  though
    they were living under the same roof at the  time  the  appellant  left
    Iraq. It was claimed that as a result  of  arguments  with  his  wife's
    family, her brother had threatened to kill him. They had links  to  the
    KDP and were "powerful people".

 8. In a decision letter dated 20th February 2019  the  Respondent  refused
    his claim for asylum. It was accepted that he was a  national  of  Iraq
    and of Kurdish ethnicity. It was not accepted that as  a  result  of  a
    complaint  made  against  traffic  officers  that  the  appellant   was
    assaulted or that he came to the attention of the KDP.  The  respondent
    considered that the appellant's account lacked detail and that  he  had
    provided inconsistent  accounts  of  what  occurred  when  he  made  as
    complaint and thus his credibility was damaged. The appellant  had  not
    adequately explained how problems at work were directly linked  to  the
    KDP or how problems at work were directly linked to that party  or  his
    complaint against the police.

 9. The appellant  provided  documents  in  support  however  applying  the
    decision in Tanveer Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439,  the  respondent  gave
    reasons why those documents were not reliable.

10. Furthermore, it was not accepted that he had undergone threats from his
    wife's  family.  The  respondent  considered  that  he   had   provided
    inconsistent accounts of how  his  problems  started  with  his  wife's
    family, and given an inconsistent account of what house the family were
    currently living in nor was it accepted that having reconciled with his
    wife and living without in the same house before he left Iraq, that  it
    was credible that the family would wish to kill  him  when  he  had  no
    intention of  taking  the  house  from  his  wife.  He  had  failed  to
    demonstrate why his wife's family would want to kill him given that she
    is currently in possession of the family home which he had claimed they
    had threatened him about.

11. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal against that decision came before the FtTJ on the 5th April 2019
    and in the decision promulgated on  17th  April  2019  his  appeal  was
    dismissed.

12.  The judge set out  his  findings  of  fact  at  paragraphs  19-38.  He
    identified the primary matters in  issue  as  whether  the  appellant's
    claimed issues with the traffic police resulted in him  coming  to  the
    adverse attention of the KDP and threats from  his  wife's  family.  In
    respect of the documentary evidence provided, the judge gave reasons at
    paragraphs 24 - 26 as to  why  the  documents,  which  consisted  of  a
    medical report, police report and letter of complaint were not reliable
    documents. At paragraphs 27 - 37 the FtTJ gave reasons why he found his
    account to be both inconsistent and implausible. He found  the  account
    given of being beaten up  by  the  police  was  inconsistent  with  the
    contents of the medical report. As  to  the  claim  that  he  had  been
    blacklisted, the judge did not accept the evidence in respect  of  this
    claim. In particular, he had referred to the failure  of  his  employer
    and close friend of putting the business in his name. The appellant not
    given any explanation of why that would be the case or why would be  as
    a result of any intervention on the part of the KDP.  No  reasons  were
    given as to why the electricity was cut-off and ongoing problems caused
    as a result of any intervention by the KDP. Furthermore, the  appellant
    did not put any explanation forward as to why problems he  had  at  the
    hospital were attributable to the KDP.

13. As to the account given of difficulties  experienced  with  his  wife's
    family, the judge rejected that for the reasons given at paragraphs  31
    - 37. The FtTJ found that his account was inconsistent and there was  a
    "degree of vagueness". He claimed that he and his wife were not getting
    on and as a result he sent her  to  her  parent's  home  but  that  was
    inconsistent with the position at the date he left Iraq  in  June  2018
    when they were reconciled living under the same roof.  In  his  witness
    statement, he had not explained what the problems were. In the evidence
    given,  he  stated  that  his  in-laws  interfered  in   their   lives.
    Notwithstanding the account given by the appellant  that  he  took  his
    wife to her parents'  home  and  stated  that  he  did  not  like  them
    interfering with his lives and his  father-in-law  threatened  to  kill
    him, four months later the appellant's wife moved  back  to  live  with
    him. The judge considered that the appellant's account that his  family
    in-laws were threatening to kill him was undermined by  the  fact  that
    the threats are being made in early 2018 but he had  remained  unharmed
    in Iraq until he left in June 2018. Furthermore, his wife  returned  to
    reside with him four months after the alleged dispute with her family.

14. The judge considered the appellant's account as a  result  of  problems
    with the KDP he wanted to move from Erbil, but his wife would not agree
    to do it. His account was that he moved to another house  in  the  same
    area. The judge considered that the fact that the appellant  had  moved
    from one area to another in the  same  area  did  not  explain  how  he
    expected or hoped that such a move would  stop  the  problems  that  he
    claimed he had with the KDP. Furthermore, his oral evidence was that he
    stated it was not possible to get a house or move  houses  without  the
    approval of the KDP who would provide a letter from the local  official
    of the party to the security forces to obtain  a  house  move.  In  the
    light of the appellant's claim that he was blacklisted by the  KDP  and
    they were attempting to interfere with all aspects  of  his  life,  the
    fact that the appellant was able to  move  was  inconsistent  with  his
    account that he was blacklisted by the KDP (see [32]). At paragraph 33,
    the judge found that  the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated  that  his
    problems with employment at the  hospital  were  as  a  result  of  the
    intervention of the KDP, and at [34] the  judge  rejected  his  account
    that his wife had now made a complaint against him. At [35]  the  judge
    took into account that in his screening interview  the  appellant  only
    referred to being in fear of the government as a result of an  incident
    in November 2017 and that no reference had been made as to any problems
    with his wife's family in Iraq. At [36] there was no other evidence  to
    support his claim that his family  relatives  worked  in  the  security
    services and this was inconsistent with his account that  in  light  of
    the problems that he claimed to have had with the KDP and that  he  had
    not attempted to obtain the protection from any influential  relatives.
    At [37], the FtTJ made a finding under section 8  and  the  failure  to
    make a claim in a safe country.

15. The judge therefore was not satisfied that the appellant  had  given  a
    consistent and credible account and had therefore failed to demonstrate
    that he had well-founded fear of persecution on  return  to  Iraq.  The
    appellant did not raise any Article 8 issues (see [41]).

16. As the feasibility of return to Iraq, the judge at [42] relied upon his
    findings of fact and that as an Iraqi national Kurdish  ethnicity  from
    Erbil who continued to have contact with his family and  on  the  basis
    that his Iraqi passport been sent to his brother, the judge found  that
    it will be possible for the appellant to obtain a replacement CSID card
    if unable to obtain the original from his family. At [43] did not  find
    that the appellant could rely  in  the  alternative  on  the  grant  of
    humanitarian protection. He therefore dismissed the appeal.

17. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and granted  and  on  the
    30th May 2019 by FtTJ Swaney.

18. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr  Holmes,
    who appeared before the FtTJ and had settled  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    appeared on behalf of the appellant and Ms Hopkinson, senior presenting
    officer, appeared on behalf of the respondent.

19. I am grateful for  the  submissions  heard  from  Mr  Holmes  and  Miss
    Hopkinson on the issues that arise in the grounds advanced on behalf of
    the appellant. I confirm that I have considered  those  submissions  in
    accordance with the decision of the FtTJ and the grounds which had been
    filed before the Upper Tribunal. I further confirm that  I  have  given
    full consideration to those submissions  which  I  have  heard,  and  I
    intend to incorporate those submissions into my analysis of the grounds
    that are relied upon by the appellant.

Ground (a):

20. It is submitted that the judge made an error of law by making  mistakes
    of fact. At paragraph 34 of the decision, the judge made  reference  to
    the appellant having failed  to  mention  the  making  of  a  complaint
    against him at any point prior to the  hearing.  However,  this  was  a
    straightforward mistake of fact when seen in the light of his answer to
    question 62 of the asylum interview and also question 75. Thus  it  was
    submitted that the FtTJ's finding that he had not  previously  referred
    to a complaint was wrong.

21. The second mistake of fact related to paragraph 33 of his decision.  Mr
    Holmes submitted that the appellant's account  made  reference  to  him
    being required to obtain unpaid leave  and  when  interviewed  he  made
    reference to the length of that leave being between six months and five
    years. However, the judge misread the reference to that at question 146
    of his interview to the effect that the appellant was stating  that  it
    took between six months and five  years  for  an  individual  to  given
    permission to take unpaid leave from his work. In fact,  the  appellant
    said nothing about permission to obtain leave and had only referred  to
    the potential duration of any unpaid leave. This mistake  of  fact  was
    then  used  against  the  appellant  to  make  an  adverse  credibility
    assessment.

22. Miss Hopkinson submitted there was no error of fact and that a  careful
    reading of the determination in the light of his  account  demonstrated
    that the appellant had not raised the complaint on  the  factual  basis
    now claimed and that this was  what  the  judge  was  referring  to  at
    paragraph 34 his decision. As to the second error, she  submitted  that
    there may have been a slight misinterpretation of the answer  but  that
    it was not material because it did not  appear  to  form  part  of  the
    credibility assessment of the appellant. At  paragraph  33,  the  point
    made by the judge  was  that  he  was  required  to  obtain  permission
    notwithstanding  the  fact  that  he  been  blacklisted  by  the   KDP,
    permission was given in June only two months after the request and that
    this did not indicate any interference by the KDP  in  the  appellant's
    life.

23. I have carefully considered the decision of the FtTJ in  the  light  of
    those submissions, but I have reached the conclusion that there  is  no
    error of law demonstrated in the FtTJ's decision based on  any  mistake
    of fact.

24. The grounds assert that the judge made a mistake of fact in his finding
    of credibility at [34] by reference  to  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    interview. It  is  asserted  that  where  the  judge  stated  that  the
    appellant had not previously referred to a complaint being made by  his
    wife at paragraph 34, either in his witness statement or interview that
    this was incorrect as the appellant referred  to  a  complaint  in  his
    interview at questions 62 and question 75.

25. The decision made by the judge should be read in its  entirety  and  in
    the context of the  factual  claim  asserted  by  him.  Similarly,  the
    answers given in interview also needs to be read in context.

26. The relevant questions and answers in the interview begin with question
    61 where the interviewer sought to establish why the appellant's wife's
    family would wish to kill him when his wife and children had possession
    of the home and the appellant had not taken it from them. The appellant
    replied, "I had problem with my wife in the past and they interfered in
    our private life." At question 62, the interviewer then made  reference
    to the appellant's witness statement that notwithstanding this, he  had
    stated both he  and  his  wife  were  still  living  together  and  had
    reconciled and had their house in Erbil. He was asked  why  the  family
    would want to kill him if he had not taken the  house  from  them?  The
    appellant  replied,  "my  wife's  sister  husband  told  me  that  they
    complaint against me to take off the house off me, but I have all  text
    messages and voice messages in my messenger". At question  63,  he  was
    asked, "but if they have the house and you are unable to take  it  from
    them, can you tell me why the brothers want to kill you? The  appellant
    responded "I don't know, what shall I say, I was able to sell the house
    while I was there, before I leave and come here, I was  thinking  badly
    with them stop I tried and sent the  text  messages  my  wife  took  my
    children but she did not let them talk to me".

27. The following questions and replies made  reference  to  the  house  in
    Erbil and the appellants claim that he sold the house and  then  bought
    another in the same area and that his wife and children lived  in  that
    house. Against that background it was  suggested  to  him  that  if  he
    returned and left his wife in possession of the house,  it  would  have
    solved the problems with her  relatives.  The  appellant  responded  at
    question 70 stating that he had problems a year ago when  he  spoke  to
    his in-laws and told them that he didn't want them  to  interfere  with
    his life. He said that he was insulted in front of his  wife  and  they
    threatened him and that he said he was going to divorce  his  wife  and
    they responded that if he  did  so  they  would  kill  him.  Again  the
    interviewer at question 71  referred  to  the  appellant's  failure  to
    answer the question that had previously been put to him  about  leaving
    his wife in possession of the house  and  that  this  would  solve  his
    problems. The appellant's responses at questions 71 onwards were to the
    effect that  the  family  would  not  leave  him  alone  but  that  the
    appellant, when questioned as to what it was they wanted from him could
    not give an answer save for they were interfering with his private life
    (see question and answer to Q73).

28. When he was asked what the family wanted from him at question  74,  the
    appellant replied "for instance the houses registered in my name,  they
    are saying why not put the house in your wife's name, so what is to  do
    with them. Sometimes when they are visiting us, asking me why  you  are
    not buying this thing, it is nothing to do with them this is my private
    life. For instance tried to sell my house why my brother-in-law telling
    me you are not allowed to sell the house, the house is mine."

29.  The interviewer then asked a question 75 "so if they have  such  power
    and influence you say, why have they not simply had the  house  put  in
    your wife's name anyway? The appellant replied "they complaint  against
    me now. I asked them to send a complaint to me, but they  haven't  sent
    yet.  I have these text messages on my mobile  which  was  sent  by  my
    wife's sister's husband"

30. It is plain from reading the interview responses as set out above  that
    the appellant was giving an account concerning the family relatives and
    his answer at question 62 refers to his  wife's  sister's  husband  had
    told him that "they complained against me to take off the house of me."
    When referring to "they" the appellant  was  referring  to  the  wife's
    family members. When the interviewer sought to clarify why her brothers
    or other family members would want to kill him if they have the  house,
    the appellant stated, "I don't know".

31. The thrust of the questions  and  answers  relate  to  the  appellant's
    concerns about the house. He does not identify  in  those  answers  any
    complaint made other than "they complaint (sic) against me to take  off
    the house." The use of the word "they" does not refer to his  wife  and
    is in the context of the house. Question 75 is in a  similar  vein  and
    refers to the house. When seen in the context of paragraph  34  of  the
    FtTJ's decision, it is plain that there is  no  mistake  of  fact.  The
    factual circumstances about the complaint made in oral evidence and set
    out at paragraph 34 was based on a completely different factual  matrix
    - it was not about the house or anyone who  could  be  referred  to  as
    "they" but a specific assertion that it was his wife as the person  who
    had made a specific complaint via his proxy solicitor and the complaint
    was particularised in the appellant's oral evidence that she stated  he
    had taken 7 million Iraqi dinars from her.

32. The judge was completely right to state that  this  complaint  was  not
    referred to in either the witness statement or the  appellant's  asylum
    interview. There is no reference in the interview  to  the  appellant's
    wife making a specific complaint of him taking 7  million  dinars  from
    her. Furthermore, the appellant accepted in his evidence  that  he  had
    not referred to it (meaning its detail) because he had not received the
    evidence. At paragraph 34 the judge properly referred  to  his  account
    and that the appellant had not previously  referred  to  any  complaint
    having been made by his wife and that in his evidence at  the  tribunal
    he stated that he did not know who the complaint had been made to.  The
    judge therefore found that the vagueness of the appellant's response in
    his oral evidence that he stated that he didn't know who the  complaint
    was made  to,  alongside  the  failure  to  refer  to  this  particular
    complaint, led the judge to make an  adverse  credibility  finding.  He
    stated "if the appellant had been aware that a complaint had been  made
    by his wife he would know to whom such a complaint to be made  and  the
    fact that no previous reference to be made the complaint  by  his  wife
    casts doubt upon the plausibility of the appellant's  account  in  that
    respect."

33. I am therefore satisfied that there is no mistake of fact  is  asserted
    on behalf of the appellant. There were also a number of  other  adverse
    findings made in relation to his claimed problems with  his  family  at
    paragraphs 35 and 36.

34. I am further satisfied that  there  is  no  mistake  of  fact  made  at
    paragraph 33 of the decision that  was  material  to  the  outcome.  At
    paragraph 33, the FtTJ makes reference to the appellant's interview  at
    question 146. Earlier questions at questions 144 and 145 refer  to  the
    problems the appellant was having in attending  his  employment  having
    moved areas. He had told his employers that he could not  attend  every
    day and that he would therefore request leave. The type  of  leave  was
    then clarified at question 146 and that in April he told them  that  he
    should continue for one day until he was granted leave  without  salary
    from the government. He stated, "you can't request this leave and  that
    could be between six months and five years." When asked  what  happened
    thereafter, at question 147, he clarified that the authorities did  not
    give him permission until June and that they had accepted  his  request
    in June (question 148). The appellant was therefore referring to unpaid
    leave. The grounds therefore submit that his reference to 6 months to 5
    years meant the duration of any unpaid leave and that the appellant had
    not said anything about the length of time  for  permission  to  obtain
    leave.

35.  However when the interview responses are read together,  even  if  the
    appellant was referring to the length of time as to unpaid leave (there
    is some ambiguity in his response in any event), it  was  open  to  the
    judge to find the when set against the appellant's claim  that  he  was
    blacklisted by the KDP  and  any  change  of  employment  required  the
    government   to  give  permission,  it  took  only  two  months  before
    permission was given and therefore the fact that permission  was  given
    did not indicate adverse interference by the KDP. Therefore  the  point
    is still one that was properly made and there is no error of fact which
    would be material to the outcome given that conclusion at paragraph 33.
    The ground also ignores the other adverse findings made  by  the  judge
    when considering the appellant's claim.

Ground (b):

36. It is submitted that the judge erred in law  at  paragraph  29  of  the
    decision by speculating upon what medical evidence should have shown as
    a  result  of  the  mistreatment  that  the  appellant   suffered.   In
    particular, Mr Holmes identified that the determination  set  out  that
    the injury described by the appellant was "somewhat  inconsistent  with
    having been beaten up by three police officers". He submits that  there
    was no medical opinion or any other basis to support  that  opinion  on
    this issue and that the appellant described no injuries as part of  his
    account that would lead to any particular identifiable injury. Thus  Mr
    Holmes submitted this was  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's
    case.

37. Ms  Hopkinson  submitted  the  quoted  passage  relied  upon  had  been
    shortened and that the paragraph should be read in its entirety and the
    judge had stated that the only injury referred to in the report was  to
    a bump on the head which was inconsistent with an account given by  him
    of being beaten by three men. The judge further made reference  to  the
    appellant's account that he had been  punched  to  his  torso  and  had
    suffered dizziness but none of that had been set  out  in  the  medical
    report. The she submitted overall it was open to the judge to reach the
    conclusion that the evidence of the injuries sustained was inconsistent
    with the medical report and was therefore not accepted.

38. I am satisfied that it has not been demonstrated that the  judge  erred
    in law in reaching his findings at paragraph 29. In that paragraph, the
    judge makes reference to the witness statement of the appellant and his
    factual account that he was beaten up  by  three  police  officers  and
    later went to the  accident  and  emergency  department  of  the  local
    hospital. The judge made reference to the only injury being referred to
    in the witness statement as a "bump on the head" which  he  stated  was
    "somewhat inconsistent with having been beaten up by three  men."  This
    was  a  reasonable  inference  drawn  from  the  appellant's   account.
    Furthermore, I do not consider that this was speculation  on  his  part
    when it is read with the remainder of paragraph 29. It was wholly  open
    to the judge to consider the appellant's oral evidence as to the nature
    of the beating and the injuries he stated he received in the context of
    the contents of the report which only referred to a "bump on the head".
    The judge recorded his evidence at paragraph 29 which was that  at  the
    hearing in oral evidence he stated that he was  punched  in  the  upper
    part of his torso and that  when  he  attended  the  hospital,  he  was
    feeling dizzy. The judge then stated there  was  no  reference  to  any
    dizziness or injury to the torso  either  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement when giving his account and nor was there any specific injury
    referred to in  the  medical  report  beyond  a  "bump  on  the  head."
    Therefore the judge concluded that the evidence concerning the injuries
    was not consistent.  Those findings were reasonably open to  the  judge
    to make on the evidence as a whole.

Ground (c):

39. It is submitted that the judge erred in law by speculating at paragraph
    25 of his decision as to the nature of police reports in  Iraq.  It  is
    submitted that the judge questioned why  the  report  provided  by  the
    appellant was in "manuscript" and not  typed.  However,  there  was  no
    evidence before the judge to suggest that they  should  appear  in  any
    other way that they did, nor they should appear in any particular form.
    Mr Holmes in his oral  submissions  made  reference  to  accounts  from
    complaints being routinely taken by hand in the United Kingdom and that
    to rely on any assumption as to what the practice was in  Iraq  was  an
    unsafe basis upon which to criticise the appellant's evidence.

40. Ms Hopkinson submitted that the judge had made no error of law and  had
    properly considered the documents in the  light  of  their  format  and
    their contents.

41. I do not find that there is any error of law  identified  at  paragraph
    25. The judge gave adequate and  sustainable  reasons  as  to  why  the
    documentary  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  was  not  reliable
    evidence upon which he could place any significant weight at paragraphs
    24 - 27. The judge properly directed himself to  the  burden  of  proof
    upon the appellant to establish that the documents are reliable in  the
    context of the decision of Tanveer Ahmed (as cited) at paragraph 24. No
    argument has been advanced that the judge  made  any  inaccurate  self-
    direction in law. As stated, what was required was an appraisal of  the
    documents in the light of the evidence about  its  nature,  provenance,
    timing and relevant background evidence in the light of all  the  other
    evidence in the case. At [24] the judge analysed the  medical  document
    and at [25] the judge undertook an analysis of the other documents (the
    police report and letter of complaint). The grounds refer only to  part
    of the analysis undertaken by the judge in which he  stated  that  both
    the police statement and the complaint to the court were in  manuscript
    rather than type written. However, the  judge  gave  other  sustainable
    reasons as to why  he  did  not  attach  significant  weight  to  them.
    Firstly, in respect of the documents being in  manuscript  rather  than
    type written, he stated that had been given no explanation  as  to  why
    the  original  documents  would  be  in  manuscript  rather  than  type
    documents. He stated that the complaint letter was not on any  form  of
    letter headed paper but there was a stamp. He  took  into  account  the
    appellant evidence that there was a judicial room and a police  station
    in every accident and emergency department and that when asked why  the
    stamp appeared to refer to a Court of  Appeal,  his  evidence  was  the
    judge present at the hospital belonged to the police  Court  of  Appeal
    and they had their own seal. The judge observed  that  so  far  as  the
    complaint to the court was concerned, again it was on plain paper  with
    what appeared to be the same seal as appeared on the police  statement.
    He also took into account that the documents  had  been  produced  four
    months after he had arrived in the United Kingdom.

42. In my judgement, the grounds seek to rely on only part of the reasoning
    and fails to take into account the analysis as a whole as undertaken by
    the judge.

Ground (d):

43. It is further submitted the appellant  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    decision at  paragraph  43  by  going  behind  the  applicable  country
    guidance on Iraq without any invitation to do so  by  either  party  or
    that the scope of the judge's departure was not clear.

44. Mr Holmes was asked to explain the basis  of  that  submission  in  the
    light of the appellant's place of residence and that in  the  light  of
    the country guidance, it was not a contested area. He acknowledged that
    the appellant's place of residence was not in a contested area but that
    the ground  identified  that  the  FtTJ  generally  adopted  the  wrong
    approach by taking an issue that no one had invited him to undertake on
    Article 15 (c).

45. Ms Hopkinson submitted that there was no error of law  given  that  the
    appellant was from Erbil and the  judge  was  not  departing  from  the
    country guidance and that in effect the judge  was  trying  to  clarify
    that there was no Article (15)(c ) risk in the IKR and  that  it  could
    not undermine the judge's overall decision.

46. I am not  satisfied  that  there  is  any  proper  basis  to  challenge
    paragraph 43 as the written grounds assert in the light of the place of
    residence of the appellant which was in Erbil. There  is  no  challenge
    made to paragraph 42 whereby the judge considered  the  feasibility  of
    the appellant's return  to  Iraq  and  gave  adequate  and  sustainable
    reasons by reference to the applicable country guidance that  he  would
    be able to obtain the necessary documentation to travel back  to  Iraq.
    Paragraph 43 referred to Article 15 (c) and made reference to the issue
    of contested areas. I would agree that the paragraph  appears  slightly
    muddled but the conclusion reached at the end  of  the  paragraph  that
    there is no real risk of indiscriminate violence in the appellants area
    of origin or within the KR I generally that would meet the threshold of
    article 15 (c )  is consistent with the CG. Mr Holmes accepted that the
    appellant's home area was not in a contested area.

47. In  summary,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ
    demonstrates the making of an error on a point of law. The decision  to
    dismiss the appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

48. The decision of the FtTJ did not involve the making of an  error  on  a
    point of law; the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 25/7/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

