
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02235/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 September 2019                 |On 23 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     NN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bradley, AJ Bradley & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an order for anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  disclosure  of  any
    matter that may lead to the identification of the appellant  and  other
    parties  to  these  proceedings.   Any  breach  may  lead  to  contempt
    proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal by a national of Vietnam who was born in  1998.   She
    has a partner TP, who is also Vietnamese.  They have a daughter born in
    this country in April 2019. None of the family members as lawful status
    in the UK.

 2. The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Agnew who for reasons given in  her  decision
    dated 13  June  2019  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State refusing the appellant's  protection
    and human rights claim  for  reasons  given  in  a  decision  dated  25
    February 2019.  The claim had been made in August 2018 on the basis  of
    the appellant's political opinion, her religion, and  membership  of  a
    particular social group as a victim of trafficking.

 3. As to her immigration history, the appellant's case is  that  she  left
    Vietnam in March 2017 after obtaining a visa to study  in  Spain  where
    she was kidnapped and held in a house for approximately a  year  and  a
    half.  It appears that her kidnappers from whom she ultimately  escaped
    were instrumental in her reaching the United Kingdom in  June  or  July
    2018.  She was encountered by the authorities in a  nail  bar  in  July
    2018.

 4. The Secretary of State accepted that the  appellant  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking in the light of a reasonable grounds decision  having  been
    made that led to such a finding on 2 August 2018.  The  respondent  did
    not however accept the appellant had been persecuted in any way by  the
    Vietnamese authorities  due  to  her  Christian  religion  nor  was  it
    accepted that she had been politically active  in  Vietnam  or  was  of
    adverse interest to the authorities as a consequence.

 5. The Secretary of State considered the appellant would be able  to  seek
    protection from the Vietnamese authorities with regard to any  fear  of
    the  traffickers  and  of  re-trafficking  in  the  light  of   country
    information.  A case had not been made out under the Immigration  Rules
    or on Article 8 grounds  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  family  and
    private life.

 6. Judge Agnew did not accept the appellant's account of what had happened
    in Vietnam which included attendance at a number of  demonstrations  in
    relation to the "Formosa issue" (a  company  that  had  released  toxic
    waste into the sea) and membership of a  political  group  called  "The
    Hoang Duc Binh Group" which it was claimed had led to  her  arrest  and
    ill-treatment.  It was also claimed that her  continued  attendance  at
    demonstrations had led to the issue of three arrest warrants  and  thus
    the decision to leave the country.  The  appellant's  Christianity  had
    been an aspect of the authorities' interest in her when  attending  the
    demonstrations.

 7. In respect of events in Spain, the appellant had posted information  on
    Facebook mentioning the wrong doings being done by the communist  party
    in Vietnam and she had received messages via this medium threatening to
    kill her if she returned.  That threat  extended  to  Spain  where  her
    antagonists knew she lived.  This led her to move from Murcia where she
    had been studying to Barcelona.  On  arrival  and  whilst  looking  for
    somewhere to stay, she was kidnapped in the street and held for one and
    a half years, during which she was forced to have sex  with  men  on  a
    daily basis.  She ran  away  by  escaping  from  a  car  when  two  men
    (apparently her captors) were smoking outside and the door was open.

 8. Judge Agnew carried out a detailed assessment of the evidence,  in  the
    course of  which  she  noted  the  Country  Information  regarding  the
    'Formosa disaster', and concluded at [19]:

         "19.  The  appellant's  account  does  fit  with   the   background
             information regarding events following  the  Formosa  disaster
             and the violence of police against protesters.   However,  she
             does not claim to have been a high-profile activist in Vietnam
             in any form, on the internet or in person.  The claimed  level
             of attention from the police given to the appellant before she
             left, following  her,  visiting  her  home  looking  for  her,
             detaining and releasing her but also  subsequently  issuing  a
             number of arrest warrants or summonses seems  disproportionate
             to what she claimed she did in Vietnam.   That  is,  attending
             some demonstrations and handing out leaflets a couple of times
             of which contents she is surprisingly vague  and  only  for  a
             short time (she claimed in interview that she  was  only  with
             the group for 1 month).  Nevertheless, it is claimed that  her
             activities  in  Vietnam  were  compounded  by   the   internet
             activities she carried out in Spain."

 9. In relation to the Facebook postings, the judge  observed  at  [20]  to
    [23]:

         "20. Ms Macleod submitted that the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
             absolutely no evidence of her alleged postings on her Facebook
             account in Spain against the  government  in  Vietnam  or  the
             threats made to her life on Facebook showed  it  was  a  total
             fabrication.  It was convenient  that  the  appellant  claimed
             there was "no way" she could produce evidence of her  postings
             because her account had allegedly been closed down.

         21.  I have noted above that there is background  information  that
             the Vietnamese authorities will  approach  Facebook  to  close
             some accounts although  judging  from  the  figures  of  their
             requests to Google in 2017, they do not  make  many  requests.
             However, the fact that they can and do is  in  favour  of  the
             appellant as it is consistent with her account that her  anti-
             government postings led to her account being blocked.

         22.  Having noted this, however, the appellant has made  no  effort
             to obtain confirmation from  Facebook  that  her  account  was
             blocked.  Whilst  corroboration  is  not  required  in  asylum
             cases, because it is frequently impossible to obtain, in  this
             case the appellant via her legal  representatives  could  have
             written to the Facebook organisation asking for information as
             to her account and why it was blocked, if it was.

         23.  That there is no evidence that any steps have  been  taken  by
             the appellant to question the blocking of her  account  whilst
             she was in Spain, studying at college, or in the UK  when  she
             is legally represented, and yet she has obtained other alleged
             documentary corroboration of her account from Vietnam, I  find
             not helpful to the appellant's claims that she was making such
             postings in Spain and her account was blocked on  the  request
             of the Vietnamese authorities."

10. As to the death threats whilst in Spain, the judge considered that  the
    failure by the  appellant  to  report  this  as  "not  helpful  to  the
    credibility of [her] claims"; (see [25]).

11. In relation to documentary evidence of the adverse interest in Vietnam,
    being the 'Invitation Notices' the judge concluded at [28]:

         "28. I do not believe the appellant would be able to live and study
             a course in English which she said took 2 or 3  months  before
             she left Vietnam if the police were actively looking  for  her
             to arrest her, given  she  failed  to  report  after  the  3rd
             'Invitation' in November 2017.  I  do  not  believe  that  she
             would have been able to avoid them, despite claiming they came
             to her house many times."

12. After observing that the appellant had been allegedly hiding  from  the
    police who were regularly calling at her home and her  claim  was  that
    she had attended "an appointment with the Vietnamese Embassy  in  Hanoi
    to obtain a visa to go to Spain" Judge Agnew questioned the credibility
    of this, specifically in [30] as follows:

         "30. Over and above this, I do not believe  if  the  appellant  had
             received 3 'Invitation Notices' or arrest  warrants,  as  they
             were referred to by both legal representatives as well as  the
             appellant, and had responded to the first one, at  which  time
             she claims she was arrested and detained for the day until her
             parents came for her and obtained  her  release,  as  well  as
             receiving 2 more arrest warrants, the appellant would not have
             mentioned this in her substantive interview."

13. The judge was clearly concerned by the  absence  of  reference  to  the
    three invitation notices or arrest warrants by  the  appellant  at  her
    substantive interview but was not persuaded by the explanation and  she
    considered  their  late  production   "seriously   damaging"   to   her
    credibility.

14. In respect of the trafficking claim, she observed at [35]:

         "35. I note that the appellant has been accepted  as  a  victim  of
             trafficking by a competent authority and it is not for  me  to
             go behind this finding.  However, I would note that I  do  not
             find credible the appellant's claim made at the  hearing  that
             she escaped from her traffickers in "late June or early July",
             she had no idea which country she was in and yet on  the  same
             day she "eventually wandered into a nail  bar"  in  a  seaside
             town in Fife and which, having entered, met the man with  whom
             she had been having a relationship when she was in Vietnam and
             with whom she became pregnant with his baby in July."

15. And as to the appellant's relationship with TP:

         "36. The appellant's partner is living in the UK illegally.  He has
             not claimed asylum.  He was detained by the police in  a  nail
             bar at the same time as the appellant in early July.  I  asked
             the appellant about whether he had made a claim for asylum and
             she said he tried to apply but nothing happened.  I asked  her
             what she meant by this answer and she  said  he  had  not  yet
             applied.  I asked why he had not done so and she said that  he
             could not speak the language.  She said she  tried  to  get  a
             solicitor for him but he did  not  know  how  to  do  it  yet.
             However, I pointed out that the appellant had  solicitors.   I
             asked why her partner, if he wanted to claim asylum, could not
             just attend her solicitor and claim asylum  with  their  help.
             She replied  she  did  not  know.   I  found  the  appellant's
             evidence was discrepant, claiming first that her  partner  had
             tried to apply for asylum and then later, for various reasons,
             he had not done so."

16. The grounds of challenge argue the following points.

    (i)  No consideration had been given as to whether the appellant should
         be entitled to asylum based on her account of trafficking.

    (ii) The judge had ignored the lacuna in  the  evidence  regarding  the
         "notorious difficulty many organisations have  had  with  Facebook,
         including Parliament".

    (iii)    The judge had failed to consider whether in the light  of  the
         similarity in the handwriting on  two  of  the  invitation  notices
         whether there may be a "standard police officer"  who  penned  such
         invitations.

    (iv) The judge had become  confused  regarding  the  embassy  visit  in
         Hanoi, having referred to the Vietnamese Embassy.

17. In granting permission to appeal Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shaerf considered the appellant had not been asked whether she had made
    any efforts to contact Facebook and furthermore that  the  grounds  for
    appeal gave good reasons regarding the challenge based  on  the  arrest
    warrants being in the same hand.  The judge had not addressed the issue
    of the appellant having moved to a different area in the context of the
    timing of the invitation notices.  He concluded:

         "The express grounds are sufficient to conclude that  the  findings
         of the Judge may be so inadequately evidenced  or  reasoned  as  to
         amount to an arguable error of law.  I would  add  that  the  Judge
         made adverse credibility findings about peripheral matters but  did
         not  make  any  express  findings  about  the  substance   of   the
         Appellant's claim that on return to Vietnam she was at risk because
         of her political activities and her faith  other  than  the  rather
         generic  rejection  of  the  political  element  of  the  claim  at
         paragraph 37."

18. Mr Bradley had been instructed in June 2019 after the appeal  had  been
    dismissed and he had been the author of the grounds of  challenge.   He
    had only become aware of the grant of permission a week ago and he  had
    not seen all the papers although had seen the refusal letter.   I  gave
    him time to read the respondent's bundle and he  was  provided  with  a
    copy of the decision by the Competent Authority (CA)  although  I  note
    that a copy had been served on the solicitors who were  acting  at  the
    time of the appeal before the First-Tier Tribunal on 8 February 2019.

19. That decision is in brief terms.  It explains that on 7  February  2019
    it was decided that  there  were  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  the
    appellant was a victim of human trafficking and that, following further
    investigations, the CA had concluded that the appeal was  a  victim  of
    human trafficking.  It continues in terms with reference to the pending
    asylum claim under which "... full consideration will be given to  your
    risk on return to your home country, taking account of the finding that
    you are a victim of modern slavery".   It  is  explained  that  further
    consideration would be given as to whether leave should be  granted  if
    the protection claim is refused.   Mr Govan explained that it  was  not
    the Home Office practice to provide reasons on a grant  although  these
    could be obtained.

20. The CA decision is in the court file and I am  satisfied  that  it  was
    before the judge.  Mr Govan also explained that the reference to the CA
    had been by Police Scotland on 25 July 2018  which  evidently  followed
    the encounter of the appellant by the authorities in the  nail  bar  in
    Leven.  The refusal decision refers to the reasonable grounds  decision
    having been made on 2 August 2018.  That is the extent of the knowledge
    of this aspect.  The appellant's solicitors did  not  obtain  any  more
    detail prior to the hearing although it was open to them to do so.  The
    judge was not told of matters that were  taken  into  account  for  the
    decision and she considered the case  on  the  basis  advanced  by  the
    appellant in her screening interview on 14 August 2018 and  the  asylum
    interview on 14 January 2019.

21. Some of the answers given at interview were corrected in a letter  from
    the appellant's solicitors  dated  28  September  2018  which  included
    clarification that the prostitution referred in the interview had  been
    in Spain.  The solicitors provided more information in  response  to  a
    written request from the respondent on 7 November 2018  which  included
    reference to the appellant having been in Spain for 5 to 6 months  from
    March 2017 until she became aware of being in the UK.   She was unaware
    of her location due to her kidnap during the intervening period.   This
    response also explained in reply to a question regarding mental  health
    care, that the appellant  was  pregnant  and  receiving  "psychological
    input from Anchor - Dr Jen Meeson Gray".

22. At the substantive interview the appellant explained that she was  well
    and had no medical conditions and that  the  only  medication  she  was
    receiving were vitamins.   She had learned  about  the  opportunity  to
    study in Spain from a lady from her  village  whom  she  had  travelled
    with.  Her father had paid the college  and  she  had  learned  English
    before leaving.  She  had  been  interviewed  about  her  visa  at  the
    "Vietnamese embassy in Hanoi".  An airport pickup had taken  them  from
    Madrid to Murcia where she had lived  with  4  other  Vietnamese.   She
    described an average day at her college on a six month course.  A death
    threat message had led her to leave Murcia and she  had  applied  to  a
    college in Barcelona which she had travelled to by train.   On  arrival
    whilst she was looking for accommodation, two men and  a  woman  put  a
    handkerchief on her face and put her inside a car.  She was taken to  a
    house where she was beaten and where she was forced to  have  sex  with
    men.  She thought she had been there about one and a  half  years.   At
    some point she was moved to another house and she escaped when she  was
    in a vehicle when on waking, she saw two men smoking outside and  fled.
    The appellant was not able to say how she had ended up in the  vehicle.
    When asked about her final destination, she had run  to  a  residential
    area and saw a place with male Asian people and a statue of Jesus; that
    was the nail bar she had gone into in about June.  The owners who  were
    Vietnamese provided her with accommodation but she  had  not  done  any
    work in the nail bar nor was there any pressure to do so.  Her  partner
    was not working there.

23. Corrections to her answers  were  provided  but  none  related  to  the
    trafficking aspect except the indication that she would  be  beaten  up
    (after her kidnap) if she did not do as she was told.  The  appellant's
    witness statement does not materially depart from the account of kidnap
    and clarifies that the threat in Murcia related to her online political
    activity.  As to her return as a victim of  trafficking  the  appellant
    explains that her family had taken out a  bank  loan  which  they  were
    repaying and she would be unable to receive the same level  of  support
    from them.  She was scared that the traffickers would find her wherever
    she was.

24. I now turn to the first  ground  of  challenge  which  argues  that  no
    consideration had been given by the judge as to whether  the  appellant
    should be entitled to asylum on account of the  trafficking  alone.   A
    number of factors in the Home  Office  CPIN  report  are  set  out  but
    significantly no reference to the tribunal decision  in  Nguyen  (Anti-
    trafficking Convention: respondent's  duties)  [2015]  UKUT  170  (IAC)
    which is cited in the refusal letter.

25. Mr Bradley considered error arose as the result of the absence  of  any
    finding on this element of the claim.  Mr Govan accepted there had  not
    been  a  clear  finding.   Both  are  right.   The  judge  clearly  had
    credibility concerns on this aspect but did not consider that she could
    go behind the CA decision.   Such a course would have been open to  her
    being the mirror of  the  approach  explained  in  ES  (s82  NIA  2002;
    negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC).  But in my  judgment  if
    the judge had answered the question whether  the  trafficking  posed  a
    risk to the appellant if returned, she could have only  concluded  that
    such a risk had not been demonstrated.  As I reminded Mr.  Bradley  the
    burden of proof lay with the appellant.  The evidence did not show that
    her  kidnappers  they  had  any  connections  to  or  in  Vietnam;  the
    appellant's account has been consistently that she came with a view  to
    study in Europe and that she pursued a course in Murcia for most of its
    tenure.   She was not lured to  Barcelona  but  had  gone  there  after
    establishing that she could study there.  There is no evidence that the
    source of threats that triggered this move were in anyway connected  to
    the strangers who seized her when she was  looking  for  accommodation.
    Despite the decision of the CA, it was open to the  judge  to  consider
    whether  a  different  conclusion  was  warranted  after  hearing   the
    appellant and considering the evidence.  That is  not  the  course  she
    took.  If there were circumstances that led to the CA's decision  which
    would have been relevant to risk it was incumbent upon the  appellant's
    representatives to obtain the material and make their case.   There  is
    nothing in the appellant's evidence that was before the judge  to  show
    that the circumstances that led the appellant  coming  to  Europe  were
    connected to the events that occurred in Barcelona and there is nothing
    to show that she would be at any threat from those who seized her  were
    she to be back in Vietnam.  I have carefully examined  the  account  of
    this aspect (as noted above) and how  it  evolved  from  the  time  the
    appellant was screened.  This ground of challenge is not made out.

26. The next ground relates to the  issue  over  the  absence  of  evidence
    regarding the Facebook account which the  appellant  claimed  had  been
    taken down.  The  ground  makes  an  evidential  assertion  as  to  the
    "notorious  difficulty  many  organisations  have  had  with  Facebook,
    including  our  own  Parlaiment  [sic]...".   The  country  information
    includes extracts from a download from a site called  'the  Vietnamese'
    that refers to  claims  by  the  government's  head  of  the  "Internet
    management  authority"  that  the  government  had  been  working  with
    Facebook and Google to remove thousands of videos and accounts and from
    Reuters that refers to Vietnam  being  set  "...to  tighten  clamps  on
    Facebook and Google, threatening dissidents".  A Vietnam Country Report
    from  Freedom  House  refers  to  the  success  of  the  government  in
    compelling Facebook and Google to remove "hundreds of accounts".

27. The judge noted that this material at  [22]  was  consistent  with  the
    appellant's account which in her statement explains her belief that her
    account had been blocked and that she had tried to search for  her  old
    account and that the "whole profile has disappeared".  The judge's note
    of the evidence reveals that she asked the appellant as to her Facebook
    account "did you not ask FB directly why  you  could  not  access  your
    account" to which she replied "I did not know how to ask them".  It was
    then put to her "presumably you could have contacted  them  online  and
    asked what the problem was" to which the appellant replied  "I  do  not
    know how to do that, I asked my friends and  they  told  me  if  I  had
    posted a lot of info against V they can have my FB closed".

28. The appellant has had advisers throughout and it  has  been  reasonably
    open to them to assist her in obtaining evidence on this aspect.  In my
    judgment the judge was entitled to question the absence of evidence  on
    this aspect which feeds into  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant's
    claimed postings led to the threats in Spain and  to  her  decision  to
    move to Barcelona.

29. The next ground takes issue with the overall credibility analysis  with
    reference to a "structural failing".  It  is  argued  that  there  were
    possible explanations for the Invitation  Notices  being  in  the  same
    handwriting.  Mr Bradley argued that the judge had erred by reaching  a
    conclusion on this aspect before looking at the documents in the  round
    in an overall assessment.  In addition he argued that  that  the  judge
    had not made a clear finding on whether the Facebook account  had  been
    blocked and that she had "teetered" on her findings on  the  Invitation
    Notices.  He also added to the mix of the argument, although not raised
    in the grounds, that the  judge  had  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    appellant's  vulnerability  by  reference  to  the  trafficking  as  an
    explanation for the absence of reference at interview to the issues  of
    these notices.

30. I begin with the last point.  It is correct  it  is  not  a  ground  of
    challenge.  Even if I were persuaded otherwise, I do not consider  that
    the point has any merit.  There was no evidence before the  judge  that
    the appellant had difficulties with giving her account.  At the  outset
    of the substantive interview she said that she was  well  and  fit  and
    that she  had  no  medical  conditions  or  that  she  was  taking  any
    medication.  At its conclusion she explained that she had no  fears  in
    the UK and by inference those who had trafficked her  to  this  country
    were not considered a threat.  She answered in the negative when  asked
    if there was anything else that she feared in Vietnam and, in  response
    to whether she had any questions at all,  the  appellant  asked  for  a
    print out.  She confirmed her health and said "no" when asked if  there
    were further  documents  that  were  required  to  be  submitted.   The
    interview had been conducted by video conferencing and was followed, as
    I have observed above, by a number of requested  corrections,  none  of
    which referred to any concern as to the appellant's health  or  ability
    to  recall  matters.   Prior   to   the   interview   the   appellant's
    representatives had  signed  and  submitted  a  form  confirming  their
    assistance  which  in  part  addresses  the  planned   interview.    No
    preference was indicated as  to  the  gender  of  the  interpreter  and
    interviewer and the appellant explained that she had  no  documents  to
    submit.

31. I read to the parties the judge's note of the cross-examination on  the
    issue of timing of the revelation of the Invitation Notices.  The judge
    explained that she was still unclear why there had been no  mention  of
    the notices at interview.  The appellant responded  that  she  did  not
    think about it at the time and that she was pregnant.  Earlier in cross-
    examination she was asked why she had not mentioned the issue of  three
    "arrest warrants" before and the appellant responded she had  mentioned
    "that" in the second interview but did not  know  if  "they  understood
    me".  Thereafter the appellant explained that after the refusal she had
    called her father and told him that she had been  refused  because  she
    did not have evidence to prove she had been arrested.  He had sent them
    to her.

32. I pause to note that there  was  no  mention  of  the  notices  in  the
    subsequent corrections and it is  apparent  from  the  answers  at  the
    hearing that the decision to obtain the papers only  came  about  after
    refusal.

33. The judge noted in [26] of her decision the "extremely good  condition"
    of the originals bearing in mind they were issued  in  2016  and  noted
    also their identical appearance although issued on separate days.   She
    did not reject them simply for these reasons but it is clear  that  she
    considered these aspects went to the weight  that  could  be  given  to
    them.  The signature appears to be the same  which  suggests  the  same
    authorship.  Whilst I accept that the judge's observation that the same
    handwriting was used was not a legitimate weight factor her conclusions
    on the account was however after an  evaluation  of  a  number  of  the
    aspects of the evidence and I  do  not  consider  the  error  over  the
    handwriting  is  enough  to  dislodge  the  force  of   the   remaining
    credibility concerns.  It is correct that she did not make a finding on
    whether the appellant had been active on Facebook but in the  light  of
    her reservations on this feature of the evidence it is clear  from  her
    conclusions as a whole that she rejected  the  entire  account  as  not
    credible.

34. I accept that the decision might have been better structured  but  when
    considered in  its  entirety,  I  am  persuaded  that  the  credibility
    findings were open to the judge  and  that  she  did  give  sustainable
    reasons for rejecting  the  account.   It  is  clear  to  me  that  she
    approached the task with an open mind, gave credit for the matters that
    supported the account and gave adequate reasons for her doubts  in  the
    course of the evaluation of the evidence.  This did not mean  that  the
    judge did not consider that evidence in the round before rejecting  the
    account.  It is correct the doubts about the trafficking surfaced after
    the rejection of the account but there is no reason to believe that the
    judge did not have this aspect in mind having noted at [9] the positive
    CA decision.  Her doubts over the account of the circumstances  of  the
    trafficking were in effect an expression of  concern  over  what  might
    otherwise have the  positive  pull  of  such  an  event.   In  granting
    permission, the First-tier Tribunal Judge observed a failure  by  Judge
    Agnew to address the appellant having moved to a different area.   This
    is a misconception; in [11] of her statement the appellant did not  say
    that she had moved to a different area but that she "...would leave the
    house so that the police could not find me".

35. This leaves the final ground.  It was the appellant who first  referred
    to the "Vietnamese"  embassy  in  Hanoi  in  the  interview  where  she
    explained that she had been interviewed for her Spanish visa.  In order
    for this ground to have any purchase it needs to  be  established  that
    the judge proceeded on the basis of the absurd notion that Vietnam  has
    an embassy within and that it had power to issue Spanish visas.  It  is
    clear that the judge used the description of the Spanish embassy  given
    by the appellant at interview which was perpetuated by  the  respondent
    in the refusal letter.  The context in which the judge considered  this
    aspect was the appellant's ability to study a course in English  for  2
    or 3 months, the frequency of the police visits to her home and  travel
    to and attend the embassy for the visa.  It is evident that this public
    profile was an aspect that troubled the  judge  in  the  light  of  the
    claims of continuing police interest.  It cannot be said that the judge
    proceeded on a misapprehension as to the status of the  embassy.   This
    ground too is not made out.

36. As I explained at the beginning  of  the  hearing,  combing  through  a
    judge's credibility findings will often find a tangle and the issue  is
    whether any is major, to use the metaphor of Lord  Wilson  in  KV  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2019] UKSC 10.  In this case there were tangles but I am
    satisfied that the judge came to a decision open to her on the evidence
    and any infelicities did not result in  any  material  error.   Legally
    sustainable reasons were given why  the  appellant  was  not  believed.
    This appeal is dismissed.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date       18 October 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

