
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02420/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 August 2019                    |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                   Mr B A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Elder Rahimi Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr Azizi against the Secretary of State's
decision of 28 February 2019 refusing his claim for asylum and refusing on
humanitarian protection and human right grounds also.

2.   In essence, his claim is that he became interested in Christianity and
perhaps to the point of conversion while in Iran and perhaps that is
largely academic because the judge, though she did not accept that he
converted while in Iran, did accept that he converted to Christianity while
in the United Kingdom and that can be seen from her paragraph 21, but she
considered that he would not face a risk on return because he was no more
than an ordinary convert who would not undertake active evangelism in Iran
and was not satisfied that active evangelising was part of his identity
and, as a consequence, concluded he was not at risk.

3.   The main point in the challenge in the grounds and as developed by Mr
Gayle today concerns the failure by the judge to follow the guidance of the
Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 where it was concluded that
though a person whose practice was to be discreet about, in this context,
the manifestation of their faith might, as a consequence, not face risk on
return to the country of origin if they would simply continue to be
discreet.  The judge simply did not address this issue in this case and
that must amount to an error of law in her decision.  She really only took
into account what had been said in the Upper Tribunal in HJ (Iran) rather
than focusing on what was said by the Supreme Court and there is a clear
error of law therefore in the failure to give consideration to this point.
It is, I think, in the end common ground that as a consequence partly of
that and also because of the evidence of the conversion of the appellant,
the fact that he had carried out some degree of evangelical activity,
though the judge did not think there was very much of it but there was some
and he could not be expected to lie on return to Iran so he is a genuine
convert and the evidence I think is sufficient to show that it is not a
case where he is somebody who is accustomed to being discreet in the
manifestation of his faith in light of his experiences in the United
Kingdom and could not be expected, as a consequence, to continue a discreet
exercise of his faith on return to Iran.

4.   So, as a consequence, it seems appropriate in the circumstances by
agreement without the need for any further specific findings on the point
to conclude that the claim under the Refugee Convention is made out and
therefore his appeal against this decision is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 4 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
