
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02806/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28th October 2019                     |On 05th November 2019              |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                    E T M
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss U Dirie of Counsel, instructed by the Cardinal
Hume Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hussain promulgated on 7 August 2019, in which the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse his protection and  human  rights  claim
    dated 20 February 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Cameroon who first arrived in the United
    Kingdom with leave to enter and remain as a Tier  4  student  until  27
    June 2015.  He subsequently made a number of unsuccessful  applications
    for an EEA Residence Card and claimed asylum in 2017.  The basis of the
    Appellant's claim was that he would be at real risk of  persecution  on
    return to Cameroon as a gay man.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that  the  Appellant's
    account was considered  to  be  inconsistent,  lacking  in  detail  and
    implausible; such that it was not accepted that he was gay, nor at risk
    on return to Cameroon as such.  No separate human rights  matters  were
    accepted for a grant of leave to  remain  on  private  life  or  health
    grounds either.

 4. The Appellant's appeal was initially dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mailer in a decision promulgated on 26 April 2018 but remitted to
    be heard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal following the finding of an
    error of law by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson in a decision  promulgated
    on 27 September 2018. The Appellant's appeal was again dismissed on all
    grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain in a decision  promulgated
    on 7 August 2019.  In that decision, the Appellant was found not to  be
    a credible witness who had made a very late claim for asylum, such that
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc)
    Act 2004 applied.  The adverse credibility findings were made primarily
    in paragraph 13 and the decision went on to include the following:

    "14. The appellant now claims to be in a  relationship  with  [A].   He
    attended  and  adopted  his  witness  statement  at  page  11  of   the
    appellant's bundle.  In particular he identified  himself  as  gay  and
    said that he was in a relationship with  the  appellant  and  knew  the
    appellant as gay also as they spend a lot of time together.  I did  not
    find the evidence of [A] reliable and consequently do not  accept  that
    he and the appellant are in a relationship as claimed.  This is because
    whilst both claim to have been in a relationship for  about  5  months,
    having had the opportunity to observe the appellant and [A], there  was
    a distinct absence of affection between them.  Similarly there  was  an
    absence of outward signs of any commitment between them such as  shared
    personal or financial commitments, or signs of affection such as  gifts
    or support.

    15.  I also heard evidence from [...] of the Croydon Area  Gay  Society
    (CAGS).  I also heard  evidence  from  [...]  of  UK  Lesbian  and  Gay
    Immigration Group.  All attended and supported  the  appellant  in  his
    claim to be gay.  Whilst I accept all to be sincere in their support  I
    do not accept their view of the appellant.  This is because all  appear
    to have a limited knowledge of the appellant who only  appear  to  have
    been  approached  after  he  claimed  asylum  or  his   last   negative
    immigration decision.  Their evidence of support fails to detract  from
    the considerable adverse credibility of his own evidence.  The evidence
    from [...] was most revealing when he stated that he could not be  sure
    whether the appellant was gay.  I find  the  appellant  accessed  these
    organisations or befriended these individuals in an attempt to  bolster
    his claim for asylum."





The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on two main grounds.  First, that the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in law in failing to consider  the  delay  in
    the Appellant's asylum claim  in  the  context  of  the  complexity  of
    disclosure of sexual orientation and that in this case, the  claim  was
    only made after the Appellant's brother found out about  his  sexuality
    and he ceased to support him and his application for an  EEA  residence
    card.  There was further documentary evidence that was  not  considered
    in the round.  Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal  materially  erred  in
    law in rejecting the Appellant's current relationship on the  basis  of
    observations in the hearing which were entirely  inappropriate  and  in
    failing to consider  the  supporting  documentary  evidence  about  the
    relationship.  Further,  there  was  a  failure  to  give  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence of four other witnesses  and  more  generally  a
    failure to consider the totality of the evidence before the Tribunal.

 6. At the oral hearing, the parties were in agreement that the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in law and that the decision  should  be  set
    aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing.
    In particular, Mr Kotas submitted that in paragraph  14  there  was  an
    impermissible reliance by the Judge on observation of the Appellant  at
    the hearing which was of itself a material error of law.

Findings and reasons

 1. As properly accepted by the Respondent, I find a material error of  law
    in the First-tier Tribunal's decision specifically in relation  to  the
    findings in paragraph 14.  It is wholly inappropriate and impermissible
    for a Judge to base findings on whether a person is in  a  relationship
    on observations made during an  appeal  hearing.   Not  only  are  such
    observations inappropriate but they are highly unlikely to be  fair  or
    accurate.  An appeal hearing is  a  formal  occasion  in  which  public
    displays of affection would not necessarily be  expected,  but  in  any
    event, in the context of this particular claim, would arguably be  even
    less likely.  This is in addition to the fact that the level of  public
    affection shown by any person in any relationship is not indicative one
    way or another as to whether they are in a genuine relationship.

 2. Further, the First-tier Tribunal Judge placed weight on the absence  of
    shared personal or financial commitments or signs of affection such  as
    gifts.  In the context of  a  relatively  short  relationship  of  five
    months without  cohabitation,  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  shared
    personal or financial commitments; and the absence of the same is again
    not indicative either way of whether there is a genuine relationship.

 3. There is, contrary to the impermissible  reasons  relied  upon  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, no reference at all to the  actual  evidence
    given  by  the  Appellant's  claimed  partner  or  to  the   supporting
    documentary evidence,  including  whatsapp  messages,  photographs  and
    letters from friends.

 4. In these circumstances there is a clear error of law in the  Tribunal's
    assessment of whether the Appellant is in  a  relationship  as  claimed
    which clearly has a material impact on the overall question of  whether
    the Appellant is gay and therefore  at  risk  on  return  to  Cameroon,
    regardless of the other adverse credibility findings made.  This  error
    alone is sufficient to require the decision to be set aside and remade.
     For completeness, I deal more briefly with the other grounds raised by
    the appellant.

 5. In relation to the delay in claiming asylum, I find that the First-tier
    Tribunal also erred in failing, in accordance with the principles in A,
    B, C v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie (Cases C-148/13 - C-
    150/13) to consider the full context of the claim as to  whether  there
    is a reasonable explanation for the delay in making it and thus whether
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc)
    Act 2004 should apply to this case.

 6. Finally, in relation to the other  witnesses,  the  reasons  given  for
    rejecting the evidence are relatively brief but alone I would not  find
    that this was a material  error  of  law.   However,  the  reasons  are
    arguably inadequate and in light of the above, the appeal must  be  re-
    heard in any event such that this evidence will be considered afresh by
    a de novo Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  it  to  the
First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross hearing centre) to be  heard  do  novo  by
any Judge except Judge Mailer or Judge Hussain.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]         Date         30th October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

