

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/02260/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |  Decision Promulgated            |
|on 3 May 2017                            |  on 16 May 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                    MSAAM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:             Mr Mohzam of Burton & Burton Solicitors
(Dale Street)
For the Respondent:          Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Parkes ('the Judge') promulgated on 7 October  2016  who  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal against  his  application  for  a  grant  of
        international protection and/or  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom based on his family and private life.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of  Egypt.  The  Judge  noted  relevant
        immigration  history  and  that  the  basis  of   the   claim   for
        international protection was a real risk on return as the appellant
        will be perceived to be a supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood.
     3. The appellant provided written and oral evidence in which he stated
        he first felt in danger in Egypt when on  holiday  in  2014,  as  a
        result of which he returned to the UK early. He claims to have only
        experienced  problems  in  Egypt  after  the  political   situation
        changed. He experienced no problems leaving Egypt as  he  claims  a
        friend facilitated his exit.
     4. Whilst in Egypt the applicant's maternal uncle  was  detained.  The
        appellant claimed his problems started after  he  returned  to  the
        United Kingdom when the police and army were looking for him.
     5. The appellant claimed he had  been  interrogated  on  a  number  of
        occasions between 2005 and 2010 whilst still in Egypt, but had  not
        been arrested. He had lived in his father's house  where  his  wife
        now lived to avoid "trouble".
     6. The appellant told the Judge he had been  interrogated  because  he
        was  a  lawyer  to  the  Muslim   Brotherhood.   He   thought   the
        interrogations were in 2006 at the start and end of  the  year.  He
        left Egypt in 2007. He continued to act for his uncle between  2007
        and 2010  as  it  was  a  different  government  from  the  current
        government, as the current government came to power at the  end  of
        2014.
     7. The Judge records the appellant claiming in his oral evidence  that
        he spoke to his father  regularly  and  that  his  own  lawyer  had
        obtained written evidence from his father and that in  relation  to
        matters, his father spoke to him,  but  the  appellant  claimed  he
        concealed things from him but advised  him  not  to  travel.   When
        pressed had said that it was in 2015 after  the  verdict  had  been
        passed against him possibly May or  June.  The  appellant  told  to
        Judge his wife and child had returned to Egypt at the start of 2015
        and his father told the police they  had  separated  to  stop  them
        harassing his family members. Other aspects  of  the  evidence  are
        recorded by the Judge at [8 - 15] of the decision under challenge.
     8. The Judge sets out his factual findings at [16 - 25] which can be
        summarised in the following terms:


    . The recent political history of Egypt is not disputed [16].
    . There is central confusion in the appellant's chronology. When he last
      travelled to Egypt he left early on 2  May  2014  stating  he  did  so
      because he felt in danger but although there had been a military  coup
      the presidential elections had not taken place and at no stage in  his
      evidence did the appellant say what it was that  happened  during  his
      short time in Egypt that made him concerned about his safety [17].
    . The appellant confirmed his father only told him  that  he  was  being
      sought after he had left and so it was not at all clear  what  it  was
      that made him leave. The situation was already unstable and nothing in
      that time appears to have added to it [17].
    . It is not clear why, if the appellant was concerned  about  government
      roundups undertaken without warrants, and he knew he was being sought,
      he would let his wife and child return to Egypt from the safety of the
      UK [18].
    . With the appellant safely in the UK it is not obvious  why  is  father
      would conceal from him the fact of the legal proceedings and decisions
      against him [19].
    . If the appellant needed to remain in the  UK  in  order  to  be  safe,
      information from his father would have bolstered any resolve  to  keep
      away from Egypt. It was not seen how keeping  it  from  the  appellant
      would have helped and, in  the  context  of  his  father  telling  the
      authorities that the appellant and his wife separated,  it  could  not
      make his position worse [19].
    . The documents in the Home Office bundle  were  provided  at  an  early
      stage but are difficult to verify and could have been  produced  on  a
      word processor, with vague references to being in danger, and the need
      to keep silent, they do not provide any solid  information  about  the
      matter that the Judge need to decide upon [21].
    . Very late  production  of  the  translations  of  the  documents  made
      verification difficult. Given the appellant's friend is a  lawyer  and
      living in the situation the appellant says would cause  him  problems,
      is not clear why the documents dating  from  2015  were  not  provided
      sooner.  Sending  the  documents  earlier  would  not  have  made  the
      appellant's position in the UK worse and could have  assisted  him  in
      his case [22].
    . Considering the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed, and having  considered  the
      documents in light of the other evidence in the case,  the  Judge  was
      not satisfied the documents are reliable and  attached  no  weight  to
      them [23].


     9. The Judge sets out his conclusions in relation  to  the  protection
        and human rights claims in [24] and [25] in the following terms:


        24.  While I would accept that the  Appellant  is  fearful  of  the
             situation in Egypt for the reasons given above I do not accept
             that his account of past events relating to him and his family
             is reliable. In summary he has not explained what it was  that
             made him leave Egypt in May 2015, why he would have  sent  his
             wife and child back there or why his father or friend did  not
             provide him with information knowing he was safe in the UK and
             could have used  the  information.  It  was  accepted  by  the
             Appellants representative that this case turned on credibility
             but the Appellant has not provided a clear or reliable account
             that would allow a finding that  he  would  be  in  danger  on
             return.


        25.  Given the limited time that the Appellant has spent in the  UK
             he cannot succeed under paragraph 276ADE and  with  his  wider
             family in Egypt his links to that country are clearly  strong.
             He has qualifications that he can use and there is nothing  in
             the evidence to show that he  could  not  return  to  work  to
             support himself and his family. There is  nothing  that  would
             justify  a  grant  of  leave  under  article  8  outside   the
             Immigration Rules having regard to section 117A and B  of  the
             2002 Act.


    10. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but  thereafter
        granted on a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal on the basis
        it was found the appellant's grounds were on balance arguable, that
        in the absence of a finding as to whether or not the appellant is a
        supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, the conclusions as to
        the documentation may be flawed.  The  judge  granting  permission,
        Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen,  recognised  difficulties   in   the
        appellant's case but found the matters raised  in  the  appellant's
        grounds to be arguable.



Error of law


    11. The respondent's reasons for refusal letter summarised the core  of
        the appellant's case at [4] in the following terms:


        "You fear persecution in Egypt because you acted as  the  solicitor
        for your uncle, Dr.  WME-S.  You  had  a  contract  with  him  that
        permitted you to work as his representative "in all  civil  matters
        in front of all kinds of courts" as well as appeals. You  are  also
        permitted to go to the polling stations  on  his  behalf.  This  is
        relevant in your claim as Dr E-S  stood  for  office  in  the  2005
        elections as a supporter of Muslim Brotherhood. You came to the  UK
        on 19 January 2010. Dr E-S was arrested on 24 November 2013 and  he
        has not been released. You returned to Egypt in 2014 and you  state
        that you stayed in hiding while you were there. During your stay in
        Egypt  you  attempted  to  visit  your  uncle  but   the   Egyptian
        authorities denied you access to him. You left Egypt on 2 May  2014
        to return to the UK and did not experience  any  problems  on  your
        departure from the country. However, on 5 May 2014 the  authorities
        came to your family home looking for you. Your father paid a  bribe
        for them to go away. Your family have warned you not to  return  to
        Egypt.


    12. The appellant  at  [11]  of  his  witness  statement  dated  the  7
        September 2016 claims that he will be tortured and  killed  by  the
        government in Egypt because  he  was  a  supporter  of  the  Muslim
        Brotherhood  and  had  participated  in  demonstrations.   In   his
        substantive asylum interview dated 8  January  2016,  in  reply  to
        question 20 asking the appellant what he did during the  10  to  12
        weeks when voting was taking place,  the  appellant  mentioned  his
        uncle's support of the Muslim Brotherhood, that  he  was  with  his
        uncle who was the candidate in that election, and "even when  I  am
        with a Muslim Brotherhood I am not a terrorist".
    13. Mr Mozham submitted on the appellant's behalf  that  this  was  the
        issue before the First-tier Tribunal and had indeed been considered
        in the Reasons for Refusal  letter  where  the  decision-maker  has
        written at [18 - 23] the following:


        18.  It is not accepted that the  Egyptian  authorities  have  been
             looking for you following your departure from Egypt on  2  May
             2014. Your sole involvement with the  Muslim  Brotherhood  was
             while you were instructed by your uncle to act  as  his  legal
             representative. This was before you left Egypt in 2010.


        19.  Reference is also made to the  document  "Country  Information
             and Guidance Egypt: Muslim Brotherhood" which states;


                  "Although the government is able, under the  penal  code,
             to  detain  anyone  suspected  of  membership  of  the  Muslim
             Brotherhood, arrests and detentions  have  primarily  been  of
             high and mid-level leaders and those taking part  in  protests
             against the government which have become violent.  Journalists
             affiliated or perceived to be sympathetic to the MB have  also
             been targeted. The Egyptian government, given the sheer  scale
             of the number of members and supporters, is unlikely  to  have
             the capacity, capability or interest in seeking  to  persecute
             everyone associated with the MB.   There  is  no  evidence  to
             suggest that merely being a member of,  or  in  particular,  a
             supporter of the MB will put a person at risk of persecution".


        20.  It is noted that you do not state that you are a high or  mid-
             level supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood  nor  do  you  claim
             that you have been involved in violent demonstrations. You  do
             not claim that you were a journalist. Indeed, you  state  that
             you are "like a bird" because you wish to be free of political
             affiliations. It is further noted that you have been in the UK
             for the last five years and therefore would not have attracted
             the  attention  of  the  Egyptian  authorities.  It  is  again
             considered that your claim that you would be targeted  by  the
             Egyptian authorities because of your connection to your  uncle
             is not supported by the objective evidence.


        21.  It is noted that you returned to Egypt in 2012, 2013  and  did
             not experience any difficulties. You also returned to Egypt in
             2014. It is therefore concluded that  you  have  no  political
             profile in Egypt. It is noted that you claimed that you  tried
             to see your uncle in April 2014 but the authorities would  not
             permit you to see him.


        22.  It is noted that you left Egypt on your own passport.  The  US
             State Department Report 2015 states;


                  "The law provides  for  freedom  of  movement  within  the
                  country, foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and
                  the government generally respected  these  rights,  albeit
                  with some exceptions, including the handling of  potential
                  refugees and asylum seekers. The Civil Aviation Authority,
                  in  cooperation  with  the  Ministries  of   Justice   and
                  Interior, maintained a "no-fly" list that  prevented  some
                  defendants in court cases from  fleeing  the  country.  MB
                  members and other wanted individuals appeared on the  list
                  after July 2013".


        23.  It is therefore concluded that if you were of any interest  to
             the  authorities  as  person  associated   with   the   Muslim
             Brotherhood it was open for the Egyptian authorities to  place
             you on a "no-fly list" but they clearly did not  as  you  were
             allowed to leave the  country  with  no  difficulties.  It  is
             therefore  considered  that  your  claim  is  not   externally
             consistent with the objective  evidence  regarding  departures
             from Egypt.


    14. The appellant's representative submitted that  at  [16  -  24]  the
        Judge made no reference to why the appellant was not at risk  as  a
        result of the connection he relied upon. It was  accepted  at  [18]
        that the Judge mentioned the Muslim Brotherhood but  submitted  the
        Judge has erred by making no mention of the fact the appellant is a
        supporter of this group and has a profile that will  place  him  at
        risk on return. It was argued that this is  a  fundamental  finding
        that needed to be made and that failure to do so impacted upon  all
        other findings made by the Judge. The  key  issue  of  whether  the
        appellant was a supporter  of  the  Muslim  Brotherhood  and  other
        issues are interrelated such  that  the  Judge  needed  to  make  a
        finding upon whether the appellant will be at risk for this reason,
        as claimed.
    15. It is also asserted by  the  appellant's  representative  that  the
        appellant gave evidence he attended a demonstration in  the  United
        Kingdom which was also relevant as it was a  demonstration  against
        the current government. The representative specifically  refers  to
        paragraph 8 of the appellant's witness statement to this effect and
        submits the Judge failed to adequately deal with this aspect of the
        evidence.
    16. The appellant focuses very much upon the subjective aspects of  his
        case but fails to address the issue of a  real  risk  to  a  person
        associated with the Muslim Brotherhood  set  out  in  [19]  of  the
        country report and referred to above. The Judge clearly rejects the
        appellant's claim to be  at  risk  as  a  result  of  any  previous
        association with his uncle based upon an imputed political  opinion
        as a supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood sufficient to place him at
        risk on return and, in light of the evidence made available to  the
        Judge, such a finding that the  appellant  had  not  established  a
        sufficient real risk was a finding fully open to the Judge  on  the
        evidence.
    17. The core of the appellant's case  is  as  recorded  by  the  Judge,
        namely an imputed risk as the lawyer for his uncle, but  the  Judge
        gave adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's account that he
        was at risk which have not been shown to be  infected  by  arguable
        legal error.
    18. Even if the appellant is a  supporter  of  the  Muslim  Brotherhood
        country material does not establish a real risk for all  supporters
        without connections or a profile that  could  lead  to  arrest  and
        detention, where such a person could be subjected to ill-treatment.
        The Judge did not find such had been made out.
    19. Mr Mills accepted that the sur plas element of the case was  raised
        in the statement and in the respondent's reasons for refusal letter
        and that the Judge did not find that the  appellant  had  made  out
        that he possessed a profile that would place him at risk on return.
    20. Although the Judge fails  to  specifically  mention  any  sur  plas
        activities it is clear the Judge was aware  of  the  basis  of  the
        appellants claim which would have  been  considered  prior  to  the
        Judge arriving at the conclusions referred to above.
    21. In the Reasons for Refusal letter, when dealing with the  sur  plas
        activities, it is written:


        28.  Photographs: You have submitted a number of photographs  taken
             while you are in Egypt that show you in the company of unnamed
             individuals. It is not clear  who  these  individuals  are  or
             their significance to your claim for asylum. It is noted  that
             you state that you were not politically active  in  Egypt  and
             were, in fact, politically neutral. Therefore, given that  the
             photographs were taken while you were in Egypt before you came
             to the UK in  2010,  it  is  concluded  that  they  cannot  be
             considered to be evidence that you would be recognised  as  an
             opponent of the current government, because of  your  previous
             associations.


        29.   You  have  also  submitted   photographs   of   yourself   at
             demonstrations in the UK at which you have  protested  against
             the present government of Egypt, led by President Al Sisi.  It
             is accepted that you may  have  attended  such  demonstrations
             while in the UK. However, you have submitted  no  evidence  to
             suggest that the Egyptian authorities have either the capacity
             or  will  to  monitor  those  who   have   attended   peaceful
             demonstrations, either inside Egypt or without.


        30.  Social media: You have submitted a number of screenshots  from
             social media sites such as "Facebook". Some of these have been
             translated into  English.  It  is  understood  that  you  have
             submitted these documents to establish a profile as  a  person
             opposed to the current regime in Egypt.  Reference  has  again
             been made to the US State Department Report 2015 which states;


             "The government did not generally restrict or  disrupt  access
             to the Internet or censor online  content,  albeit  with  some
             exceptions. The constitution protects the  right  to  privacy,
             including on the Internet.  The  constitution  guarantees  the
             confidentiality and "inviolability"  of  postal,  telegraphic,
             and electronic  correspondence,  telephone  calls,  and  other
             means  of  communication.  There  may  not   be   confiscated,
             revealed, or monitored except with a judicial order, only  for
             a definite period, and only  in  cases  defined  by  law.  The
             constitution  prohibits  the  government  from   "arbitrarily"
             interrupting, disconnecting, or depriving citizens seeking  to
             use all forms  of  Internet  communications.  Law  enforcement
             agencies occasionally restrict or disrupted individuals access
             to the Internet and monitored Internet usage, relying on a law
             that only allows targeted interception of communications under
             judicial oversight and for a limited period of time  and  does
             not  permit  indiscriminate  mass  surveillance.  The   public
             prosecutor  occasionally  prosecuted  individuals  accused  of
             posting "insulting" material".


             "The government attempted to  disrupt  the  communications  of
             terrorist  groups  operating  in  northern  Sinai  by  cutting
             telecommunication networks:  mobile  services,  Internet,  and
             sometimes landlines. Cuts continued on an average from 6 AM to
             6 PM. Networks were again fully accessible at approximately  8
             PM  and  sometimes  later.  This   disrupted   operations   of
             government facilities and  banks.  The  law  obliges  Internet
             service providers and mobile  operators  to  allow  government
             access to  government  databases,  which  can  allow  security
             forces to obtain  information  about  activities  of  specific
             customers, which could lead to lack of online anonymity. There
             were no reports of widespread denial of service or blocking of
             social media sites during  the  elections  and  demonstrations
             that occurred during the year. Social  media  sites,  such  as
             Twitter and Facebook, widely used  during  demonstrations  and
             throughout  the  presidential  election  period  and  included
             widespread criticism of the government and security forces".


             "According to a 2013 World Bank study, 49.6% of the population
             used the Internet and 3.3% of households  subscribe  to  fixed
             broadband services".


             "On January 23, a court sentenced an accountant  to  a  three-
             month suspended sentence and a fine of 10,000 Egyptian  pounds
             (LE) ($1400) for "insulting the Interior Ministry",  "misusing
             the Internet", and harassment for tweeting a video critical of
             the Ministry of Interior in March 2013".


             "In October, two students who ran  pro-MB  pages  on  Facebook
             were arrested for  allegedly  inciting  violence  against  the
             police and army",


        31.  It is therefore understood that that  while  there  have  been
             incidents of the Egyptian government pursuing individuals  who
             have incited violence, social media users  such  as  "Twitter"
             and "Facebook" have been used to express  disapproval  of  the
             authorities. You have submitted no evidence to  indicate  that
             the Egyptian authorities would have either the  means  or  the
             will to identify you as an opponent of the  regime  from  your
             use social media sites in the UK.


        32.  One of the messages appears to be from your parents and states
             "Receiver: M we are glad your dad and me that you deleted your
             Facebook page. We have our  peace  of  mind  now,  instead  of
             having people searching for you every little time. Please,  if
             you love us, delete  the  second  Facebook  of  you.  However,
             please stop, we are in danger. If you love  us  and  you  love
             your daughter stay totally silent, M you are away, we are  the
             ones that stayed back".


        33.  Although not explicitly stated, it  is  understood  that  this
             document has been submitted to support  your  claim  that  the
             authorities have been looking for you following your visit  to
             Egypt in May 2014. However, it is noted that the date  of  the
             message is illegible and therefore it is not known  when  this
             message was sent. In addition, the author has not  stated  who
             is looking for you.  It  is  not  considered  that  the  short
             message can be considered to be  evidence  that  the  Egyptian
             authorities were looking for you.


    22. The lack of evidence to show the appellant has a  profile  such  as
        that identified in the country material as liable to place  him  at
        risk on return or to show  that  as  a  result  of  his  Sur  Place
        activities he would have come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
        Egyptian authorities as  a  result  demonstrations  or  entries  on
        social media, such as to create a real risk on return, mirrors  the
        finding of the Judge that the appellant has failed to make out that
        he would be in danger on return.
    23. There is also an additional element of some considerable importance
        in relation to the evidence  given  to  the  Judge  which  is  that
        notwithstanding the appellant claiming that the authorities have an
        adverse interest in him formed after he left Egypt for the UK on  2
        May 2014, the appellant felt it was sensible or appropriate to send
        his wife and child back to Egypt from a country in which they  were
        safe, out of reach of the Egyptian government, and able  to  remain
        together as a family unit. This is arguably not  the  action  of  a
        person facing a credible real risk of ill-treatment for himself  or
        any family member for the reasons claimed.
    24. The Judge also noted that the quality of the evidence was poor with
        the appellant not explaining what it was that made him leave  Egypt
        when he last did, why he sent his wife and child back, or  why  his
        father or friends did not provide him with  information  about  the
        situation in Egypt knowing he was safe in the UK.
    25. As noted by the First-tier Judge who initially  refused  permission
        to appeal "the grounds, as  drafted,  do  not  raise  any  arguable
        material error of law, and amounted to no more than a  disagreement
        with the finding that the Judge made that the appellant had  relied
        upon a false story. The Judge was perfectly  entitled  to  conclude
        that if the appellant had genuinely believed that he was  suspected
        of being a supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood that  he  would  not
        have let his wife and child return to Egypt from the UK. The  Judge
        applied the correct burden and standard of proof,  and  gave  brief
        but adequate reasons for his conclusion upon the reliability of the
        Appellant's evidence. It was well  open  to  him  to  find  on  the
        evidence that the appellant's accounts was false, and that he could
        return to Egypt safely".
    26. It can be clearly inferred from the findings of Judge  Parkes  that
        he did not accept the appellant's core claim or accept as  credible
        the appellant's assertion that he faced a real risk on  return  for
        any of the  stated  reasons.  This  includes  a  rejection  of  the
        appellant's account to be  at  risk  as  a  result  of  an  imputed
        political opinion based upon any association with, or support  for,
        the Muslim Brotherhood. This is the core finding that underpins the
        other findings of the  Judge  which  have  not  been  shown  to  be
        affected by arguable  legal  error  material  to  the  decision  to
        dismiss the appeal.


Decision

    27. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    28. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15 May 2017



