
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA026592016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10 May 2017                        |On 26 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                     h d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, Counsel instructed by Lambeth Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Afghanistan  whose  date  of
    birth was considered by the respondent  and  found  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be 1 January 2001 (such was not in dispute before me).  The
    appellant claimed that he arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 September
    2015 and claimed asylum.  That application was refused, although he was
    granted leave to remain as an unaccompanied asylum seeking child.  In a
    decision and reasons  promulgated  on  16  January  2017,  following  a
    hearing on 12 December 2016, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J McMahon
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

    Ground 1(a)    The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  rejecting
                  material  facts  based   on   his   own   perceptions   of
                  implausibility;

    Ground 1(b)   The failure to make findings as to whether the  appellant
                  was in contact with his family at the date of the  hearing
                  and failure to consider material evidence;

    Ground  2  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   unlawfully   focused   on
                  peripheral, immaterial matters;

    Ground 3 The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in  failing  to
                  give reasons for rejecting evidence;

    Ground 4 The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  consider  and/or
                  determine the appeal based on  the  MPSG  ground  and  the
                  humanitarian  protection  claim  on  the  grounds  of   an
                  internal armed conflict in Afghanistan.

 3. The Upper Tribunal Judge granting permission noted that,  although  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider in terms the return  of  the
    appellant to Kabul as  an  unaccompanied  minor,  the  judge  did  make
    findings on the presumed contact he may or may not have with his family
    in Nangahar Province.  Nevertheless it was considered arguable that the
    judge should  have  considered  whether  and  to  what  extent  it  was
    reasonable to reach  the  implied  conclusion  that  he  would  not  be
    returning to Kabul as an unaccompanied  minor  and  that  it  was  also
    arguable that  the  judge  may  have  fallen  into  error  in  reaching
    conclusions as to the plausibility  of  the  appellant's  evidence  and
    failed to take into account his age when considering his evidence  that
    the Taliban came every 10-15 days.

Error of Law Discussion

 4. Mr Chakmakjian summarised his grounds in two broad themes.   His  first
    was  a  challenge  to  the  judge's  findings  and  credibility   which
    encompassed grounds 1(a), 2 and 3 above.  The second was in relation to
    the alleged lack of findings, particularly in relation to reception  in
    Kabul, encompassing grounds 1(b) and 4 above.

 5. Mr Chakmakjian submitted that it was not clear what objective  evidence
    the judge was relying  on  for  his  substantive  conclusion  that  the
    absence of direct contact by the  Taliban  with  the  appellant  was  a
    matter of adverse credibility.  It was submitted that there was nothing
    inconsistent with the appellant's account that the approach was made to
    his family and Mr Chakmakjian relied on the original skeleton  argument
    before the First-tier Tribunal, at paragraph 18, relying on the country
    of origin information that the Taliban rely on family and clan  loyalty
    and normally recruit fighters  within  their  tribe;  it  was  asserted
    therefore that recruitment through the family was a common practice.

 6. In a careful and closely reasoned decision, the judge set  out  all  of
    the background country information and information  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and reached his conclusions on that evidence.  The judge  set
    out that the appellant's account  was  that  at  the  time  of  leaving
    Afghanistan he was at risk of being taken by the Taliban  who  intended
    that he should fight for them which  may  have  involved  acting  as  a
    suicide  bomber.   The  judge  noted  (at   paragraph   [35])   written
    submissions to the effect  that  it  was  common  Taliban  practice  to
    recruit through family members.  The judge took into consideration that
    the appellant was not able to point to any personal knowledge of such a
    threat and that there was nothing in the appellant's  account  to  show
    that the appellant had had any direct contact  with  them.   The  judge
    went on to consider all of the claimed circumstances including that  in
    interview the appellant stated that he had never had any  contact  with
    the Taliban before his father died, that the Taliban had never  visited
    his mosque and that it was his evidence at the appeal hearing  that  he
    had  no  knowledge  of  other  children  in  the  village  having  been
    recruited.  It was the judge's  assessment  that  the  appellant  never
    personally saw the Taliban visit the family home.  The judge went on to
    consider that there was evidence in the background country  information
    which identified the practice of the Taliban recruiting young people to
    fight as suicide bombers.  The judge properly directed himself at  [38]
    that whilst he accepted that child  recruitment  exists  as  a  Taliban
    practice in Afghanistan, he had to determine  whether  this  particular
    appellant experienced such a risk, by examining  whether  there  was  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that the Taliban wanted to recruit him.



 7. The judge then went on to consider the timeline of events and concluded
    that if the appellant's father had died this had  happened  some  years
    before the appellant left Afghanistan which the  judge  found  to  have
    been in the middle of 2015 when the judge concluded the  appellant  was
    14.  The judge went on to find that the appellant must have  been  aged
    no more than between 5 and 8 at the time his father had died.

 8.  The  judge  proceeded  to  set  out  in  some  detail   the   relevant
    jurisprudence in relation to dealing with  a  claim  made  by  a  child
    including AA (unattended children) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00016
    (IAC).  The judge also took into consideration the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No.2 of  2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant guidance on dealing with children and set  out  the  specific
    issues to be aware of.  The judge reminded himself that the standard of
    proof is low and that any  benefit  of  the  doubt  should  be  applied
    liberally in favour of the appellant given that he is a child.

 9. The judge continued: "but I feel I am bound also to take  into  account
    that:" and the judge took into consideration that the appellant had  no
    personal experience of the Taliban nor had he been approached by  them;
    that his father's death must have taken  place  roughly  six  or  seven
    years before the appellant left Afghanistan and  there  was  no  direct
    action taken against the appellant during that approximate  eight  year
    period; that the appellant's mother had  told  him  the  Taliban  would
    visit the home every ten to  fifteen  days;  and  that  the  supporting
    detail provided by the appellant was sparse and that  it  was  unlikely
    that the appellant's family would not have put in place some method  of
    contacting the appellant although it was the appellant's  account  that
    he had had no contact with her.

10.  Mr  Chakmakjian  sought  in  some  detail  to  criticise  the  judge's
    considerations in particular at paragraph [48].  Those  criticisms  are
    without proper foundation.  Although it was submitted  repeatedly  that
    the judge did not provide any objective evidence for his  criticism  of
    the failure of the Taliban to contact the appellant directly, this  was
    a fact that the judge was entitled to take into  consideration  in  the
    round.  Mr Chakmakjian, although he relied  on  the  skeleton  argument
    before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the importance of  family
    loyalty for the Taliban, did not point to anything  specifically  which
    would support a finding that such recruitment only takes place  through
    the family.  The judge quite properly considered this  evidence  (about
    family loyalty and the Taliban) before him (although  in  my  view  the
    judge perhaps gave more weight to this evidence than it was due as  the
    skeleton argument purports to state  that  the  passage  confirms  that
    recruitment through the family is a common practice whereas the passage
    relied on merely states that  the  Taliban  rely  on  family  and  clan
    loyalty and that they normally recruit fighters within their own tribe.
     It is an overstatement to claim that this  passage  is  authority  for
    recruitment through the family being a common practice).

11. There was absolutely no error in the judge taking into consideration in
    the round, both the fact that the appellant was not approached  by  the
    Taliban directly and the fact  that,  despite  the  fact  that  it  was
    claimed that his father died approximately eight years before  he  left
    Afghanistan, he himself was not approached in the interim period.

12. Again significant criticism was made by Mr Chakmakjian of the  findings
    at [48(iii)] where the judge took into consideration that the appellant
    claimed the Taliban would visit the family home every  ten  to  fifteen
    days to persuade his mother to allow her son to join them so  they  can
    make him a suicide bomber and that the appellant  at  interview  stated
    that all he knew was that the Taliban wanted him to join them and be  a
    suicide bomber.  It is unclear how the  judge  can  be  criticised  for
    this.

13.  Paragraph  [48(iii)]  must  be  considered  in  the  entirety  of  the
    Tribunal's findings.  The judge was not saying in this  paragraph  that
    he was specifically criticising the appellant for a lack of  detail  as
    to time and dates, as suggested  by  Mr  Chakmakjian  at  the  hearing.
    Rather this must be seen in the context of  the  judge's  consideration
    that the appellant was not personally approached and that no action was
    taken by the Taliban for approximately eight years,  despite  the  fact
    that they allegedly visited his mother  at  their  home  every  ten  to
    fifteen days.

14. The judge at [48(iv)] again made allowance for the appellant's age  but
    considered that his knowledge was very limited as to how  long  it  had
    been since he had last seen his father and that  he  did  not  know  in
    which area of Afghanistan his village or  province  was  situated.   He
    also did not know where he had been taken to upon  leaving  Afghanistan
    and stated that his uncle did not explain about the risk of  harm  from
    the Taliban or where they were going to.  He said that  his  uncle  had
    not given him any  contact  details.   Mr  Chakmakjian  submitted  this
    approach was flawed particularly in light  of  the  appellant's  stated
    difficulties with dates and timings.  Mr  Chakmakjian  pointed  to  the
    fact that the appellant had stated, as recorded in paragraph [22], that
    he did not know about years and dates and could  not  say  about  time.
    However it was incumbent on the judge to reach an  assessment  on  that
    evidence.  The judge properly took into account  the  appellant's  very
    young age and his vulnerabilities but correctly reminded  himself  that
    despite giving this latitude "there still remains some level of  burden
    on the appellant to demonstrate the  basis  of  an  objective  fear  of
    persecution".   The  judge  also  took  into  consideration  that   the
    appellant's claim was  consistent  with  the  country  information  but
    reminded himself that he  was  bound  to  take  into  account  all  the
    evidence.  There was no error in that approach.   The  matter  of  what
    weight clearly attached to the evidence was a matter for the judge  and
    there was no error in his finding, in the round, that there was a  lack
    of supporting detail  in  the  appellant's  account  even  taking  into
    account his age.

15. It was also open to the judge to find, at [50(ii)], that there  was  no
    approach directly to the appellant despite living  in  Afghanistan  for
    six to seven years after the death of his father and despite  the  fact
    that the Taliban were visiting the family every  ten  to  fifteen  days
    (which puts into context the  judge's  consideration  at  [48(iii)]  as
    discussed above).  The judge went on to find that it was most  unlikely
    that the Taliban would have been  visiting  the  family  every  ten  to
    fifteen days in these circumstances but did not take any direct  action
    against him.   It  was  not  the  case  that  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence because he stated it was every ten to fifteen days
    that the Taliban approached his family.

16. The Court of Appeal in HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1037  reiterated  the
    principle that plausibility should be assessed in  respect  of  country
    information  and  not  on  the  decision  maker's  own  perception   of
    reasonability and that inherent probability can be a dangerous or  even
    a wholly inappropriate factor to rely on in some asylum cases and  that
    much of the evidence would be referable to societies with  customs  and
    circumstances which are very different from those of the members of the
    fact-finding Tribunal.

17. The factors relied on by the First-tier Tribunal Judge were not  relied
    on in isolation but considered  in  light  of  the  background  country
    information (even though as noted above I am of the view that this  was
    on occasion overstated).  In addition, the respondent's refusal letter,
    at  paragraph  20,  pointed  to  background  information  that   forced
    recruitment is only used by the Taliban in exceptional cases.   It  was
    not the case that the judge rejected the  appellant's  evidence  simply
    because he found it implausible, but rather considering all the factors
    in the round the appellant's account of events was not credible and  in
    particular taking into consideration the lack of supporting detail.  Mr
    Chakmakjian did not point to any evidence before the judge which  might
    have supported a finding that it is usual practice for the  Taliban  to
    visit the family home on a regular basis but to fail to take any action
    to actually recruit a child for approximately eight years.

18. It was also submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
    focusing on immaterial matters by focusing on the  appellant's  journey
    to the United Kingdom.  This was in reference to the  judge's  findings
    including at [48(v)], in  relation  to  the  alleged  lack  of  contact
    between the appellant and his family which the judge  did  not  accept.
    The judge found it most unlikely that on the  appellant's  account  the
    family members would have gone to considerable effort  and  expense  of
    arranging for the appellant's departure out of Afghanistan without even
    an attempt to  set  in  place  some  method  of  reassurance  that  the
    appellant had reached a place of safety.  The judge also found  in  the
    preceding paragraph that the appellant did not know about the route  or
    where he was going.  However it is an overstatement to suggest, as  the
    appellant's representatives did, that the judge found  the  appellant's
    core account not credible because of peripheral  matters  such  as  his
    journey.  The judge was considering the  appellant's  journey  and  his
    claimed lack of family contact in the context of all the evidence  (and
    it is not disputed that the judge had a  copy  of  a  Red  Cross  email
    before him which indicated he was looking  for  his  family)  including
    what the judge found to be a claim generally lacking in detail  and  in
    the context  of  the  judge's  consideration  that  despite  a  reduced
    standard of proof given the appellant's age there  still  remains  some
    level of burden on the appellant which he had not discharged.   It  was
    not the case that the judge focused solely on the  lack  of  detail  in
    relation to the travel route but rather  took  into  consideration  the
    lack of detail generally provided by the appellant in  all  aspects  of
    his claim.  I can see no merit in  the  challenge  to  those  findings,
    which were made with great care and which were  properly  open  to  the
    judge.

19. Equally, it was open to the judge to consider as he did at [48(v)] that
    it was unlikely that the appellant's family members would have gone  to
    considerable effort and expense for  arranging  his  departure  without
    giving some method of reassurance that he was in a place of safety.  EU
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 32 noted that family  members  may
    be unlikely to cooperate with the Secretary of State for the return  of
    their child in relation to family tracing.  Whilst  this  clearly  does
    not create an absolute principle that contact details are given to  all
    children who are sent to Afghanistan it is not the case that the  judge
    was simply applying his own consideration of what was unlikely or  not.
    The judge explored fully all the evidence and it was entirely  open  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to not be satisfied, as the judge  was  not  at
    [50(iii)] that the family made no arrangements for contact.

20. In relation to the judge's findings on return  to  Afghanistan  it  was
    argued that the judge may have fallen into error in not making findings
    in relation  to  returning  the  appellant.   However  considering  the
    judge's findings in their entirety the judge is saying that he does not
    accept that the appellant is not in contact with his family.   This  is
    implicit both in his findings that it was unlikely that the family made
    no arrangements for contact once the appellant arrived and also that he
    was satisfied, at [51] that the appellant could resume living with  his
    mother and sister and brother and that his  uncle  lives  in  the  same
    locality and has provided support which would continue.  It is implicit
    in the findings in their entirety that the judge was satisfied that the
    appellant was not credible, as the judge concluded that  the  appellant
    "has not given a reliable account".

21. Although the respondent in the refusal letter found that the  appellant
    could safely relocate to Kabul and took into consideration AK  (Article
    15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 in deeming  it  reasonable  for
    the appellant to relocate to Kabul with his family, there was no  error
    in the judge finding that in fact what the respondent had failed to  do
    was to find that there was no risk to the appellant or  his  family  in
    returning to their home area.  Whilst  Mr  Chakmakjian  criticised  the
    judge's claimed lack of findings in relation to the appellant's father,
    the judge quite clearly  found  that  the  appellant  had  provided  an
    unreliable account.  There  were  no  positive  findings  made  in  his
    favour.  These were  perfectly  adequate  and  proper  findings.   They
    cannot said to be perverse.  The appeal mounts to nothing more  than  a
    quarrel with the findings of fact made and the conclusion drawn. Notice
    of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law such that it should be set aside  and  shall  stand.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

I  direct  that  the  appellant  be  granted  anonymity   throughout   these
proceedings, unless and until the Tribunal or court directs  otherwise.   No
report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
appellant.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date: 24 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date:  24 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

