

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02385/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13 May 2019                              |On 16 May 2019                 |
|                                            |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     ksa
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Uddin, Counsel instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals (with permission of FtT Judge  Cruthers)  against
    the decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge O'Brien that was issued
    on 9 May 2018.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal directed anonymity and because of the nature of
    the appeal and the vulnerability of the appellant it is appropriate  to
    continue to order anonymity.  The full terms of my order appear at  the
    end of the decision and reasons statement.

 3. After hearing from Mr Uddin, Mr Mills conceded that  the  decision  and
    reasons statement of FtT Judge O'Brien contained  errors  of  law  that
    requires it to be set aside.

 4. Given this concession, there is no need to go  into  detail  about  the
    legal errors that are present.  It is  sufficient  to  say  that  Judge
    O'Brien did not properly  approach  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    social worker, foster carer and church minister, when  considering  his
    activities, bearing in mind: (i) the appellant was a child at the  date
    his appeal was heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  therefore  a
    vulnerable person, and it was unclear whether Judge O'Brien had  proper
    regard to the relevant Presidential guidance;  and  (ii)  the  guidance
    about evidence of conversion given by the Inner House of the  Court  of
    Session in TF and MA v SSHD [2018] ScotCS CSIH 58, which  although  not
    binding on the Upper  Tribunal  sitting  in  England,  is  nevertheless
    persuasive.

 5. Because of the concession, I set aside  the  decision  and  reasons  of
    Judge O'Brien.  None of his findings are preserved.

 6. I considered whether I could remake the decision in the Upper Tribunal.
     Mr Uddin referred to new evidence, which will  have  to  be  assessed.
    That  evidence  is  likely  be  relevant  to  the  assessment  of   the
    appellant's credibility, which Mr Mills says remains in issue.

 7. I decided, with the agreement of both representatives, that the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by  a  judge
    other than Judge O'Brien.

Decision

There is legal error in the decision and  reasons  statement  of  FtT  Judge
O'Brien.
His decision is set aside.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing  on
all matters before any judge other than Judge O'Brien.



Signed                                       Date         13 May 2019

     Judge McCarthy
     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"KSA".


Signed                              Date         13 May 2019

     Judge McCarthy
     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
