
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02780/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 December 2020                   |On 6 April 2021                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JOLLIFFE


                                   Between

                                     H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, instructed by AA Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  His  date  of  birth  is  2
    November 1989.   He was anonymised by the First-tier Tribunal. There is
    no reason for us to interfere with this.

 2. The Appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Greasley following a hearing on 17 May 2019.  The Appellant was granted
    permission to appeal.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pickup  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The matter was listed  before  us
    for a face-to-face re- hearing.

 3. The Appellant made an application on  protection  grounds  on  8  March
    2019.   In a nutshell, his case is that his father was a commander  for
    the  Hezb-e-Islami,  and  the  Appellant's  brother  was  his  father's
    bodyguard.  On 20 April 2007, his father and  brother  were  killed  by
    members of the Jamiat Political Party in Afghanistan.  They were killed
    by the Mohseni family[1]. Mustafa Mohseni, Saftar Mohseni, Mohamad Azam
    and  Rusol  Khan  Mohseni.   Those  responsible  for  the  murders  are
    influential  within  the  government  in  Afghanistan.   Following  the
    Appellant's father and brother's funeral the Appellant was  advised  to
    flee because those responsible for the death of his father and  brother
    would kill him.

 4. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 7 May 2008.  On 7 May  2008  he  was
    served with a RED 0004.  He was encountered on 2 February  2017  whilst
    working illegally here.  On the same day he made a claim for asylum.

 5. The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal.   Judge
    Greasley heard oral evidence from the Appellant and  his  uncle,  "ZS".
    Both had made witness statements dated 23  April  2019.   There  was  a
    report before the judge from Dr Giustozzi.

 6. The judge found the Appellant credible.  There were  before  the  judge
    death certificates pertaining to the Appellant's father and brother and
    their respective Hezb-e-Islami membership cards.   There  was  evidence
    from Dr Giustozzi concerning the authenticity  of  the  documents.   In
    addition, the Appellant relied on biographical details in  relation  to
    the named  assailants  of  the  Mohseni  Family.   The  judge  said  at
    paragraph 48:

         "48. I accept, to the lower standard of proof, that there is,  when
             assessed in the round, credible evidence that the  appellant's
             brother and father were members of the Hezbe Islami  in  their
             capacity as a commander and bodyguard  respectively.   I  also
             accept that the death certificates provided are  noted  to  be
             genuine  by  Dr  Giustozzi,  as  indeed  are  the   respective
             membership cards.  I draw no adverse inference  by  virtue  of
             the fact that  the  death  certificates  do  not  specifically
             indicate who was responsible for causing  death  by  gunshots,
             but rather focus upon medical aspects of the deaths.

         49.  I accept that Dr Giustozzi  has  used  a  regular  contact  in
             Afghanistan, upon whom he has placed reliance, when  assessing
             the  genuineness  of  both  the  death  certificates  and  the
             membership cards.  I find that the fact  that  the  points  of
             contact and the researcher  respectively  did  not  separately
             provide their credential does  not  undermine  Dr  Giustozzi's
             opinions and observations.

         50.  I also accept that it is likely  the  appellant's  father  and
             brother were in fact killed by the Mohsinis.  This  allegation
             was made by members of the appellant's  village  in  a  letter
             provided to the Tribunal, and appearing  at  page  30  of  the
             appellant's bundle.   It  was  not  suggested  at  the  appeal
             hearing,  nor  indeed  in  the  refusal  decision,  that  this
             correspondence was not genuine.  Nor equally was  anything  of
             the same kind said in relation to production  of  the  Taskiri
             family details appearing at page 11.  The  judge  went  on  to
             find that the appellant could reasonably internally relocate."

 7. The judge said at paragraph 57 that he accepted the biographies of  the
    Mohseni individuals and that they:

         "Point to affiliations and  associations  with  Jamiat  Islami  and
         indeed  with  the  authorities.   I  accept   that   the   evidence
         demonstrates that they have been involved in drug trafficking, land
         grabs and killings in Afghanistan.  However, there is  no  evidence
         before the Tribunal that these individuals have  sought  to  target
         the appellant who  has  never  had  any  political  connections  or
         affiliations with any opposition group to that  of  Jamiat  Islami.
         It is over ten years since the appellant left Afghanistan.  Nor has
         the appellant demonstrated, at any stage, any inclination or motive
         to seek revenge against such individuals following the death of his
         father and brother",

    The judge then went on to apply AS (Safety  in  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118 and concluded that  relocation  was  reasonable  for,
    amongst other reasons, the fact that the Appellant is young,  educated,
    and resourceful.

The error of law  decision

 8. Judge Pickup found that the judge materially erred and  set  aside  the
    decision.  The error of law decision reads as follows:-

         4.   It is quite  clear  that  the  judge,  having  considered  the
             evidence in its totality, made findings of fact largely in the
             appellant's favour.  The judge considered the  expert  reports
             from Dr Giustozzi and accepted,  from  paragraph  48  onwards,
             that the appellant's brother and father were members of  Hezbe
             Islami and that the death certificates provided  are  genuine,
             as are  membership  cards.   The  judge  largely  accepted  Dr
             Giustozzi's evidence and found that it was not  undermined  by
             the respondent's  criticisms.   At  paragraph  50,  the  judge
             accepted that it was likely the appellant's father and brother
             were in fact killed by the Mohsini family.  The allegation was
             made by  members  of  the  appellant's  village  in  a  letter
             provided to the Tribunal and it was never suggested  that  the
             correspondence was not genuine.

         5.   The further facts that are relevant are that the judge  found,
             and it is not contested, that the  appellant  had  never  been
             directly  threatened  or  specifically   threatened   by   the
             assailants of his father and brother; he  had  never  had  any
             direct contact with  them.   However,  what  is  said  is  the
             village elders informed him  that  they  have  threatened  his
             life, and thus he fled.  At paragraph 51 of the decision,  the
             judge stated,

                  '... What I must therefore go on to consider  is  whether,
                  in light of these circumstances, the appellant is able  to
                  avail himself of a reasonable  opportunity  to  internally
                  relocate within Afghanistan.  For reasons that  follow,  I
                  find that he can.'

             Challenge was made  to  the  use  of  the  phrase  "reasonable
             opportunity to internally relocate".

         6.   Mr Bazini points out that the correct test is  whether  it  is
             reasonable to internally relocate,  not  whether  there  is  a
             'reasonable opportunity', as  expressed.   I  agree  that  the
             phrase is open to interpretation as to whether the opportunity
             to  relocate  was  reasonable,  rather  than  whether  it  was
             reasonable to expect the appellant to internally relocate,  in
             other words, whether it will be safe for him  to  be  able  to
             relocate within Afghanistan.  However, I am not satisfied that
             on the facts of the case there  was  any  material  effect  in
             respect of the mis-statement of the test.

         7.   Mr Bazini claims in essence that the decision  is  incomplete,
             that the findings are incomplete in that the judge did not  go
             on to make specific findings as to whether the  appellant  was
             himself at risk from the Mohsini family or  their  associates.
             In a sense, it might be implied that the judge agreed that the
             Appellant was at risk in his home area because otherwise,  why
             would the judge go on to consider  the  question  of  internal
             relocation?  However, my attention has been drawn to what  the
             judge stated in paragraphs 56 and 57, where the judge  pointed
             out the appellant had never been  specifically  threatened  by
             the assailants of his father and brother and has never had any
             direct contact with them and at 57 stated,

                  'However, there is no evidence before  the  Tribunal  that
                  these individuals have sought to target the appellant, who
                  has never had any political  connections  or  affiliations
                  with any opposition group to that of Jamiat Islami.'

             The judge went on to point out that it had been over ten years
             since  the  appellant  left  Afghanistan  and  he  had   never
             suggested  any  inclination  to  seek  revenge  against  those
             persons responsible for the death of his father  and  brother.
             The difficulty is that  given  that  the  judge  accepted  the
             profiles, the biographies, of the Mohsini family and that  the
             evidence from those profiles demonstrated that they  had  been
             involved in drug  trafficking,  land  grabs,  and  killing  in
             Afghanistan.  They are known  warlords,  or  equivalent.   The
             difficulty is that the judge  never  addressed  the  reach  of
             these individuals to the intended place of safety, Kabul,  and
             never answered the questions as to whether  the  appellant  is
             actually at risk from them  even  though  he  had  never  been
             directly threatened.  In essence, the judge stopped  short  of
             making a complete  set  of  findings  that  would  inform  the
             question as to whether internal relocation was reasonable.

         8.   A further point is made that Dr Guistozzi's report raised  the
             issue of blood feud.  In addition to concluding that there was
             no risk to the appellant from the authorities but rather  from
             the political opponents to the authorities, he also raised the
             concern that these notorious  individuals,  fearing  that  the
             appellant might in due course or in the  future  take  revenge
             against them for the death of his father  and  brother,  might
             act pre-emptively to  attack  him.   None  of  that  has  been
             addressed in the decision and it is for these reasons  that  I
             find that the findings are incomplete.

         9.   I do not consider it is possible to  read  into  paragraph  51
             that the judge accepted that the appellant was  at  risk  from
             those persons, the  Mohsini  family  and  others,  because  at
             paragraphs 56 and 57 the judge was relying on the  absence  of
             evidence of a direct  link  of  threat  to  the  appellant  to
             suggest that he would not  be  at  risk  on  relocation.   For
             example, it is pointed out in paragraph 56 that he was able to
             attend the funeral without the knowledge  of  his  father  and
             brother's assailants as they lived in a location some distance
             away.  The judge suggested  at  paragraph  56  that  this  was
             cogent evidence that he is  someone  who  was  able  to  avail
             himself of a 'reasonable opportunity' for internal  relocation
             and the judge then rejected his claim that he would be  traced
             anywhere and everywhere in Afghanistan.

         10.   After  considering  the  decision  carefully,  I  accept  the
             submissions  of  Mr  Bazini  that  the   incomplete   findings
             undermine the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  can  relocate
             safely in Kabul, or elsewhere in Afghanistan.  In  respect  of
             that, the judge noted that the appellant's uncle  had  visited
             Kabul and had been returned there despite having been  granted
             refugee status.  All of this is complicated by the  fact  that
             the Court of Appeal has remitted the decision in  AS  back  to
             the Upper Tribunal as to the safety of Kabul.  It appears that
             the Upper Tribunal miscalculated the risks and that is  to  be
             reviewed on that narrow issue some time later this year.

         11.  In all the circumstances, I am troubled by  the  decision  and
             find that the errors are material; it would be unsafe to allow
             it to stand.  It may not be  surprising  that  the  judge  was
             unaware that the Court of  Appeal  remitted  AS  (Afghanistan)
             back to the Upper Tribunal  just  some  six  days  before  the
             decision was promulgated on 30 May 2019.  However  the  larger
             difficulty remains the incomplete findings as to  the  adverse
             interest of the Mohsini family and whether their reach extends
             as far as Kabul and whether they might  act  pre-emptively  in
             fear of retaliation or revenge from the appellant.   All  that
             needs to be addressed.

         12.  In the circumstances I find there is a material error of  law,
             one that requires it to be set aside."

 9. Judge Pickup in his decision made directions including the preservation
    of the positive findings from the First-tier Tribunal and therefore the
    outstanding issues are an assessment of the safety in Kabul and whether
    it is reasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate  there  given  the
    threat and reach of the Mohseni family.

10. There were further directions given by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  which
    were sent to the parties on 17 August 2020.  Judge Blum said  that  the
    remaking of the decision would take place by a face to face hearing  at
    Field House.  He identified the three issues as follows:-

      i)  whether  the  Mohsini  family  has  an  adverse  interest  in  the
         appellant;

     ii) whether the Mohsini family's reach extends as far as Kabul; and

    iii) whether, in any event, it  was  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to
         internally relocate to Kabul.



The evidence

11. There was reference at paragraph 4 of Judge Blum's decision to  further
    evidence from the Appellant.  There was  no  further  evidence  on  the
    court file. The  Appellant's  solicitors  had  purported  to  send  the
    further evidence in an email of 28 July 2020 but had failed  to  attach
    the "supplementary  bundle"  as  an  attachment.    The  Appellant  was
    relying on the bundle that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In
    addition there was an addendum report from Dr Guistozzi dated  30  June
    2020, an article from the Telegraph of 13 October 2020, an article from
    a   website    https://www.afghanaid.org.uk/news/the-new-threat-facing-
    afghanistan-coronavirus-co of 24 November 2020, an article from UN News
    at  https://news.un.org/en/story/2020/06/1067162  an  article  from  Al
    Jazeera entitled coronavirus pushing millions of Afghans into  poverty,
    a supplementary bundle  containing  a  letter  from  the  head  of  the
    villagers and a translation, bank statements belonging to ZS and a copy
    of the Appellant's medical prescription for amitriptyline.

12. The Appellant did not give oral  evidence  before  us.   ZS  gave  oral
    evidence.  Mr Bazini said that it was necessary for  the  court  to  be
    updated  on  the  situation   regarding   relocation.    We   expressed
    disappointment that the solicitors had  not  taken  a  further  witness
    statement from the uncle bearing in mind  the  passage  of  time.   The
    Appellant's uncle's witness statement before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    corroborates the evidence of the Appellant in respect of  the  part  of
    his account which has already been accepted by the First-tier Tribunal.
     He gave oral evidence before us that can be summarised as follows.

13. ZS Lives with his wife and two children.   The  Appellant  visits  him.
    The Appellant is unemployed.  ZS gives the Appellant  money  and  food.
    The Appellant is suffering from depression  and  stress.  He  does  not
    sleep well. He takes medication. The Appellant's mother and sister live
    in Afghanistan as  does  ZS's  brother  (the  Appellant's  uncle).  The
    Appellant's mother divides her time between Andorab  and  Kabul  (where
    ZS's brother lives). The Appellant's sister resides in Andorab with her
    family.

14. The Appellant could not live in Andorab because there are  enemies  who
    are influential.  He could not live  with  his  uncle  in  Kabul.   The
    Appellant's uncle there has his own family living with him.   He  is  a
    retired pharmacist. He could support the Appellant for up to two  weeks
    or a month at most; however, he would  not  want  to  invite  risk  and
    danger to his own family from the Mohseni family one of whom is  now  a
    member of the Afghan parliament.

15. It would be very easy for the Mohseni family to trace the Appellant  to
    Kabul particularly  in  the  light  of  his  uncle's  occupation  as  a
    pharmacist. He is well-known and easily recognisable in the  community.



16.  Kabul  is  negatively  impacted  by  the  coronavirus.  There  are  no
    facilities there and not enough oxygen for  those  suffering  from  the
    disease.  The Appellant's uncle in Afghanistan has just enough money to
    support himself and his own family.  There is a lot of unemployment  in
    Kabul as a result of the pandemic. ZS could possibly send the Appellant
    money for food but he could not afford to  support  his  accommodation,
    clothing or other expenses.

The Evidence of Dr Guistozzi

17. Dr Guistozzi has made a number of reports and certain  aspects  of  his
    evidence have been accepted, which led to the  lawful  and  sustainable
    findings made by Judge Greasley.

18. In relation to relocation Dr Guistozzi deals with this in his report of
    12 May 2019. Paragraphs 10, 13-15 of the report state as follows:-

         "10. As a result of all the above, there is no risk anymore to [HA]
             from the authorities.  However, the risk from political rivals
             of Hezbe Islami, like Jamiat-i Islami, persists.  The  killing
             of two close  relatives  means  that  the  culprits  would  be
             worried  that  [HA]  might  take  revenge  against  them.   In
             Afghanistan it is a matter of honour for every male member  of
             the offended party to take revenge whenever  it  is  possible.
             There is no time limit to the validity of a  feud,  which  can
             often last for generations.  While  [HA]  has  not  previously
             made such an attempt,  this  would  not  alleviate  the  risk,
             particularly as his return from the UK as an older  man  could
             be seen as increasing his ability to take revenge.  Sometimes,
             these feuds can turn into outright war, as  happened  in  2006
             between the Bhattani and Marwat tribes with  80  killed.   The
             Sipai-Alisherkhel feud was still  going  on  in  2012,  having
             caused up to 40 casualties already.  Anthropologists  Barfield
             and Coburn confirmed in separate interviews to  Cori  in  2014
             that blood feuds are still common occurrences in Afghanistan."



19. Dr Guistozzi said as follows in his report of 12 May 2019:-

         "13. If [HA] returned to Afghanistan and  relocated  to  Kabul,  he
             might make harder for those responsible of the  death  of  his
             father to track him down (sic), but he would also have to face
             the fact that Afghanistan does not have  any  benefit  system.
             The cost of living in cities like Kabul is way higher than  in
             the villages, where an individual might be able to get by with
             50  dollars/month.   Without  any  family  support  or   state
             assistance, and unable to even apply for relatively  well-paid
             jobs, [HA] would be at risk  of  becoming  homeless.   Finding
             accommodation will be difficult and  expensive.   The  current
             cost of accommodation in Kabul (September 2017) is for  a  bed
             in a dormitory with around ten people cost about 10 dollars-15
             dollars per month.  These dormitories are  found  in  outlying
             areas such as Kote-Sangi, Karte-Se and Darulaman Road.  In the
             centre of Kabul a bed in dormitory cost around  20  dollars-25
             per month (sic) single rooms in west Kabul  (like  Kote-Sangi,
             Karte-Se and  other  areas  of  west  Kabul)  cost  around  50
             dollars/month.  Single rooms in central Kabul cost  around  80
             dollars-100/month.  A two bedroom  flat  in  west  Kabul  cost
             around 150 dollars/month.  A three bedroom flat in west  Kabul
             cost around 250 dollars-300/month.   A  two  bedroom  flat  in
             central Kabul cost around 200 dollars-250.   A  three  bedroom
             flat in central Kabul cost around 350-400 dollars/month.

         14.  Concerning a livelihood on his own would be a major  challenge
             for [HA].  He will have to cope with an environment  which  he
             is completely unfamiliar: The Afghan  labour  market  is  very
             competitive due to  high  unemployment.   Recommendations  and
             references are essential for being hired.  He  would  have  to
             deal with a shrinking job  market  and  a  deep  economic  and
             social crisis.  Unskilled work as  a  daily  labourer  in  the
             building industry is the most widely available option, but due
             to massive unemployment (35-56% depending  on  the  estimates)
             most workers only get a  few  days  of  work  each  week;  his
             chances of getting even this type of employment will depend on
             his physical strength.  Daily labour rates in Kabul were about
             200 AFS/day (4 dollars), but of  course  work  is  not  always
             available.  The pay rate for unskilled workers  had  risen  by
             September 2015  to  300-400  AFS  per  day,  according  to  my
             researcher Shoib Najafizada who asked in two of  Kabul's  main
             squares, were labourers line up waiting for somebody  to  hire
             them  (sic).   This  is  higher  than   previously   reported,
             apparently because of the  20%  devaluation  suffered  by  the
             Afghan currency over the last eighteen months, and because  of
             the increase in the cost of living (accommodation especially).
              EUPOL estimates that a man with a family needs 600 dollars to
             live in Kabul; a single man would need a proportion  of  that,
             probably 200 dollars at least.  Other  chances  of  employment
             are paid even less: as a baker  earning  40  AFS  a  day,  for
             example.  The rising unemployment is reportedly  driving  many
             young men towards crime, with the level of  criminal  activity
             rising fast in Kabul.  As of September 2017 the rates paid  to
             daily labourers in Kabul were around 500-700  AFS  (around  10
             dollars-15 dollars), according to Najafizada.  This is  higher
             than  previously  reported,  apparently  because  of  the  20%
             devaluation suffered by the  Afghan  currency  over  the  last
             eighteen months, and because of the increase in  the  cost  of
             living (accommodation especially).  EUPOL estimates that a man
             with a family needs 600 dollars to live in Kabul; a single man
             would need a proportion of that, probably 200 dollars at least
             other chances of employment are paid even  less:  as  a  baker
             earning 40 AFS a day, for example the rising  unemployment  is
             reportedly driving many young  men  towards  crime,  with  the
             level of criminal activity rising fast in Kabul.

         15.   In  conclusion,  [HA's]  account  is  plausible.   He   would
             primarily be at risk from the killers of his relatives.  Their
             membership of Hezbe Islami was confirmed in  the  verification
             report,  and   their   death   in   the   verification   death
             certificates.  The rivalry between  Jamiat  and  Hezbe  Islami
             continues."

20. Dr Guistozzi has prepared an addendum  report  concerning  the  Mohseni
    family and the prospects of obtaining a job as a day labourer in Kabul.
     He says the  following in relation to the Mohseni family:-

         "3.  The Mohseni family is well-known in  Baghlan  as  one  of  the
             dominant families in the province.  They hail from Andarab and
             first started rising to  power  when  Ghulam  Mostafa  Mohseni
             became head of the security department of  the  20th  Infantry
             Division in the late  1980s.   Ghulam  defected  to  the  army
             opposition of  Jamiat-i  Islami  in  1992  and  was  appointed
             responsible for Andarab District by Jamiat.  During the  1990s
             he led the fight against the Taliban in Jamiat's ranks,  under
             the command  of  Jamiat's  Minister  of  Defence,  Ahmad  Shah
             Massud.  When the Taliban Emirate fell  in  2001,  Ghulam  was
             appointed  commander  of  20th  Infantry   Division   in   the
             Provisional Army of Afghanistan (2001-5).  That made  him  for
             the first time one of the three key power brokers  in  Baghlan
             (the other ones being Amir Gul for the Pashtuns and Said Mansu
             Naderi for the Ismalis).  In the first provisional  elections,
             Ghulam's brother Ghulam Rasoul Mohseni,  was  elected  to  the
             provincial council and then chosen as  head  of  the  council,
             thanks to the support of Deputy President Marshal Fahim and of
             Jamiat-i Islami.  However, Ghulam Rasoul Mohseni was killed in
             a suicide attack against his office in May 2013.

         4.   After Ghulam Rasoul  was  killed,  the  family  protected  its
             political interests by having two  other  brothers  of  Ghulam
             Mostafa run for office.  Ghulam Safdar  Mohseni  ran  for  the
             provincial council and Mohammad Azim Mohseni for parliament in
             2018.  Both were elected. Again, Ghulam Safdar managed to  get
             elected as president of the council  and  is  currently  still
             occupying this position.

         5.   Ghulam Mostafa has retired from active life and Mohammad  Azim
             has taken the family leadership.  As well as a  well-connected
             MP he managed to  get  numerous  state  projects  to  Andarab:
             clinics, roads, electricity in schools.   This  has  made  him
             very influential in Andarab.

         6.   The younger Mohseni brother, Ghulam Azam,  is  influential  in
             civil society but does not occupy any position.

         7.   The family is no longer so dominant in Baghlan as a whole,  as
             the Pashtun areas and  some  Tajik  areas  have  fallen  under
             Taliban control, and Pashtun officials have been appointed  in
             considerable numbers in the administration  in  recent  years.
             They are still the dominant family in Andarab (which  has  not
             been divided in three districts).  The only  competition  they
             suffer there is from the family of Khalil Andarabi,  who  used
             to be linked to the  rival  Hezb-e-Islami.   Now  even  Khalil
             Andarabi is aligned behind Jamiat, but the two families  still
             compete for power.  In the 2018 parliamentary elections one of
             Khalil  Andarabi's  brothers  (Dr.  Modabir)  was  elected  to
             parliament as well, enhancing the ability of the ability (sic)
             to compete with the Mohsenis.   Khalil  Andarabi  himself  has
             been appointed again as Provisional Chief of  Police  after  a
             period at home, and leads now the police in Ghazni.

         8.   Hizb-i Islami of Gulbuddin  Hekmatyar  has  some  presence  in
             Andarab, but is very weak.  No other party  or  groups  has  a
             significant  presence  there.   Hizb-i  Islami  is  not  in  a
             position to protect [HA] in Andarab.

         Concerning the Prospects of Employment as a Day Labourer

         9.   Typically day labourers in Kabul wait in  one  of  the  city's
             squares for someone to come and hire them for the day.  Before
             the current COVID-19 crisis, the daily rate  was  AFS  500-600
             (6.50-8.00 dollars).  Once the current crisis started, because
             of a collapse in job offers, the rates has fallen to AFS  300-
             400 (4-5 dollars).

         10.  Before the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, a day labourer  would
             hope to be hired two days out of three, although  this  as  an
             average in the actual  rate  of  employment  would  fluctuate.
             That implies an average monthly earning (excluding  period  of
             illness) of AFS 8,800 (113 dollars).

         11.  At present, because of the crisis, a day labourer cannot  hope
             to get hired more than one/two days out of  four  (at  reduced
             rates).  That implies an average monthly earning of AFS  3,150
             (40 dollars).

         12.  It is impossible to survive in Kabul with 40 dollars/month, so
             day  labourers  commonly  take  loans  from  relatives,   sell
             whatever valuables they might have, and cut their  consumption
             to the lowest possible level,  such  as  feeding  on  tea  and
             bread.   One  interviewee  reported  that  his  children  were
             beginning to suffer from  malnutrition.   Another  interviewee
             mentioned the case of a friend, who committed suicide  because
             he was not able to feed his family.  Fortunately by  the  time
             the pandemic exploded in Kabul it was spring and  heating  was
             no longer necessary (in winter the  temperature  fall  to  -10
             (sic)).

         13.   Getting  hired  is  also  becoming  a  matter  of   ferocious
             competition.  Says one day labourer that (there are  thousands
             of daily workers who are looking for work, when  someone  come
             to hire some daily workers, hundreds of people rush to him  to
             get hired).

         14.  The situation is similar in other jobs that are considered  to
             be at the bottom of the social  ladder.   It  is  possible  to
             become a taxi driver (unlicensed) with a modest investment  of
             a few hundred dollars for an old, worn out  car.   Before  the
             crisis an unlicensed taxi driver would turn over  AFS  700-900
             per day, while now the turnover has fallen to AFS  400-500/day
             (including costs  to  be  detracted  before  profit),  despite
             working longer hours (up to 14h per day).

         15.  I also confirm that I stand by the  findings  of  my  previous
             report and that [HA] will be at risk from the killers  of  his
             father in his home area and also in Kabul."

Submissions

21. Ms Everett relied on the decision letter.  She made  an  important  and
    significant concession that the Appellant is at risk on return  to  his
    home area. She accepted that, in the light of this and the findings  of
    the judge, parts of the decision letter are obsolete.

22. She drew our attention to the evidence of Dr Guistozzi in his report of
    12 May 2019 at paragraphs 10 and 13.  She submitted that  he  does  not
    address the issue of whether the Appellant would be at  risk  from  the
    Mohseni family in Kabul. The evidence is not  sufficient  to  discharge
    the burden of proof.  It is not enough to  establish  that  should  the
    Appellant's presence accidentally be revealed it would put him at risk.
     Dr Guistozzi does not specifically engage with the issue.

23. The Appellant has a support  network  of  significance  in  Kabul.   Ms
    Everett said she could not go behind the evidence that the  Appellant's
    uncle would not allow him to live with him; however,  there  is  family
    support and, on that basis, it  is  reasonable  for  the  Appellant  to
    relocate.  She accepted that the global pandemic compounds the existing
    problems but there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  will  catch
    coronavirus and as a result be very ill.   The  evidence  is  that  his
    family in Afghanistan continue to be employed.

24. Mr Bazini made submissions.  He stated that the starting point is  what
    is said by Judge Pickup particularly at  paragraphs  4  and  7  of  his
    decision in respect of paragraph 57 of the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He emphasised that this is not a case where the Appellant is
    at risk from the Taliban. The bibliographies in relation to the Mohseni
    family have been accepted by the Tribunal.  They have been specifically
    named as those responsible for the death of the Appellant's father  and
    brother.  They are warlords  and  gangsters  who  have  taken  powerful
    positions. One brother is a member of parliament.  The Appellant is  at
    risk in his home area. If they have an interest in him there, they also
    have an interest in him in Kabul.  The Appellant left Afghanistan  when
    he was a minor and he will be returning as an adult.  He  will  be  the
    talk of the town.  The family is well-known in the area and  word  will
    get out.  Those he fears are warlords. They have  power  and  influence
    and are  well-known  within  Jamiat  Islami.  The  risk  is  real.   Dr
    Giustozzi was not aware  that  the  Appellant's  uncle  was  a  retired
    pharmacist in Kabul which explains why he did not comment on this.

25. The bibliographies indicate that one of the brothers  is  a  member  of
    parliament.  He referred us to the bibliographies at pages 29 to 32  of
    the Appellant's bundle.  He referred us specifically to  paragraphs  3,
    4, 5 and 7 of Dr Giustozzi's report to support that the Appellant would
    not be safe in Kabul.  He will be perceived as a political rival or  as
    somebody who will avenge the death of his father and son.   The  appeal
    should be allowed on this basis.

26. Whilst the Appellant has a relative in Kabul the relative feels that he
    will bring danger to the family.  It is speculative  to  say  that  his
    family would be able to support him financially. Mr Bazini referred  us
    to paragraphs 2, 11,  213,  241,  242  and  246  of  AS.   The  general
    situation  is  exacerbated  by   the   global   pandemic.    Employment
    opportunities are less than they were when the Upper  Tribunal  decided
    AS.  In addition the Appellant has mental  health  issues.   Mr  Bazini
    drew our attention to paragraphs 241, 242 and 246 of AS.  There will be
    suspicion should he return to Kabul.  Attention will be drawn  to  him.
    The Appellant has good reason to be concerned and  that  will  have  an
    impact on his mental health.  Mr  Bazini  drew  our  attention  to  the
    background material. Our attention was drawn to pages 37 to 39  of  the
    supplementary bundle where there is  evidence  that  the  Appellant  is
    taking amitriptyline.

AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT

27. In respect of the reasonableness of internal relocation to  Afghanistan
    of an individual at risk in his home area the  Upper  Tribunal  decided
    the following which forms part of the headnote:-

         Reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul

         (iii)    Having regard to the security and  humanitarian  situation
             in Kabul as well as the difficulties faced by  the  population
             living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other
             returnees, which are not dissimilar to  the  conditions  faced
             throughout many other parts of Afghanistan) it  will  not,  in
             general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh for  a  single  adult
             male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not
             have any specific connections or support network in Kabul  and
             even if he does not have a Tazkera.

         (iv)     However, the particular  circumstances  of  an  individual
             applicant must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of
             conditions in the place of relocation,  including  a  person's
             age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections  with
             Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
             language, education and  vocational  skills  when  determining
             whether a person falls within the  general  position  set  out
             above. Given the limited options for employment, capability to
             undertake manual work may be relevant.

         (v)      A person with a support network or specific connections in
             Kabul is likely to be  in  a  more  advantageous  position  on
             return, which may counter a  particular  vulnerability  of  an
             individual on return. A person without a network may  be  able
             to develop one following return. A person's  familiarity  with
             the cultural and societal norms of Afghanistan (which  may  be
             affected by the age at which  he  left  the  country  and  his
             length of absence) will be relevant to whether, and if so  how
             quickly and successfully, he will be able to build a network.

         Previous Country Guidance

         (vi)     The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG
             [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive remains unaffected by this decision.

         (vii)    The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG
             [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to the (un)reasonableness of
             internal relocation to Kabul (and other  potential  places  of
             internal relocation) for certain categories of  women  remains
             unaffected by this decision.

         (viii)    The  country  guidance  in   AA   (unattended   children)
             Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16 (IAC) also remains unaffected by
             this decision.

         211.     In accordance with the 2019 Court of Appeal  decision,  we
             have made new findings on the extent of the risk the appellant
             will face from security incidents and the  relevance  of  this
             risk to the reasonableness of Kabul as an internal  relocation
             alternative.

         212.     The other findings of the Panel in the  2018  UT  decision
             were preserved by the Court  of  Appeal.  We  have  considered
             whether developments since December 2017 (which  is  the  date
             until which evidence was considered in the 2018  UT  decision)
             justify our reaching a different finding.  This  consideration
             has involved  a  review  of  a  very  considerable  number  of
             reports, articles and other  documents  (including  the  UNHCR
             Documents) as well  as  the  expert  evidence,  as  summarised
             above.

         Safety and Security

         213.      The  evidence  indicates  that  although  Kabul  and  its
             inhabitants are affected by armed conflict, in particular as a
             result of violent attacks by Taliban and ISIS,  the  city  and
             province are - and are likely to remain - under the control of
             the Afghan authorities. We therefore do not consider there  to
             be a real risk that Kabul will fall under the control of anti-
             government elements or become a site of active conflict.

         241.     The Panel in the 2018 UT  decision  noted  that  EASO  had
             recorded  very  high  levels  of  mental  health  problems  in
             Afghanistan, creating significant needs, but that there was  a
             lack of trained professionals and  inadequate  infrastructure.
             It was noted that there was only one dedicated  mental  health
             hospital in Kabul.

         242.     The evidence before us  is  consistent  with  the  Panel's
             findings: the conflict has resulted in mental health  problems
             for many  inhabitants  of  Kabul,  but  there  is  a  lack  of
             facilities (and professionals) available to provide treatment.
             There is no new evidence on this issue to warrant a  departure
             from the findings of the Panel.

         246.     UNHCR, in the 2019 COI  UNHCR  Report,  cites  extensively
             from a recent German study which found that returnees to Kabul
             from Germany have faced  violence,  suspicion  and  hostility.
             This study (which we have not  seen)  was  based  on  only  55
             individuals, and therefore caution must  be  exercised  before
             drawing generalised conclusions from it. We accept  that  some
             people  in  Kabul  are  suspicious  of  and  hostile   towards
             returnees.  However,  the  evidence  before   us,   considered
             together  and  as  a  whole,  points   to   returnees   facing
             challenging circumstances not because they have returned  from
             the west (risk from westernisation was categorically  rejected
             in the 2018 UT decision (at para. 187) and  this  finding  was
             not appealed), but  primarily  because  of  poverty,  lack  of
             accommodation and the absence of employment opportunities,  as
             well as the security situation.  The  mere  fact  of  being  a
             returnee does not prevent  a  person  accessing  accommodation
             (the  evidence  is  that  the  "tea  house"  accommodation  is
             available to all males) or being taken on for day labour  work
             in  the  informal  market.  Nor  does  it  prevent  a   person
             establishing, or re-establishing,  a  network,  although  care
             would need to be taken to avoid  people  who  are  hostile  to
             returnees.

         252.     Taking  a  holistic  view,  and  considering  all  of  the
             circumstances together, we are  satisfied  that  generally  it
             would not be unreasonable for a single healthy man to relocate
             to Kabul, even if he does not have any family  or  network  in
             the city and  lacks  a  Tazkera.  However,  in  all  cases  an
             individualised case-by-case  assessment  is  required,  taking
             into account an individual's personal circumstances  including
             factors such as his age, health, disability, languages spoken,
             educational  and  professional  background,  length  of   time
             outside of Afghanistan, connections to and experience of Kabul
             and family situation and relationships."

Findings and Reasons

28. This Appellant has been found to be credible in respect of his account.
     Ms Everett indicated at the hearing that it was conceded that  he  was
    at risk on return to his home area.  This  is  a  realistic  concession
    considering the positive findings that  were  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The power base of the Mohseni family is in Baghlan Province,
    specifically Andorab, the Appellant's home area.   The Appellant is  at
    risk on return to his home area from the  Mohseni  family,  members  of
    which killed his father and brother.

29. We must now consider whether it would be  safe  for  the  Appellant  to
    relocate to Kabul. We attach weight to  Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence.   We
    accept that the family would still have an interest  in  the  Appellant
    because of a family feud and they may perceive the Appellant wishing to
    avenge the death of his father and brother.  The family presents a risk
    to the Appellant in his home area. There is no reason  why  they  would
    not present a risk to the Appellant outside his home area,  should  his
    presence in Kabul  come to their attention; however as conceded  by  Dr
    Giustozzi, in Kabul it will be harder for the Appellant to  be  tracked
    down. He does not express an  opinion  in  his  report  concerning  the
    likelihood of the family tracking down the Appellant in Kabul.  We  are
    not sure whether he was specifically asked to comment on  this  by  the
    Appellant's solicitors. His evidence is that their influence is  waning
    in Baghlan province; however, it remains strong in the Appellant's home
    area.  We bear in mind that the family  remains  generally  influential
    with criminal intentions.  While  we  accept  that  should  the  family
    locate the Appellant he would be at risk, we  find  that  the  evidence
    does not establish that the reach of the family  extends  to  Kabul  or
    that it is reasonably likely that the Appellant would be  tracked  down
    should he return there. We accept that should the Appellant  return  to
    Kabul he may as a westerner be considered with some  suspicion  and  we
    accept that the Appellant's uncle is known within his  local  community
    because he was a pharmacist.  However, there is a gap in  the  evidence
    concerning the family's ability to locate the Appellant in Kabul.  From
    the  background  evidence,  their  power  base  in  Baghlan  is  waning
    generally.  The bibliographies accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal  do
    not establish  that  the  family  have  significant  influence  through
    Afghanistan that would support them becoming aware of  the  Appellant's
    return and being able to track him should  he  return  to  Kabul.    Dr
    Giustozzi's evidence does not support this. However, while there is  no
    objective fear, we accept that there is a genuine subjective fear which
    is a material factor when assessing the reasonableness of relocation.

30. We would have no hesitation in finding  relocation  reasonable  in  the
    absence of a genuine subjective fear expressed by the Appellant and his
    family There was no challenge to the evidence of ZS. We found him to be
    a credible and straightforward witness.  Ms Everett did  not  challenge
    his evidence which was that his brother, the  Appellant's  uncle  would
    not be able to offer meaningful support to  the  Appellant  because  he
    would fear that his presence would put him  and  his  family  at  risk.
    While the evidence does not establish that it is reasonably likely that
    the Appellant would be tracked down by the Mohseni family on return  to
    Kabul, we accept that if he is, he will be killed. We find  that  there
    is a genuine subjective fear felt by the Appellant and his family  that
    he will be tracked down and killed.

31. We accept that there is an ongoing feud which is not time- limited.  We
    accept that there is some support for the Appellant in Kabul;  however,
    it will be limited because his uncle fears association and putting  his
    own family at risk.

32. This will not only limit support  that  the  uncle  will  give  to  the
    Appellant,  but  it  will  also  impact  the  Appellant's  ability   to
    reintegrate and access support.  He is depressed and stressed  here  in
    the United Kingdom at the prospect of return to what he perceives to be
    death.  The evidence does not establish his fear is  objective  because
    of the gap in the evidence, but it is rational considering  the  murder
    of his father and brother and the ongoing feud with a family that still
    has significant influence in his home area.

33. We do not find that it is reasonable to expect the Appellant to  return
    to Kabul where he genuinely perceives that he will be tracked down  and
    killed by those who murdered his father and brother.   His  family  who
    can provide a network would be significantly compromised by his return.
    We find that this will severely limit the effectiveness of the  support
    that they will give to him. The Appellant's own genuine fear will limit
    his ability to access support or develop a support network. Considering
    all  matters  including  the  Appellant's  personal  circumstances,  we
    conclude that it would not be reasonable to expect him to  relocate  to
    Kabul.

34. The Appellant's appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 20 January 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Joanna McWilliam
Signed                                  Date 20 January 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

-----------------------
[1] There are several different spellings of the family name in the papers
before us including Moshsani, Mohsini and  Mohseni. We use the spelling in
the text copied or adopt the spelling used by Dr Guistozzi., "Mohseni"

