
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02862/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Thursday 12 December 2019         |On Tuesday 24 December 2019          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     F A
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Wand, Counsel instructed by Virgo Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
appeal involves a protection claim. Accordingly, it is appropriate  to  make
an anonymity direction.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Wylie promulgated  on  11  September  2019  ("the  Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal on protection  and  human  rights
         grounds.  The appeal had been dismissed on a previous occasion, but
         that decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal in December  2018
         and was remitted for redetermination.

      2. The Appellant is accepted to be a Sunni Muslim  from  Lebanon.   It
         was accepted by the Judge that  the  Appellant  had  been  sexually
         assaulted by men who appeared to  be  members  of  Hezbollah.   The
         Appellant says that the assault was based on his religion.  He says
         that he would therefore be at risk on return to Lebanon.   He  also
         says that he told others about the assault,  that  his  father  met
         with the Hezbollah leader who told him that he should not speak  of
         this  incident  as  it  would  discredit  Hezbollah  and  that  the
         Appellant's safety could not be guaranteed if he returned.

      3. The Judge did not accept that the Appellant had told  others  about
         what had happened to him and found that he would not be at risk  on
         that account.  She also concluded that the background evidence  did
         not show that Hezbollah target Sunni Muslims.  The Judge  concluded
         that there would be a sufficiency  of  protection  against  further
         incident if the Appellant faced problems from  Hezbollah  and  that
         the Appellant could internally relocate away  from  Shia  dominated
         areas of Lebanon should the need arise.

      4. As a starting point, the Appellant emphasises that  the  Judge  has
         found to be credible the Appellant's claim to have been subject  to
         a sexual assault by Hezbollah.  The Appellant  says  that  this  is
         relevant as the Judge accepts past persecution; it is said that  it
         is implicit in the finding that the Appellant was targeted  due  to
         his religion.  It  is  said  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
         Appellant would not  be  at  risk  is  irrational  viewed  in  that
         context.  It is also submitted that  the  Judge  misunderstood  the
         background evidence concerning the influence  of  Hezbollah  within
         Lebanon and that, when looking at internal  relocation,  the  Judge
         failed to take into account the Appellant's past experiences.

      5. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Chohan on 22  October  2019  in  the  following  terms  so  far  as
         relevant:

             "... 2.  The grounds appear to challenge every aspect  of  the
             judge's findings.

             3.   However, when one considers the  judge's  decision  as  a
             whole, it is apparent that the judge duly considered the facts
             and evidence in the case and the overall  findings  made  were
             open to the judge.  In my view, the judge has  given  adequate
             reasons.

             4.   The grounds are nothing more than a disagreement with the
             judge's findings.  There is no arguable error of law."

      6. The Appellant renewed his application to the Upper Tribunal.  By  a
         decision dated 11 November 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  granted
         permission for the following reasons:

             "Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Wylie  accepted  that  the
             appellant had been raped.  Ground 1  contends  that  she  must
             also have accepted his evidence that he was  targeted  due  to
             his religion because he gave evidence  that  the  perpetrators
             had told him at the time of the incident that he was Sunni and
             dirty and that they wanted "them" out of the area (para 16  of
             the judge's decision).

             At para 71, the judge referred to the incident  as  a  "sexual
             crime" which does not assist in deciding whether she  accepted
             his evidence summarised at para 16.  The judge's reasoning  at
             paras 78 and 80 appears to suggest that she did  not  consider
             that the appellant's religion was a factor.  Nevertheless,  in
             my view, it is arguable that it is not clear whether the judge
             had accepted the evidence  that  the  appellant  was  targeted
             because of his religion.

             It is arguable that, if the motivation for  the  incident  was
             the appellant's religion, this may be relevant in deciding the
             sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation.   In  that
             case, the judge arguably  failed  to  take  this  factor  into
             account when deciding sufficiency of protection  and  internal
             relocation.

             All the grounds may be argued."

      7. The Respondent contends  that  the  Decision  does  not  contain  a
         material error of law for the following reasons:

             "... 3.  It is submitted that whilst  the  FTTJ  accepted  the
             account of the appellant being attacked, the central issue was
             risk on return.  A holistic reading of the determination shows
             that the FTTJ rejected the claimed account of events  that  is
             said to have happened after  the  attack.   Having  identified
             that the appellant is  a  Sunni  Muslim  (as  are  his  family
             members), the FTTJ noted that there has been no further action
             taken against the appellant or his family in his absence,  the
             objective evidence did not demonstrate that Sunni  Muslims  (a
             comparable percentage of the population to Shia Muslims  [53])
             are targeted by Hezbollah at [77], the family of the appellant
             have been able to take employment and move freely  within  the
             state, and the appellant was able  to  leave  Lebanon  without
             issue.  Given these circumstances, it is clear that the attack
             whilst accepted was not one which was motivated purely by  the
             appellant's religion."

      8. The matter comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  Decision
         contains a material error of law and, if it does,  to  re-make  the
         decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.




    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

    Ground One

      9. The Appellant claims to have been raped on account of being a Sunni
         Muslim.  His evidence about the core of his  claim  is  as  follows
         (statement dated 13 November 2017 at  [B1-2]  of  the  Respondent's
         bundle):

             "4.  On 16th April 2017 I was playing football with my friends
             and I was returning home at 9 or 10pm.   I  was  close  to  my
             home, the street behind.  I saw some Hezbollah on  the  street
             and they called for me to come to them  and  they  would  make
             sure that I had fun (in a sexual way).  They told me come  and
             play bride and groom (this is a famous sexual game).   Then  I
             ran away and went home.  I didn't want to tell my family  what
             happened because I was shy about what had happened and ashamed
             about what they had said.  I had seen  them  around  and  they
             carry weapons, etc and I knew that they were Hezbollah.

             5.   On 29th April 2017, I was going home again.   I  had  not
             seen them in the meantime.  When I went back  home  they  were
             there and they pushed me to the wall in a side road  and  they
             tried to grab my genitals.  There were  five  of  them.   They
             tried to take my clothes off and put my hand on  their  sexual
             organs.  They said that I was Sunni and I was dirty  and  they
             wanted us out of their area.  I began shouting  and  I  pushed
             them.  They held me down and I was raped.  After  I  ran  away
             and went home.  They warned me not to  tell  anyone  what  had
             happened."

     10. The Judge accepted at [60] of the Decision that the Appellant  "was
         subjected to rape by one or more men who appeared to be members  of
         Hezbollah".  However, as she recognised in the following paragraph,
         the issue is whether this attack would give rise to risk on  return
         to Lebanon.

     11. The Appellant's first complaint about the Judge's findings in  this
         regard is a failure to make a finding  about  the  reason  why  the
         Appellant was attacked.  The Appellant  says  that,  since  he  had
         claimed that the attackers told him that he was "Sunni and  dirty",
         and the Judge did not find that this was not credible but  accepted
         his account, it must follow that it was accepted that the Appellant
         was targeted for that reason and yet at [89] of the  Decision,  the
         Judge refers  to  the  incident  as  a  "criminal  assault".    The
         Appellant also points out that the Judge accepted his account  that
         his father had met with the local Hezbollah leader in  relation  to
         the attack (see [79] to [81] of the Decision).

     12. The Appellant submits that whether there has been past  persecution
         is relevant to future risk and asserts that the Judge having  found
         the Appellant's account credible acted irrationally when concluding
         that he would not be at risk on return.

     13. The Respondent does not accept that the Judge made a  finding  that
         the attack was motivated by religious reasons.   She  submits  that
         the Judge accepted the attack but did not accept what  flowed  from
         it and certainly did not accept the  entirety  of  the  Appellant's
         claim.  The tenor of the asserted risk now  is  as  stated  by  the
         Judge at [71] of the Decision:

             "As I understand it the appellant's position is that he is  at
             risk from Hezbollah because of his  complaint  of  rape:  were
             that to be publicised, and members of Hezbollah implicated  in
             this sexual  crime,  the  reputation  of  Hezbollah  would  be
             damaged.  He was at risk of being killed to prevent this."

     14. The Judge dealt with that risk in what follows.  In particular,  at
         [73] and [74] of the Decision, the Judge found as follows:

             "73. The appellant described distress and embarrassment  about
             the assault.  He had not wanted to report the  matter  to  the
             police because he did not want  to  tell  about  what  he  had
             suffered: he said in oral evidence 'as an Arab its not easy to
             go to police and report I'd been  raped'.   I  can  understand
             that given his age and cultural background.

             74.  However there is such inconsistency in his evidence about
             making the assault known in the  community,  I  cannot  accept
             that he had done  so,  certainly  not  within  the  five  days
             following  the  assault,  before  his  father  spoke  to   the
             Hezbollah leader"

         Based on what is there said, the Judge went on to consider  whether
         there continues to be any risk arising from the assault.

     15. The Judge makes the point at [76] of the  Decision  that  "[a]t  no
         time has the appellant claimed that matters had  escalated  due  to
         his making public his complaints to others".  Whilst it is  claimed
         that a threat was made from the Hezbollah leader,  his  father  had
         spoken to that leader and the Judge found at [80] of  the  Decision
         that  "[t]he  family  have  not  suffered  any  problems  from  the
         Hezbollah"([80]) and that "[i]t would seem that the leader has been
         satisfied that the father had indeed kept his mouth shut".

     16. Whilst there is no express finding that the  Appellant's  assertion
         that the attack was religiously motivated is not  credible,  it  is
         implicit in the Judge's findings at [77] of the Decision  that  she
         did not accept this.  As she there says, "[t]here is  no  objective
         evidence that Sunni Muslims are specifically targeted by  Hezbollah
         in Lebanon because of their faith".  That is inconsistent  with  an
         acceptance by the Judge that the attack was motivated by  religion.
         As the Respondent  points  out,  the  Appellant's  grounds  do  not
         challenge that finding nor does the Appellant point  to  background
         evidence to the contrary.

     17. At its highest, therefore, the Judge accepts that the Appellant was
         subject to a random attack by  men  who  he  believed  to  be  from
         Hezbollah but his account that this was religiously  motivated  was
         not borne out by the background evidence.  On that basis, the Judge
         was thereafter entitled to conclude that the attack was a "criminal
         assault".  That conclusion is not irrational on the evidence.

    Ground Two

     18. Even if I am wrong in  my  conclusions  about  the  effect  of  the
         Judge's findings  about  the  attack,  as  Mr  Wand  accepted,  the
         Appellant also has to show that  there  is  not  a  sufficiency  of
         protection from the authorities in Lebanon.  The Judge set out  the
         evidence on this issue at [62] to [67] of the Decision.   She  made
         findings based on that evidence as follows:

             "86. The appellant did not report the assault to  the  police.
             According to the USSD Report the  Lebanese  civil  authorities
             maintained effective control over the Internal Security Forces
             (ISF)  and  the  government  had   effective   mechanisms   to
             investigate and punish abuse: the ISF is responsible  for  law
             enforcement.  The appellant said that he did not report to the
             police because Hezbollah were at the heart of the institution:
             this is not borne out by the objective evidence.  It  is  more
             likely that the decision not to make the report was due to the
             nature of the crime.

             87.  The  2018  USSD  Human  Rights  Report  states  (page  7)
             'Despite the presence of  Lebanese  and  US  security  forces,
             Hizbollah retained significant influence  over  parts  of  the
             country.  Neither the LAF nor the ISF controlled or  attempted
             to control the interiors of 11 of the 12 Palestinian camps  in
             the country ...'

             88.   There  is  no  reliable  evidence  that  Hezbollah  have
             significant influence over the ISF in the appellant's area.

             89.  I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  sufficient  protection
             available in  Lebanon  for  a  person  subjected  to  criminal
             assault such as the appellant."

     19. The starting point for the Appellant's ground two  is  a  complaint
         that the Judge  has  irrationally  categorised  the  assault  as  a
         criminal one rather than  being  motivated  by  religious  reasons.
         That was the subject of ground one and I have already explained why
         the Judge was entitled based on her findings  not  to  accept  that
         element of the case.

     20. The second point made is  that  the  Judge  has  misunderstood  the
         background evidence read as a whole.  The Judge has cited from  the
         USSD report at [87] of the Decision.

     21. It is said that the Judge has erred at [66] of the  Decision  where
         she says that "from my reading of the USSD report,  the  law  which
         cannot be enforced is that relating to freedom of movement,  rather
         than the rule of law".  I  am  unable  to  accept  the  Appellant's
         submission  in  this  regard.   The  point  made  about   Hezbollah
         maintaining checkpoints in "certain Shia-majority areas" is clearly
         made in the context of "In-country Movement" and is clearly in  the
         context of movement between areas.  Moreover, that section  of  the
         report includes the following commentary:

             "Government forces were usually unable to enforce the  law  in
             the predominantly  Hizbollah-controlled  southern  suburbs  of
             Beirut and did not typically  enter  the  Palestinian  refugee
             camps"

         That is consistent with the extract cited at [87] of  the  Decision
         and therefore to the extent that the section does raise any  issues
         about rule of law, that is dealt with within the citation at  [87].



     22. Whilst the extract cited from the USSD report might tend to support
         rather than undermine the Appellant's case, that extract  also  has
         to be read within the context of the USSD report taken as  a  whole
         which, although it indicates that "Hizballah, and  other  extremist
         elements operated outside the direction or  control  of  government
         officials" contains a lengthy  section  immediately  prior  to  the
         passage cited which deals with the effectiveness  of  the  ISF  and
         LAF.

     23. Moreover, as the Respondent points out, the Judge found at [88]  of
         the Decision that  there  was  "no  reliable  evidence"  about  the
         influence of Hezbollah in the Appellant's  own  area.   That  stems
         from the point made at [67] of the Decision  that  "[t]here  is  no
         evidence from the appellant's  father  in  a  letter  or  affidavit
         setting out his contact with the local Hezbollah leader, or  giving
         information about the local area" [my emphasis].

     24. The Judge's finding that there would be a sufficiency of protection
         is therefore one open to her.  As I have already pointed out,  this
         ground arises in any event only if the Judge was  not  entitled  to
         conclude that the attack was not religiously  motivated.   For  the
         reasons I have  already  given,  the  Judge  was  entitled  on  the
         entirety of the evidence to conclude that it was a criminal attack.
          If the Appellant were to  suffer  any  further  problems  of  that
         nature, on the Judge's findings which were open to  her,  he  could
         look to the authorities to protect him and take action against  the
         perpetrators.

    Ground Three

     25. The Appellant's third ground concerns the Judge's finding that  the
         Appellant could internally relocate to avoid a risk if one  exists.
         As such, based on what I say about grounds one and two,  this  does
         not arise. However, I deal with it for the sake of completeness.

     26. The Appellant's complaint in this regard is that, in  reaching  her
         findings at [90] to [93] of the  Decision  that  it  would  not  be
         unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate, the Judge has failed to
         factor in "the Appellant's  personal  circumstances  including  his
         past persecution, namely that he was subjected to a violent rape by
         members of Hezbollah for being a Sunni Muslim, a fact found by  the
         Judge [�60], and the trauma that resulted therefrom" ([31]  of  the
         grounds).

     27. I have already explained why I do not accept  that  the  Judge  has
         found that the Appellant  was  attacked  by  members  of  Hezbollah
         because of his religion.  I have also explained  why,  once  it  is
         accepted that this was, as the Judge found, a criminal assault, the
         findings in relation to sufficiency of protection also overcome any
         future risk of further attack.

     28. Although, as the Respondent points out, the Appellant does not  say
         that the factors considered at [90] of the Decision were not  those
         on which the Appellant relied, I accept that the  Judge  needed  to
         consider internal relocation in the context of the  overall  claim.
         I accept that the Judge has failed to take into  account  in  these
         findings that the Appellant was the subject of an attack which  has
         had a traumatic effect on him ([5] of the Decision).  Although  the
         Judge did not accept that any special  arrangements  needed  to  be
         made at the hearing to deal with asserted vulnerability,  as  there
         was no medical evidence  of  any  ongoing  mental  health  problems
         ([7]), nonetheless, it was relevant to the issue of undue harshness
         what would be the impact of the Appellant in light of his  personal
         circumstances, relocating away from his family within Lebanon and I
         accept that this is not considered by the Judge.

     29. However, given my conclusions in relation to grounds one  and  two,
         any error in relation to  ground  three  is  not  material  as  the
         Appellant can return to his home area to re-join his family there.

    CONCLUSION

     30. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that grounds one and  two
         do not disclose any error of law.  For those reasons, ground  three
         does not arise.  In any event, although I accept that there  is  an
         error disclosed by ground three, that error is not material.



DECISION

I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wylie
promulgated on 11 September 2019 does not  disclose  an  error  of  law.   I
uphold that decision  with  the  consequence  that  the  Appellant's  appeal
remains dismissed.


[pic]
Signed:  Dated: 17 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

