
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02791/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 December 2017                       |On 11 December 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                            Muhammad Nazim Uddin
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mrs L Barton, instructed by Hamlet Solicitors LLP
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Knowles  promulgated  12.5.17,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 3.3.17, to refuse
    his protection application.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 19.4.17 at Manchester.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio granted permission to appeal on 13.9.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 4.12.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Error of Law

 5. The appellant was not present at the appeal hearing.  I  was  given  no
    explanation for his absence.

 6. For the reasons summarised below, I found no material error of  law  in
    the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require the decision to be set aside.

 7. The primary ground of appeal, and that on which Mrs  Barton  based  her
    submission, is that the refusal  of  the  adjournment  application  and
    proceeding with the appeal in the appellant's absence was  procedurally
    unfair and not in the interests of justice, pursuant to  Rule  28,  and
    did not meet the overriding objectives of fairness and justice.

 8. Prior to the case review, the  appellant's  representatives  sought  an
    adjournment to obtain documents from Bangladesh and because his partner
    has a severe disability and it was not known if wheelchair  access  was
    available at the court. The application was refused by  the  Designated
    Judge conducting the case review hearing. A confirmation of the hearing
    date of 19.4.17 was sent to the  appellant's  representatives,  warning
    that if he or his representatives did not attend  without  satisfactory
    explanation, the Tribunal may determine the appeal in their absence.

 9. Prior to the appeal hearing on 19.4.17, there  was  a  further  written
    application for an adjournment, made by letter dated 13.4.17,  send  by
    fax the same day. It was asserted  that  the  appellant's  partner  was
    unable to  attend  the  hearing,  due  to  her  medical  condition.  An
    adjournment from 19.4.17 to a date  from  July  2017  was  sought.  The
    application was supported by a short medical note stating  merely  that
    she was suffering from  "urological  syptoms  (&  investigations)"  and
    considered unfit to attend court until the end of June 2017. No further
    explanation was offered and in the circumstances a judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal considered the application on the same date, 13.4.17, and
    determined that the information was entirely inadequate to justify  the
    requested adjournment, noting that the medical note did not explain why
    she was not able to attend court.

10. A notice was sent out to the parties confirming  that  the  adjournment
    application was refused, for the reasons summarised above, and that the
    hearing would proceed on 19.4.17. There was no  further  correspondence
    from the appellant's representatives.

11. The appellant was neither present at the appeal hearing on 19.4.17  nor
    represented, though he clearly still  had  instructed  representatives,
    who continue to act  for  him.  The  adjournment  application  was  not
    renewed in person or in writing.

12. At [7] of the decision,  the  judge  considered  the  absence  of  both
    appellant and representative and recited the  history  and  noted  that
    there  was  no  explanation  for   their   absence   and   no   further
    correspondence.

13. It is also noted that  at  an  earlier  date  the  appellant  had  been
    directed to provide to the Tribunal no later than  5  days  before  the
    hearing, witness statements and a paginated bundle of documents  to  be
    relied on. No such documents were ever  submitted.  At  [8]  the  judge
    noted that there was no evidence on behalf of the appellant, no witness
    statements and no bundle of documents. The judge determined to  proceed
    in the appellant's absence.

14. Before me, Mrs Barton was unable to explain why there was no attendance
    of appellant or representative at the hearing. She accepted that at the
    very least his representative should have been present  at  the  appeal
    hearing. There was no reason given as to why the appellant himself  did
    not attend and why his representative did not attend,  who  could  have
    renewed  the  adjournment  application  and  perhaps  provided   better
    information about the claimed medical condition. I note that even  now,
    the Tribunal has not been given any better information. It appears that
    even now there has been no preparation  of  the  appellant's  case  for
    hearing. Mrs Barton was unable to point me to any witness statements or
    bundle of documents.  As Mr McVeety submitted there remains  no  cogent
    explanation as to why refusal of the  adjournment  application  led  to
    "not one scrap of evidence" being submitted.

15. It would have been open to the  appellant  and  his  representative  to
    attend and pursue or renew an application to  adjourn.  He  could  have
    obtained a witness statement from his partner for use in the appeal. He
    could have obtained further and better  evidence  as  to  why  she  was
    unable to attend. It appears that the appellant and his  representative
    simply decided not to attend the hearing. Mrs Barton has been unable to
    enlighten the Tribunal as to why there was no  attendance  stating,  "I
    can't say  why  he  didn't  turn  up."  There  is  no  excuse  for  the
    appellant's behaviour. I am surprised that Mrs Barton  did  not  obtain
    better instructions on the matter before attending to pursue an  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.

16. Mrs Barton's second line of appeal was to suggest that  the  article  8
    assessment at [27] of the decision  was  inadequate.  However,  in  the
    absence of  the  appellant,  any  witness,  or  any  documents,  it  is
    difficult to see how the judge could  have  made  any  more  favourable
    finding.

17. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it was  held
    that if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    considerations;  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to   intrude;
    denying the party concerned  a  fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most cases  the
    question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his
    right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on
    fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that  the  question  for
    the Upper  Tribunal  is  not  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted
    reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied is that of  fairness:   was
    there any deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

18. In all the circumstances, I find that  whilst  there  was  no  specific
    discussion within the decision of the  fairness,  or  of  the  Tribunal
    Rules, or any case law, the decision to continue  in  the  absence  and
    effective contempt of the appellant for the appeal process was entirely
    justified and not unfair to the appellant. It was he who chose  not  to
    attend and not to present any evidence at all in support of his appeal.
    The appellant was not deprived  of  a  fair  hearing  just  because  he
    consciously decided not to bother attending.

19. No error of law is disclosed in any of the grounds.



Conclusion & Decision

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated




Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



