
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02831/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                 |                                |
|On 10 July 2019                        |On 19th July 2019               |
|                                       |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                     WA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Johnrose, for Broudie Jackson and Cantor
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. An anonymity direction was made in this case and will continue.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Garratt promulgated on 2 May 2019, which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a protection claim on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 1 June 1988 and is a national of Afghanistan.
    The Appellants wife (FA) and  sons  (AAA)  whose  dates  of  birth  are
    30.4.1992 and 1.4.11 are dependents in his appeal.

 4. The Appellants case was that 5 years before his arrival in  the  UK  he
    and his wife had met while she was studying near his home.  Her  family
    had already agreed that she should  marry  another  family  member  and
    therefore beat her when they found out about her relationship with  the
    Appellant. She fled her home and  married  the  Appellant.  She  became
    pregnant and tried to speak to her family again  but  was  beaten.  The
    Appellant and his wife and child fled  from  Afghanistan  fearing  that
    they would be killed by her family. The Respondent did not accept  that
    the Appellant was at risk from his wife's family as a result  of  their
    relationship or that her family had influence. It was not accepted that
    any medical problems suffered by the Appellants wife were at a critical
    stage.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Garratt  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found

      a) Although the Appellant had other family members living  in  the  UK
         none of them gave evidence to support  his  account  of  events  in
         Afghanistan.

      b) He did not  find  the  account  of  the  Appellants  courtship  and
         marriage of his wife and any risk arsing therefrom was credible.

      c) He did not find that there was reliable medical evidence  that  the
         Appellants wife had PTSD because he found that  the  letter  of  Dr
         Bright (AB 272-3) did not provide  a  detailed  analysis  and  that
         there was no psychological assessment (para 41)

      d)  The  Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellants  wife  suffered   from
         depression.

      e) In relation to the human rights appeal the Judge  considered  again
         the Appellants wife's medical issues and accepted that she suffered
         from severe depression (paragraph 53) and had a hearing defect.  He
         found that these did not meet the high threshold in N  [2003]  EWCA
         Civ 1369; he found that there had to  be  unchallenged  psychiatric
         evidence of a significant risk of suicide of the asylum seeker were
         removed and the Judge found no such evidence; he noted that she had
         never been sectioned.

      f)  In  respect  of  the  availability  of  treatment  in  Afghanistan
         equivalent to that in the UK he found that there  was  no  risk  of
         imminent death and therefore Article 3 and 8 were not engaged.

 6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that:

      a) That the Judge failed to take into  account  the  medical  evidence
         before him in rejecting the claim  that  the  Appellants  wife  had
         PTSD.

      b) The Judges  assessment  of  the  risk  on  return  of  suicide  was
         therefore inadequate.

      c) The Judge failed to engage with the guidance  given  in  J  v  SSHD
         [2005] EWCA Civ 629

      d) The Judge failed to  adequately  assess  the  expert  evidence  who
         states that the Appellants wife was unlikely to  receive  treatment
         not that the treatment available was not as good as that in the UK.

 7. On 24 May 2019 First tier Tribunal Judge Scott Baker gave permission to
    appeal.

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnrose on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) She relied on the Grounds.

      b) The Judge failed to assess the risk of suicide in  accordance  with
         the step by step guidance in J.

      c) The Judge made a finding that the Appellant did not have PTSD which
         was not open to him listing the sources of that  diagnosis  in  the
         Appellants bundle.

      d) The Judge at paragraph 53 conflated the guidance in N and R.

      e) There is no assessment of the risk of suicide if she were told  she
         was being removed when throughout the bundle there is  evidence  of
         'suicidal ideation.'

      f) It is unclear why the Judge accepted that the Appellants  wife  had
         'severe  depression'  when  the  medical  evidence  all  refers  to
         depression with suicidal ideation.

      g) There was no assessment of the causation of  her  problems  as  the
         Appellants case was that her mental health problems were linked  to
         events in Afghanistan.

      h) A proper assessment under Article 3 was required.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Tan submitted that:

      a) There is no challenge or permission in relation to the findings  in
         respect of the events in Afghanistan the Appellant  claimed  caused
         the family to flee only Article 3.

      b) The Judge does not say that there was no medical evidence  of  PTSD
         but rather that there was no evidence upon which he could rely.

      c) The references to PTSD in the medical notes were not a diagnosis.

      d) The most recent assessment from Dr Bright  was  dated  18  February
         2019 (AB 64) and the diagnosis  made  no  reference  to  PTSD  only
         depression with suicidal ideation.

      e) The letter at page 64 did not address the level  of  risk  for  the
         Appellants wife of suicide and did not establish that there  was  a
         real risk and what risk there was the  Doctor  linked  not  to  the
         process of removal but to the lack of social  interaction  and  the
         ongoing stress of the outstanding claim.

      f) The Judge was entitled to consider the fact that the Appellant  had
         not been sectioned as reflecting on the level of risk.

      g) If the Appellant returned with his wife against the background that
         the Judge had rejected the reasons given for flight  she  would  be
         returning to  a  familiar  place,  with  family  and  some  medical
         services. The expert was not in  a  position  to  assert  that  the
         treatment available was not appropriate for the Appellants wife.

10. In reply Ms Johnrose on behalf of the Appellant submitted

      a)  The most recent letter from  Dr  Wright  also  did  not  refer  to
         'severe depression' yet that was the finding made by the Judge  but
         it does refer to suicidal ideation. While there was no reference to
         PTSD there were past diagnoses.

      b) The medical notes would not simply  record  the  Appellants  wife's
         claim she had PTSD but would record symptoms and what was accepted.
         The letter did speak of increasing her  dose  of  metazapine  which
         must be relevant.

      c) The challenge is that the experts evidence i not that the treatment
         in Afghanistan is different but that it is not available.

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.





Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

14. The grounds challenge the Judges  finding  at  paragraph  40  that  the
    Appellants wife was not suffering from PTSD arguing that this was not a
    finding reasonably open to him. I am satisfied that the Judge  did  not
    have a full psychiatric or psychological report but was  faced  with  a
    bundle that contained various GP notes; letters  from  Nurses,  Doctors
    and two different Consultants both dated and  undated,  none  of  which
    were placed in any chronological order.

15. Thus the Judge at paragraph 41 refers to  an  undated  letter  from  Dr
    Bright a Consultant Psychiatrist (AB 92) which  confirms  that  FA  was
    being treated for PTSD and depression but notes that there is 'no other
    medical report which shows that there has been a detailed  analysis  of
    the wife's condition '.Even where a Judge  is  presented  with  a  full
    medical report (which he did not have in this case) he is  entitled  to
    consider to what extent it is based on established medical  methodology
    and criteria.  To the extent that it is not, a Judge may  be  justified
    in attaching less weight to it.

16. In this case I am satisfied that the Judge was not stating  that  there
    was no medical evidence but what was in the bundle was not evidence  he
    could rely to conclude that the Appellants wife had PTSD and that was a
    finding open to him. It is clear that the Judge was not  provided  with
    an up to date psychiatric or psychological assessment of the Appellants
    wife's mental state. There was no assessment of this lady by  reference
    to the recognised diagnostic formulation which was presumably what  the
    Judge means at paragraph 41. An experienced  Judge  such  as  this  one
    would also have routinely seen an accompanying psychological assessment
    but that was also absent in this case and the  Judge  was  entitled  to
    note its absence and to note that the Psychiatrist Dr Dolange at AB106-
    107 in her undated letter states that what  she  had  done  was  not  a
    'complete  assessment'  and  there  was  a   psychological   assessment
    outstanding.

17. Indeed, the most recent letter in the bundle at page 64 (not under  the
    heading Medical Evidence but in that part of the  bundle  described  as
    Country Evidence) was dated 18 February 2019 and made no  reference  to
    PTSD or any associated treatment but stated that FA had depression with
    suicidal ideations 'due to her social situations'. Ms Johnrose urged me
    to accept that the Judge should have accepted that the prescription  of
    Mirtazapine was an indicator that the PTSD was ongoing but there was no
    evidence before the Judge to suggest that this medication was  intended
    to address anything other than the depression that he had diagnosed.

18. While the GP notes and medical notes make references to PTSD again  the
    Judge would be entitled to give very limited weight to that  as  it  is
    unclear on what basis that record was made and by whom and  where  they
    have derived the information.

19. I am therefore satisfied that it was open to the Judge on the basis  of
    the evidence before him to conclude that the Appellant had not met  the
    evidential burden of establishing that his wife had at the time of  the
    hearing PTSD.

20. The Judge at paragraph 53 makes clear that he accepts that  FA  suffers
    from depression: he states 'severe' depression but I am satisfied  that
    this is a factual error as the evidence he  appears  to  accept  states
    that it is 'depression' but I am satisfied that this factual error  was
    not material as clearly a less debilitating condition does  not  assist
    the Appellants case.

21. The Judge accepts that there is mention of suicidal  thoughts  and  the
    threat of suicide if returned to Afghanistan but the  gravity  of  that
    risk was undermined again by the absence of clear evidence. I  am  also
    satisfied that the Judge has adequately assessed the  suicide  risk  at
    paragraph 53-53 again on the basis of the  material  before  him  given
    that he notes again the absence of a full psychiatric or  psychological
    assessment with a clear and definitive diagnosis of  FAs  mental  state
    and her suicide risk at  the  time  of  the  hearing.  I  have  already
    indicted above that the Judge was entitled to limit the weight that  he
    gave to evidence where the absence of a detailed report does not enable
    him to assess it by reference  the  medical  methodology  and  criteria
    underpinning it.

22. The Judge states at paragraph 53 that the threshold for the  engagement
    of Article 3 is a high one by reference to N [2003] EWCA Civ  1368  and
    would have been entitled to explicitly state that caselaw is clear that
    the Appellant must adduce the clearest possible evidence of a real risk
    that suicide would occur which would not otherwise  be  preventable  by
    appropriate medical supervision  both  on  the  part  of  the  removing
    country and having regard  to  facilities  which  might  reasonably  be
    expected to exist in the country of destination. The grounds argue that
    the Judge failed to take into account the  guidance  given  in  J   and
    confuses that with N but there firstly are many features of  that  case
    that the Judge would have been able to distinguish:  the  Appellant  in
    that case was accepted to be suffering from  PTSD  but  more  important
    there was a full report from a Consultant Psychiatrist  who  explicitly
    addressed the risk of suicide. The Court in J  nevertheless  was  clear
    that the threshold of engagement in relation to suicide risk  was  high
    even when faced with detailed psychiatric reports.

23. The evidence in this case I have already indicated fell  far  short  of
    painting a clear picture for the Judge, much of it undated or described
    as incomplete (Dr Dolange pages 93-95) While there  are  references  to
    suicidal ideations  due to her social situation and an attempt to  jump
    of a bridge in 2018 prevented by  the Police there  follows  thereafter
    in the bundle a letter from a Nurse at AB 96-97 who  records  that  the
    Appellant wants to return home; does not want to end her life ; her son
    was a protective factor and she would not  'do  anything  crazy  again'
    which is presumably a reference to the suicide attempt.

24.  Therefore, I am satisfied that there  was  an  absence  of  clear  and
    consistent evidence on which the Judge could conclude that there was  a
    real risk of suicide either in the UK or in  Afghanistan.  His  comment
    about the fact that FA was not sectioned was just that, he  was  noting
    that whatever she has done and however she has behaved although she has
    been treated by the NHS their concerns were not  such  that  sectioning
    her was believed to be the appropriate course.

25. Ms Johnrose also argues that the Judge did not properly engage with the
    expert report of Mr Foxley (AB13-56). The findings that I have accepted
    were open to the Judge were that FA suffers  from  depression  but  not
    PTSD and there was no clear evidence of a real risk of suicide  and  it
    is on the basis that the Judge was entitled to assess the  availability
    of treatment. While the Judges summary of the evidence in so far as  it
    is relevant to FAs mental health issues is very brief it  was  open  to
    him to conclude that 'treatment would not  be  available  at  the  same
    standard as that present in this country.' I  do  not  accept  that  Mr
    Foxley in the report states that no treatment was available but  rather
    that treatment was poor, medication was  limited  and  she  would  have
    difficulty accessing it. However given that the findings of  the  Judge
    were that he rejected the claim  that  she  was  at  risk  from  family
    members and  therefore  might  have  the  prospect  of  family  support
    together with the support of her husband who would return with  her  it
    was open to the Judge to find  that  the  Appellant  had  not  met  the
    evidential burden of establishing that FAs rights under Article 3 or  8
    would be breached by their removal.

26. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by the
    Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

         "The duty to give reasons requires that  reasons  must  be  proper,
         intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court
         in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
         dispute in the present case relates to the last of those  elements,
         that is the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  for  its
         decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is  important  to
         appreciate that adequacy in this context is precisely that, no more
         and no less.  It is not a counsel of perfection.  Still less should
         it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment  of
         the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
         their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,
         to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also to
         enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the  reasons  for
         the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of
         approach has been committed."

27. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.





CONCLUSION

28. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.



DECISION

29. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
15.7.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

