
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02718/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                              |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 4 December 2017                              |On 11 December 2017        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                            Ryad Khayon Al Tamimi
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Adebayo, instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Lawrence  promulgated  9.5.17,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  11.3.17,  to
    refuse his protection claim.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 18.4.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird granted permission to appeal on 14.9.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 4.12.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance, I have to determine whether or not there was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 6. In essence, the grounds  assert  that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
    consider the evidence placed before the Tribunal, applied  too  high  a
    standard of proof, and failed to apply anxious scrutiny. It is  further
    alleged that the judge failed to give proper weight to the  appellant's
    concession that he had gone to the USA on a false Iraqi passport.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge  Bird  considered  it  arguable
    that:

      a)  The  judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant's siblings, whose evidence  as  to  their  ethnicity  and
         nationality had not been challenged by the respondent. At [11]  the
         judge referred to the previous appeal dismissal in 2013,  but  gave
         no reason why the evidence of the witnesses was to be  disregarded.
         Judge Bird considered  the  Judge's  findings  were  arbitrary  and
         without adequate reasoning;

      b) The comment by the judge at [12] about the appellant travelling  to
         the USA ignored the appellant's evidence and  were  speculative  in
         relation to the appellant's siblings.

 8. The Rule 24 response, dated 28.9.17, submits that it is clear from  [3]
    the judge had regard to the evidence submitted by the appellant and did
    not need to refer to all of it.  The  judge  found  the  appellant  not
    truthful and the evidence does not establish that either the  appellant
    or his siblings are telling the truth.

 9. The first ground of appeal has no merit. It was common  ground  at  the
    appeal that if the appellant is an undocumented Bidoon, he is  entitled
    to  refugee  status.  In  the  circumstances,   arguments   about   the
    application of NM (documentation/undocumented Bidoon: risk)  Kuwait  CG
    [2013] UKUT 003656 are otiose.

10. In a previous asylum application made in 2013 the appellant claimed  to
    be an undocumented Bidoon. This was comprehensively  dismissed  in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin promulgated  in  November
    2013, which found that he had travelled to the USA on an Iraqi passport
    and was there fingerprinted. Despite the  appellant's  absolute  denial
    that this person was him, the evidence was overwhelming. Judge  Shimmin
    concluded that the appellant was in fact  an  Iraqi  national.  In  his
    asylum interview, the appellant denied that he had  ever  been  to  the
    USA.

11. The grounds and Mr Adebayo's submissions make a fair point  as  to  the
    assessment of the previous asylum appeal. The judge  has  misunderstood
    at [11] that at the time of that appeal, only one  of  the  appellant's
    siblings, Aziz, had been accepted as an  undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoon.
    Although he application had been refused by the Secretary of State, his
    appeal was allowed by Judge Agnew in 2011. The other two siblings  only
    entered the UK after the  2013  appeal  hearing,  in  2015.  The  judge
    mistakenly assumed that Judge Shimmin had considered  the  evidence  of
    all three siblings claiming to be undocumented Bidoon. However,  it  is
    not clear that there is any materiality in this point. Just as the fact
    that one the appellant's siblings had been found by a previous decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal to be an undocumented Bidoon was not binding
    on Judge Shimmin, the fact that two  or  more  have  subsequently  been
    accepted to be undocumented Bidoon was not binding on the respondent or
    Judge Lawrence in  the  consideration  of  this  appellant's  case.  An
    independent assessment of the evidence had to be made on  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal, taken as a whole.  I  note  that  Judge  Shimmin's
    decision was upheld by the Upper Tribunal.

12. Complaint is made that at [12] the judge suggested that "new  evidence"
    had come to light to indicate that the siblings are likely to be  Iraqi
    nationals and not undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon, when there was  no  such
    new evidence. However, on a reading of the decision as a whole, in  the
    context of the chronology, what the judge was referring to here was the
    new evidence post the 2011 decision in relation to the  first  sibling,
    i.e. the evidence before Judge Shimmin that this appellant had been  to
    the USA on an Iraqi passport, which he had denied. The  judge  was  not
    referring to new evidence post the decision of Judge Shimmin,  but  new
    evidence post the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in  2011,  which
    had allowed the appeal of the appellant's sibling, Aziz. Nothing  turns
    on the apparent mistake that it was only one brother that gave evidence
    in support of the appellant  before  Judge  Shimmin,  rather  than  all
    three. The point is the same; whether one or three brothers having been
    accepted as undocumented Bidoon cannot be  binding  on  the  First-tier
    Tribunal tasked  with  assessing  the  evidence  in  relation  to  this
    appellant.

13. In relation to this issue, it is claimed with reference to [10] of  his
    witness statement the appellant did not deny that he had  been  in  the
    USA and the judge was in error to suggest so.  However, I do not accept
    that the appellant accepted that fact  at  all.  All  he  said  in  his
    witness statement an acknowledgement that was what the judge found;  he
    neither explicitly nor implicitly admit that he went to the USA  on  an
    Iraqi passport. It follows that Judge Lawrence was entitled to rely  on
    his previous denial, which in reality has never  changed,  to  made  an
    adverse finding against the appellant when considering his claim to  be
    an undocumented Bidoon. To this extent, the way in  which  the  grounds
    are drafted is misleading.

14. The grounds, as amplified in  Mr  Adebayo's  submissions  to  me,  also
    complain that the  judge  overlooked  material  evidence  and  made  no
    findings on the  Kuwaiti  Association  letter  of  10.9.13,  and  other
    documentation. However, all of this  evidence  had  been  before  Judge
    Shimmin and Judge  Lawrence  was  entitled,  following  the  Devaseelan
    principle to take the findings of the previous  Tribunal  on  the  same
    evidence and facts as the starting point. That  included  the  fact  on
    almost the same evidence, including that the appellant travelled to the
    USA as an Iraqi, Judge Shimmin found that the evidence  outweighed  the
    findings in relation to the  brother,  Aziz,  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant was an Iraqi and not  an  undocumented  Bidoon.  In  reality,
    there was no fresh material evidence before Judge Lawrence, other  than
    the fact that two more  siblings  had  been  admitted  to  the  UK  and
    accepted by  the  respondent  as  undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoon.  Their
    assertions that they were undocumented Bidoon was taken  into  account,
    but in the light of the evidence considered as a whole  Judge  Lawrence
    suggested that they may also be Iraqi nationals and that the  cases  of
    the brothers may not have been scrutinised  anxiously  when  they  were
    granted asylum, and that the respondent  might  want  to  review  their
    cases. Further, in the light of the evidence, taken as a  whole,  there
    was in reality nothing upon  which  Judge  Lawrence  could  have  found
    reason to depart from the findings of Judge Shimmin.

15. With respect to the complaint that Dr George's report had been ignored,
    this evidence does no more than conclude that  the  ration  card  looks
    genuine, but it is clear from [34] of the report, the expert has no way
    of knowing who that person is, and cannot say that it was the father of
    this appellant. The value of the evidence is therefore strictly limited
    and, in the light of the other evidence and findings, it cannot be said
    that any specific consideration of this evidence would  or  could  have
    resulted in a different outcome to the appeal.  In  the  circumstances,
    the failure to specifically deal with this evidence cannot be  regarded
    as material to the outcome of the appeal  and  thus  there  can  be  no
    material error in any failure to do so. As the judge made clear at  [3]
    that all the evidence relied on by the appellant had  been  taken  into
    account, there was no requirement to address each and every part of  it
    in the decision.

16. Finally, the complaint that the judge failed  to  address  whether  the
    appellant was at risk as an undocumented Bidoon is not material, as the
    judge found that the appellant is not an undocumented  Bidoon,  but  in
    fact an Iraqi citizen, and went on to deal with risk on return to Iraq,
    applying the case law to the facts. I note  that  there  is  no  appeal
    against that part of the decision.

17. In all the circumstances, I  find  that  grounds  fail  to  identify  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusion & Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


