

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/02558/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2017                      |    On 11 January 2018            |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                    W G N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         No appearance and not legally represented
For the Respondent:        Mr D Clarke - Senior Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

 1. WGN is 16 years old (soon to turn 17), has no legal representatives and
    is the subject of a supervision order held by Leeds City Council.

 2. I am told that there are on-going adoption proceedings in  relation  to
    WGN in the Family Court, brought by a  person  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The final hearing in relation to those proceedings  has  been
    set down for 10 January 2018.   The  appellant  is  assisted  in  those
    proceedings by the children's guardian (MJ).  MJ does  not  assist  the
    appellant in the instant proceedings, although his assistance would  be
    welcomed by the Tribunal and, no doubt, by the appellant.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the  SSHD's
    decision of 24 February 2017, refusing her protection and human  rights
    claims. She was, however, granted leave to remain "as an  unaccompanied
    asylum  seeking  child".  The  appellant's  appeal   was   subsequently
    dismissed by FtT Judge Jones, in a decision promulgated  on  17  August
    2017.  The appellant did not attend the hearing of  her  appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, nor did a legal representative attend  on  her
    behalf.

 4. Given the appellant's absence from the hearing, the First-tier Tribunal
    initially considered whether it should proceed, concluding as  follows:



        "2.       Ms Hopkinson appeared on behalf of the  Respondent.   The
              appellant did not appear.  I notice from  the  Tribunal  file
              that the matter had been adjourned on an earlier occasion, at
              the appellant's request, when representatives  had  withdrawn
              representation,  in  order  that  she  might  secure  further
              representation "in about three months' time."   The  Tribunal
              adjourned the matter in line with that request.  I could  see
              from the file of papers that in response to the request  from
              the Appellant to adjourn dated 22nd  March  2013  (sic),  the
              Tribunal wrote to her at the address as stated in her earlier
              letter on 20th March 2013  (sic),  adjourning  until  today's
              hearing date.  Ms Hopkinson asked me to proceed.

        3.   I considered Rules 2 and 28 of the First-tier  Tribunal  Rules
              applicable to this jurisdiction  and  concluded  that  timely
              notice had been given of the hearing to the Appellant,  there
              is nothing to suggest that that notice, sent  to  an  address
              with which she had recently communicated with the Respondent,
              had not been sent to her.  It had not been  returned  by  the
              Post Office suggesting it was not  delivered.   The  Tribunal
              has heard nothing further from the Appellant in the meanwhile
              either.  I determined to proceed."

 5. On 6 November 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge C.A.  Parker  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, for the following
    reasons:

        "The grounds allege that the appellant understood that she did  not
        need to attend the  hearing  as  parallel  court  proceedings  were
        ongoing.  She explained that she had been placed with [LG] under  a
        child arrangement order and was living with her in Leeds.  She  was
        represented in those proceedings by a solicitor and  has  a  social
        worker in Leeds.

        The appellant is an unaccompanied minor and  so  I  very  carefully
        considered the judge's decision in its entirety.  My  only  concern
        is in respect of the judge's decision to proceed in the appellant's
        absence.  At paras 2 and 3, the judge notes  that  the  appeal  was
        adjourned earlier at the appellant's request  as  she  was  seeking
        representation and the notice of  hearing  appeared  to  have  been
        properly served.  There is no criticism of this approach,  had  the
        appellant  been  an  adult.   Although  the  judge  refers  to  the
        appellant being a minor in the body of the decision,  there  is  no
        evidence that her being an unrepresented minor was considered  when
        the judge made the decision to proceed in her absence.  There is an
        arguable error of law in the decision."

 6. The matter was listed before the Upper Tribunal as  a  case  management
    hearing to determine how best to proceed given that the appellant is an
    unrepresented minor, and in light of  the  real  possibility  that  the
    proceedings in the Family Courts would be finalised shortly.

 7. Lengthy representations were received shortly before the hearing from a
    Mr Rogerson, who writes on behalf of  Leeds  City  Council,  ostensibly
    requesting that the proceedings be adjourned until the outcome  of  the
    family proceedings is known.

 8. At the hearing on 22 December 2017 Mr Clarke accepted, for the  reasons
    identified by Judge Parker in the grant of permission, that the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision contains an error of law  and  should  be  set
    aside.  I concur.  Had the aforementioned concession not  been  made  I
    would, given the  information  which  has  now  been  provided  by  the
    appellant  in  relation  to  her   personal   circumstances   and   the
    circumstances leading  to  her  non-attendance,  have,  in  any  event,
    concluded that there  had  been  unfairness  occasioned  by  the  FtT's
    decision not to adjourn the hearing of the appellant's appeal.

 9. Consequently, despite the appeal being listed before the Upper Tribunal
    for a case management review hearing and despite the non-attendance  of
    the appellant at the hearing I, nevertheless, set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

10. Mr Clarke further submitted that the appropriate  course  was  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  re-determined
    afresh.  Once again, I concur with the Secretary of State's position.

Decision

   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Bradford  hearing
   centre to be determined afresh.

   Signed:
[pic]
   Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

   Dated:  22 December 2017




