
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02612/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2018                      |On 20 April 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                              RAHMATULLAH NOOR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Medley-Daley, Consultant with Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Pickup dated 29 December 2017, in which he dismissed
         his asylum and humanitarian protection appeal.

Summary of asylum claim

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, who speaks  Pashto.   He
         claims that his father  was  killed  by  the  Taliban  for  reasons
         relation to his employment at a company known as MWG, which  had  a
         contract with Americans.  The appellant believes that he is also at
         risk because he too worked for MWG and received threatening letters
         from the Taliban.  The First-tier Tribunal disbelieved the entirety
         of the appellant's account.

Issues before the Upper Tribunal

      3. In granting permission to appeal, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rimington
         considered that there was an arguable procedural error  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal owing to the appellant's  claimed  difficulties
         in understanding the  interpreter,  but  also  indicated  that  all
         grounds of appeal are arguable.

      4. At the hearing before me, Mr Medley-Daley clarified  that  he  only
         relied upon two matters raised in the grounds of appeal, and  these
         are to be found at paragraphs 7(a), (c) and (h):

             (i) the interpreter difficulties were  not  addressed  by  the
                  First-tier Tribunal and this led to procedural unfairness;

             (ii)      the First-tier Tribunal did  not  adequately  reason
                  its  conclusion  that  the  appellant   could   internally
                  relocate to  Kabul,  given  the  extent  of  the  evidence
                  including expert evidence, on this point.

      5. When  addressing  me  on  (i)  Mr  Medley-Daley  acknowledged  that
         regrettably there was no evidence whatsoever to support the  claims
         regarding the interpreter or how the First-tier Tribunal dealt with
         the issue.  In those circumstances, I  was  invited  to  hear  oral
         evidence from the appellant, in order to  fill  that  gap,  and  to
         provide some evidence as to his concerns regarding the interpreter.
          There was no witness statement filed either by  the  appellant  or
         the solicitor appearing on his behalf at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing back in December 2017.  It was way  too  late  to  seek  to
         elicit evidence at the hearing and inappropriate to do so without a
         witness statement or any advance notice.  I therefore rejected  the
         application to hear oral evidence from the appellant.

      6. Mr Medley-Daley then applied  for  an  adjournment  to  enable  the
         solicitors to prepare a witness statement.  I declined to grant  an
         adjournment given the lateness of the request.  As  I  observed  at
         the hearing it should  have  been  well-known  to  the  appellant's
         experienced solicitors, who have represented him throughout, that a
         party alleging misconduct by a judge needs to prove it  and  should
         do so when memories are fresh.  There has been  a  failure  to  act
         promptly in this case, without any  real  explanation.   Particular
         care must be taken in making allegations as to events at a hearing.
          At no stage have the appellant's solicitors sought  to  place  any
         reliance on their own contemporaneous note, preferring  instead  to
         rely upon vague assertions.  The circumstances  are  such  that  it
         would not be in the interest  of  justice  for  the  matter  to  be
         adjourned, in order to provide evidence that could and should  have
         been provided much earlier - see HA (Conduct of  Hearing:  Evidence
         Required) Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00018 and Azia (proof of  misconduct
         by judge) [2012] UKUT 00096 (IAC).

      7. Mr Medley-Daley then relied upon the second ground  of  appeal  and
         submitted that the reasons provided as to why the  appellant  could
         internally relocate are woefully inadequate.

      8. Mr Harrison relied upon the rule 24 response.  This emphasises that
         the First-tier Tribunal expressly  noted  that  the  appellant  was
         content to continue and there was no request by his  representative
         for the matter to be considered  further  or  for  an  adjournment.
         There was no reference whatsoever to the quality of the interpreter
         during submissions.  In the circumstances, Mr Harrison  invited  me
         to dismiss the appeal.

      9. After hearing from both parties, I reserved my  decision,  which  I
         now provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

     10. Mr Medley-Daley made it clear that he only relied upon two  grounds
         of appeal that I have summarised above.  I address each  ground  in
         turn below.  For the avoidance  of  doubt,  the  remainder  of  the
         grounds merely disagree with  the  factual  findings  and  seek  to
         reargue the appellant's case.  Mr Medley-Daley was entirely correct
         to place no reliance on paragraphs 7(b) and (d)-(g) of the grounds.



 i) Interpreter difficulties / procedural unfairness

     11. The grounds of appeal assert, without any reference  to  supporting
         evidence that the  appellant  had  "significant  issues"  with  the
         interpreter, who made  "various  interpreting  errors",  which  the
         First-tier Tribunal wrongly misconstrued  as  the  appellant  being
         obstructive and/or evasive.  There is no clear particularisation of
         what the alleged errors/significant issues were and how the  author
         of the grounds or the appellant came to identify those errors.

     12. It is also asserted in the grounds that the interpreter  originated
         from  Pakistan,  and  not  Afghanistan,  when  the  appellant   had
         specifically requested an Afghan dialect of Pashto  at  an  earlier
         case management hearing.  Again, as Mr Medley-Daley accepted, there
         was no evidence to support the assertion in the  grounds  that  the
         interpreter originated from Pakistan.

     13. The grounds also assert, again without reference to  any  evidence,
         that the First-tier  Tribunal  ignored  the  appellant's  complaint
         regarding the interpreter and failed  to  consider  that  the  poor
         quality of the interpreting was such that an  alternative  solution
         should have been found.   Contrary to the  grounds  the  judge  was
         aware of the appellant's claim that he had  difficulties  with  the
         interpreter and he expressly recorded this at [45].   I  note  that
         this is inconsistent with the indication at [8] that no issues were
         raised at the hearing.  However, the decision should be read  as  a
         whole.  The typed record of proceedings states this after  "Q  19":
         "ISSUE RE  INTERPRETATION  -  I  understand  the  interpreter,  but
         dialect is a  bit  different.  Content  to  continue."   The  judge
         clearly did not ignore the appellant's complaint.  He considered it
         and dealt with it.  He noted that the appellant did not  raise  any
         concerns until Q 19.  He then clarified  with  the  appellant  that
         although the appellant believed the dialect was a "bit  different",
         he was content to continue.  It is significant that the appellant's
         solicitor, Mr L Singh,  made  no  attempt  to  persuade  the  judge
         against accepting the appellant's willingness to continue.  Indeed,
         the record of proceedings makes it clear that Mr Singh relied  upon
         the appellant's oral evidence and  made  no  submission  whatsoever
         regarding interpreter difficulties.   There has been no attempt  to
         explain why the assertions made in the grounds of appeal  were  not
         made at an earlier stage either during or  after  the  hearing  but
         before the decision containing adverse credibility findings.

     14. Having said that, the responsibility for deciding  whether  or  not
         the proceedings should continue with the existing interpreter falls
         not on the legal representative but the judge.  It is  sufficiently
         clear from the decision and the judge's record of proceedings  that
         he directed himself to the appellant's complaint, noted that he was
         content to proceed and made the decision that the proceedings could
         fairly continue.  The appellant  and  his  solicitors  have  simply
         provided no evidence to support the submission that the judge erred
         or acted unfairly in this regard.

     15. I am not satisfied that the appellant has  established  that  there
         were interpreter concerns that caused him difficulties in providing
         evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  appellant  has  also
         not established that the judge acted improperly or that  there  was
         any procedural unfairness.

(ii)  Internal relocation

     16. Mr Medley-Daley invited me to find that the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         findings on internal relocation at [73] are  clearly  insufficient.
         He contrasted this with detailed  findings  reached  regarding  the
         reasons for finding the appellant not to be credible.

     17. The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find that  Kabul  would  be
         sufficiently safe and it would not be unduly harsh  to  expect  the
         appellant to relocate there for the reasons provided  at  [72]  and
         [73].  The First-tier Tribunal clearly took into account the expert
         evidence and updated country background evidence but  was  entitled
         to find that there  was  no  reason  to  depart  from  the  country
         guidance.

     18. As to the reasonableness of  internal  relocation,  the  First-tier
         Tribunal was entitled to find that as a fit, healthy young man with
         past employment links to  Kabul,  the  appellant  could  internally
         relocate  without  undue  harshness  notwithstanding  the  security
         situation,  as  highlighted  by  the  country  background  evidence
         available to it at the time.



Decision

     19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
17 April 2018
