
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02711/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 September 2016            |On 28 September 2016            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    H. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally and claimed asylum
       on 25 September 2015. That application was refused on 8  March  2016,
       and a decision to remove him was made in consequence.
    2. The Appellant's appeal to  the  Tribunal  against  those  immigration
       decisions was heard and dismissed by decision of First Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Duff promulgated on 5 July 2016.
    3. The Appellant's application to the First Tier Tribunal for permission
       to appeal was granted on 3 August 2016  by  Judge  Macdonald  on  the
       basis it was arguable the Judge had failed to determine  whether  the
       Appellant was a refugee, before turning to whether or not his removal
       to Iraq  was  feasible  in  the  context  of  whether  his  claim  to
       humanitarian protection should be granted.
    4. Thus the matter comes before me.


  Error of Law?
    5. The Appellant did not identify in his initial  claim  to  asylum  any
       risk of persecution for a convention reason, and none emerged in  the
       course of his evidence during the appeal process.
    6. The Appellant's case before the Tribunal was that he  had  fled  from
       his village in the face of the advance of ISIS forces,  and  that  he
       had in the process  lost  contact  with  the  other  members  of  his
       immediate family. He had not otherwise faced  any  problems  in  Iraq
       with either ISIS, or any other group. In the circumstances  in  which
       he had found himself he had simply taken the offer of  assistance  to
       travel abroad from a cousin. Accordingly, notwithstanding  the  grant
       of permission to appeal, the Judge was entirely  correct  to  dismiss
       the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds. There was  no  evidential
       basis upon which he could have reached any other conclusion.
    7. The Judge resolved the dispute of where the Appellant  originated  in
       his favour, concluding that the Appellant's home was in Ali Sarai  in
       the province of Kirkuk.
    8. The true thrust of the Appellant's  claim,  as  the  Judge  correctly
       identified, was that as a civilian he faced a risk  of  harm  in  the
       event  of  his  return  to  him  home  area  in  the  course  of  the
       indiscriminate violence affecting the civilian population,  resulting
       from the armed conflict being pursued between ISIS and the forces  of
       the Iraqi authorities; Article 15(c). In considering that  aspect  of
       his case the Judge considered, and sought to apply, the guidance that
       is to be found in this respect in the decision of AA (Article  15(c))
       Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544, which in turn follows the  guidance  of  the
       Court of Appeal in HF (Iraq) & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 1276.
    9. The Appellant had said that he had lost contact with the  members  of
       his immediate family in Iraq (although he accepted that  he  retained
       contact with a cousin in Iran), and that he did not  have  access  to
       any of his identity documents because they had  been  lost  when  his
       village fell to ISIS. If that claim were true, as the  Judge  appears
       to have accepted it was, then the Appellant had no identity documents
       in his possession that would permit the Iraqi Embassy  to  issue  him
       with either a passport, or, a laissez passer. Thus whether or not the
       Appellant  was  prepared  to   co-operate   with   the   process   of
       documentation (and on his account he was not prepared to  do  so)  he
       would not in practice be able to obtain the  issue  of  any  identity
       documents by the Iraqi authorities, and in particular a CSID.
   10. In those circumstances, as the Upper Tribunal concluded in AA, and as
       the Judge also concluded the return of the Appellant  to  either  the
       KRG, or, to Baghdad was simply not feasible, because no  such  return
       could be effected without documents. This was not the result  of  any
       policy of the Respondent - it was the recognition of the  reality  of
       the position adopted by  both  the  KRG  authorities  and  the  Iraqi
       authorities generally.
   11. In turn it followed, as the Judge concluded in the light of  AA  that
       the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  in  any  claim  based  upon  the
       consequences of destitution in  Iraq  arising  from  a  lack  of  the
       identity documents that would allow him to access state support.  The
       situation would never arise, because as someone whose return was  not
       feasible he would never find himself in that situation.  If,  in  the
       future, documents were issued to him that would mean  his  return  to
       Iraq became feasible, then he would not face destitution as a  result
       of their lack, because such documents would mean he could obtain  the
       issue of a CSID either in advance of removal, or  relatively  quickly
       after arrival.
   12. In the circumstances the Judge did not make any material error of law
       in his decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds. The Appellant's
       appeal is dismissed.


  DECISION
       The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  5
       July 2016 did not involve the making  of  an  error  of  law  in  the
       decision to  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  that  requires  that
       decision to be set aside and remade.  That  decision  is  accordingly
       confirmed.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 26 September 2016


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
       Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
       granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No  report  of  these
       proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction
       applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to
       comply with this direction could lead to  proceedings  being  brought
       for contempt of court.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 26 September 2016
