
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02349/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 17th October 2016 and 5th December 2016    |On 6th January 2017          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   T R E-M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, HOPO (17.10.2016)
     Mr M Diwnycz HOPO (5.12.2016)
For the Respondent:    Miss G Patel of Counsel instructed by Arshed
& Company (17.10.2016)
                    Mr M Schwenk, Counsel instructed by Arshed &
                    Company (5.12.2016)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Gladstone made following a hearing at Manchester on 8th August 2016.



Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Libya born on 20th May 1988.  He  came  to
    the UK to seek protection on  the  grounds  that  he  was  specifically
    targeted by armed militia and ISIS in Libya having participated in  the
    17th February 2011 revolution and as a well-known  member  of  a  human
    rights group.  In a detailed determination the judge concluded that the
    claimant had fabricated his account which she found not to be  credible
    in any respect.

 3. She considered Article 15c with reference to the country guidance  case
    of AT and Others (Article 15c; risk  categories)  CG  [2014]  UKUT  318
    (IAC) which concluded that a Libyan's mere presence in Libya would  not
    expose him to risk of threat to his life or person there.  She accepted
    that the claimant could not be expected to return to Benghazi but  that
    there was no reason why he could not relocate to a different area.

 4. She then turned to  the  argument  put  forward  by  the  appellant  in
    relation to the proposed method and route of return.  Both Tripoli  and
    Benghazi airports have been inoperable  since  2014  and  according  to
    information quoted in the US State Department Country Report  published
    in April 2016 "the lack of a physical presence by UNHCR or the IOM  was
    an  additional  obstacle  to  proving  protection  and  assistance   to
    returning refugees, asylum seekers and other persons of concern".   She
    also noted that travel within the country continued to be difficult due
    to the presence of Islamist and other militia checkpoints.

 5. She then wrote as follows:

         "In the light of all the above I consider that there is  sufficient
         evidence before me to find that  the  appellant  will  be  at  risk
         solely on the basis of the proposed  method  and  route  of  return
         which, in any event, has not been specified."

 6. She allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had conflated the viability of return with  risk  on  return.
    Whether there is a viable route of return is a matter for the Secretary
    of State when she decides to remove the claimant.  Furthermore she  had
    given inadequate reasons for how it can be said that any proposed route
    of return would put the claimant at  risk  of  such  a  high  level  of
    indiscriminate violence that substantial grounds  exist  for  believing
    that the claimant would solely by being present there face a real  risk
    which threatens his life or person.

 8. The Secretary of State relied on an extract from the June Country  2016
    Country of Information Report which clearly referred to  a  functioning
    airport which the judge failed to make findings on.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Woodcraft on  14th
    September 2016 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

10. The claimant served a reply defending  the  determination  and  stating
    that a cogent argument had been raised that there may  not  be  a  safe
    route of return for him which had to be  dealt  with  by  the  Tribunal
    regardless of whether the Secretary of State had  identified  a  method
    and route of return - HH (Somalia) and Others v SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    426.  The airport mentioned in the grounds, Al Abraq is in a  dangerous
    and contested area in Bayda.  The claimant would  not  voluntarily  fly
    there bearing in mind its distance from his home area of  Benghazi  and
    concerns over  the  safety  of  the  route  from  the  airport  to  the
    claimant's home area.

Submissions

11. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds and submitted that  the  judge  had
    erred in failing to deal with the  objective  evidence  before  her  in
    relation to Al Abraq Airport.

12. Miss Patel submitted that any  failure  to  deal  with  the  point  was
    immaterial because of the distance from Al Abraq to  Benghazi  and  the
    difficulty of the journey.

Consideration of whether there is a Material Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the judge erred.

14. In the papers before her, to which in fact she  referred,  there  is  a
    UNOCHA Report "shattered lives" which states:

         "Explosive weapon attacks have also led to the closure  of  Libya's
         two busiest international airports.  Benghazi International Airport
         has been closed since May 2014 due  to  the  proximity  of  ongoing
         clashes.  It was Libya's second busiest airport serving as a travel
         hub for the entire east.  Travellers  alternatively  use  Al  Abraq
         Airport, roughly 220  kilometres  to  the  east.   Mohammed,  First
         Officer at  Alafriqiyah  Airways  explained  'This  small  regional
         airport was built to host four flights per day and now sees as many
         as 25 domestic and international departures within 24 hours'".

15. It was incumbent on the judge to deal with the issue of  return  to  Al
    Abraq.  Miss Patel's submission that it would have made  no  difference
    to  her  decision  was  undermined  by  her  acknowledgment  that   her
    instructing solicitors had not provided any evidence to establish what,
    if any, the risks would be in travelling from Al Abraq to  Benghazi  or
    indeed another potential safe haven in Libya.

16. The decision is set aside  on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  did  not
    consider all of the relevant evidence before her.

17. Mrs  Pettersen  made  no  objection  to  an  adjournment  so  that  the
    representatives could provide all of the evidence upon which they  seek
    to rely, which must be filed with the Tribunal and with the  Presenting
    Officers' Unit seven days before the hearing.





Resumed Hearing

18. At the resumed hearing Mr Schwenk produced a large bundle of documents,
    including both the original bundle before the First-tier Judge and  up-
    to-date evidence relating to the situation in Libya.  He also  produced
    two faxed documents relating to an incident  at  Al  Abraq  Airport  in
    September 2016  which  the  interpreter  helpfully  translated  to  the
    Tribunal, and evidence from the BBC dated 2nd December  2016  and  from
    Sofrep Radio relating to rival militia activity in Tripoli.

19. He sought to adduce evidence of further threats to  the  appellant  via
    Facebook.  However, he accepted that there had been no cross-appeal  by
    the claimant challenging the credibility findings of the original judge
    and accordingly they stand as the assessment of  whether  the  claimant
    told the truth about the  events  which  led  to  his  application  for
    asylum.  Those credibility findings are not going to  be  re-opened  at
    this stage.  He accepted that, if the claimant had  evidence  which  he
    wished the Secretary of State to consider that should be  done  in  the
    context of a fresh application.

20. Mr Diwnycz produced evidence of commercial flights going in and out  of
    the military airport, Mitiga, in Tripoli.

Submissions

21. Mr Diwnycz relied on the  information  he  had  produced  showing  that
    commercial flights are travelling in and  out  of  Mitiga  Airport  and
    submitted that the latest information did not take the claimant's  case
    any further.  It appeared that there had been a foiled  attempt  by  Al
    Qaeda on Al Abraq but this was three months ago, and the BBC report did
    not establish a deterioration in the situation in Tripoli.

22. Mr Schwenk relied on the latest Tribunal decision in FA v  SSHD  [2016]
    UKUT 413 which held that AT and Others (Article 15c risk categories) CG
    [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC) should no longer be followed; each case had to be
    dealt with on a case by case basis.

23. He relied on his previous skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State was unlawfully failing to engage with the issue of a
    route and method of return.  She had proposed none.  All she  had  said
    was that the appellant could  return  voluntarily,  which  he  was  not
    willing to do.

24. He also relied on the Secretary of State's own evidence in relation  to
    the situation in Benghazi and submitted that there would be an  Article
    15c risk to him in his home area. There was no evidence that he had any
    connections outside Benghazi. He pointed  out  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not proposed any alternative area where the  appellant  could
    reasonably go. There was  up-to-date  information  from  Tripoli,  from
    three days ago, which reported that two of the cities largest and  most
    heavily armed militias were fighting an alliance of hardline  Islamists
    and militias loyal to rival political authorities.  Clashes,  according
    to the BBC, were continuing in two main districts of the south  of  the
    capital with tanks  and  pick-up  trucks  armed  with  rocket  launches
    reportedly deployed in several districts.

Findings and Conclusions

25. The Tribunal in FA recognised the volatility of the  present  situation
    in Libya and held that the conclusions in  AT  were  no  longer  to  be
    followed.  Each case is to be dealt with on its own facts.

26. At  paragraph  2.3.10  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  latest  country
    information and guidance on Libya dated June 2016 it states as follows:

         "In general conditions across the country  are  not  so  poor  that
         removal would be a breach of Article 2 or 3.  However the situation
         in parts of the country including Benghazi and some  areas  in  the
         east and south are likely to do so,  particularly  for  members  of
         vulnerable groups.  Decision makers should consider the  individual
         personal circumstances of  each  person  taking  into  account  the
         latest country information."

    At paragraph 2.3.15 it states:

         "The security situation varies from region to region,  and  between
         and within towns and cities.  The cities of Benghazi, Sirte, Sabha,
         Kufrah, Darnha and Misrata are particularly  violent;  Tripoli  and
         Tobruk  less  so.   Fighting  with  light   and   heavy   weaponry,
         abductions, assassinations, public executions, explosions and other
         abuses have all been  reported  in  these  cities.   Sirte  is  the
         stronghold of Daesh in Libya and is  reportedly  the  main  hub  of
         Daesh's north African operations."

    And again at paragraph 2.3.16:

         "Since the promulgation of the country guidance  case  of  AT,  the
         security situation in Libya has deteriorated.  Areas in and  around
         Benghazi, Sirte and Derna are particularly  volatile  with  a  high
         number of violent incidents and casualties due to fighting and  air
         attacks.  The conditions in these areas currently under the control
         of Islamist groups such as Daesh and Ansar Al Sharia are likely  to
         breach Article  15c  of  the  QD  although  the  situation  remains
         changeable."

27. There is absolutely no evidence that  the  situation  in  Benghazi  has
    improved since the report was compiled.  Since it is the  Secretary  of
    State's own evidence that the conditions  in  Benghazi  are  likely  to
    breach Article 15C, I conclude that the appellant, whilst he is  not  a
    member of a vulnerable group, cannot return to his home city without  a
    real risk of his Article 15c rights being breached. The COI report does
    not say that the risk is confined to such groups.

28. Indeed at paragraph 3.1.3 the CIG states

         "In general, levels of violence across Libya are not  such  that  a
         person would, solely by being present there, face a real risk which
         threatens his or her life or person in breach of 15c.   However  in
         some parts of the country, including Sirte,  Benghazi  and  Darnha,
         conditions are likely to make a return a breach of 15c."

29. That is an acknowledgment by the Secretary of State that, applying  the
    proper standard of proof of reasonable degree of likelihood,  returning
    the claimant to Benghazi would breach his Article 15c rights.

30. So far as the submission that the Secretary of State  has  not  engaged
    with the issue of route and method of return is  concerned,  I  do  not
    accept it.  She has in fact proposed two  possible  routes,  namely  Al
    Abraq, and today, the military airport in Tripoli.

31. Al Abraq is in the east.  Paragraph 2.4 of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    report deals with internal relocation.  It states:

         "Travel within Libya is restricted by violence and conflict between
         various armed militias and pro-Government troops  in  most  of  the
         populated parts of the country.   This  is  further  compounded  by
         roadblocks and  control  points  manned  by  conflicting  militias,
         including Islamic state Daesh/Daesh  and  other  terrorist  groups.
         The south of the country is subject to checkpoints  and  roadblocks
         operated by the Government and by militias.   Large  parts  of  the
         country are primarily desert areas with few towns  or  inhabitants.
         There is a lack of infrastructure and supplies, including fuel  and
         transport.  Most airports are closed, or in the  control  of  armed
         militias.  There is a risk of landmines and unexploded ordinance in
         many areas."

         Return to an area that is not the person's home may  be  reasonable
         in some cases.  Decision makers must give careful consideration  to
         the relevance and reasonableness of internal relocation on a  case-
         by-case basis, taking full account of the individual  circumstances
         of the particular person, including where they  originate  from  in
         Libya and where they will be returning to, and the latest available
         country information."

32. Evidence has been produced today of an abortive attack on  the  airport
    at Al Abraq.  Mr Diwnycz rather optimistically submitted that this  was
    three months ago, but this is a difficult basis upon which to  conclude
    that an airport is safe.

33. Be that as it may, even if the claimant could safely land at Al  Abraq,
    or indeed Tripoli, Mr Diwnycz was unable to point to any information to
    counter the conclusions in the  Secretary  of  State's  own  report  in
    relation to the difficulties of travelling in eastern Libya.

34. The FCO advice to British citizens considering travel to Libya is that

         "Road  travel  within  Libya  remains  highly   dangerous.    There
         continues to  be  a  risk  of  being  caught  up  in  outbreaks  of
         hostilities.  There is also a high risk of carjacking and  robbery.
         There is a risk of striking unexploded ordinance off road."

35. Those risks apply equally to Libyan citizens.

36. The Secretary of State has not chosen to identify  any  area  of  Libya
    which she considers it would be reasonable for the claimant to relocate
    to.  She accepts that he is at risk of Article 15c  harm  in  his  home
    area.  She is not  committing  herself  to  a  particular  airport  but
    suggests two, Al Abraq and Tripoli.  However the claimant cannot safely
    access any theoretical safe  area  from  those  airports  because  road
    travel is simply too dangerous in the present circumstances.



Decision

37. The original judge erred in law and her decision has  been  set  aside.
    It  is  remade  as  follows.   The  claimant's  appeal  is  allowed  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 5 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

