
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02474/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 April 2021                     |On 30 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     DK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Iran. He appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 28 February
    2020 to refuse him international protection. The  First-tier  Tribunal,
    in a decision promulgated on 21 October 2020, dismissed the appeal. The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup  at  [1-5]  has  given
    detailed reasons for rejecting many of the grounds of appeal.  He  has,
    however, not limited the grant (see  Safi  and  others  (permission  to
    appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC)). At [6] of  the  grant,  Judge
    Pickup has focused on [30-31] of the First-tier Tribunal's decision. He
    considered that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal judge  has
    given a 'bare rejection' of the appellant's  account  without  adequate
    reasoning.

 3. The respondent accepts that  the  appellant  acted  as  a  'kolbar'  or
    smuggler of goods across the Iranian border. The judge found  that  the
    appellant had suffered injuries consistent with having been shot whilst
    carrying out smuggling. However, he rejected the appellant's claim that
    he had any interest in the KDPI  or  other  separatist/rebel  political
    activity in Iran. He found that the appellant's claim that he had  been
    ambushed by Iranian forces whilst distributing leaflets  for  the  KDPI
    was untrue.

 4. The findings of the judge occur throughout paragraphs  [12-31]  of  his
    decision. The appellant argues that the judge has not provided adequate
    reasons for his rejection of  the  appellant's  account.  Mr  Tan,  who
    appeared for the Secretary of  State  at  the  Upper  Tribunal  initial
    hearing, submitted that the decision must  be  read  as  a  whole.  The
    findings at [30-31] are essentially a summary of the  earlier  findings
    and a confirmation that the  judge  had  considered  all  the  evidence
    before rejecting the appellant's account.

 5. I agree with that submission. The judge  has  given  reasons  at  [15],
    [18], [19], [22] for finding that the appellant's account of the ambush
    was not credible,  in  particular  that;  it  made  no  sense  for  the
    appellant to have exposed himself  to  risk  when  he  was  aware  that
    kolbars who worked for the KDPI would be treated much more harshly than
    mere smugglers working for profit or that he would  expose  himself  to
    risk having  been  ill  treated  previously;  the  account  of  posting
    lookouts prior to the ambush was not credible; the background  evidence
    did  not  support  that  the  appellant's  claim  of  having   suffered
    mistreatment as a mere kolbar as opposed to a political  activist;  the
    sums required to get to the United Kingdom to claim asylum were  beyond
    the financial circumstances described by the appellant. In my  opinion,
    paragraphs [30-31]  of  the  decision  seek  to  conclude  the  judge's
    assessment of credibility and, as such, those paragraphs are  bound  to
    be somewhat general in nature; the detailed reasons of the  judge  have
    been delivered earlier in the  decision  as  I  have  explained  above.
    Having already given detailed reasons there was no need for  the  judge
    to repeat those reasons in his conclusion. The judge's other purpose at
    [30-31] is, correctly, to confirm the holistic nature of his  analysis.
    I have no reason to doubt that the judge did consider, as  he  says  he
    did, all the evidence before reaching his conclusions. Contrary to what
    is asserted in the grounds, I find that the reasons given by the  judge
    are cogent and adequate.

 6. The judge accepted that the  appellant  may  have  been  wounded  by  a
    gunshot whilst smuggling. However, that finding  did  not  prevent  the
    judge from finding that the appellant was  not  politically  active  or
    that he had not worked for  the  KDPI.  As  the  judge  says  at  [29],
    background evidence  indicates  that  the  Iranian  forces  'shoot  [at
    kolbars] every so often to make a point.' More troubling perhaps is the
    omission of any specific discussion by the judge of the burns found  on
    the appellant by the medical expert. Background evidence indicates that
    burning is used by border forces  when  interrogating  rebel  activists
    whom they detain. However, I am satisfied that the judge was mindful of
    this part of the evidence in making his holistic assessment; he was not
    obliged to refer in his decision to each and every  item  of  evidence.
    The omission is insufficient per se to undermine the judge's  analysis.
    Moreover, I find that the judge did not fall  into  material  error  by
    referring at [22] to the modus operandi of agents working  with  asylum
    seekers leaving Afghanistan, as opposed to Iran. The point made by  the
    judge (that final payments are  only  made  after  an  asylum  seeker's
    family are notified that he/she has arrived safely in  the  country  of
    refuge) is a general one and applicable to  such  activities  globally.
    Even if the judge has erred by raising an immaterial matter,  I  cannot
    see that any error  is  serious  or  that  it  may  have  infected  his
    otherwise sound and even-handed consideration of the evidence.

 7. Finally, as regards the  appellant's  claimed  sur  place  activity  on
    Facebook, I am satisfied that the judge  has  not  erred  in  law.  The
    judge's finding [32] that the appellant would  delete  any  potentially
    damaging Facebook account before returning the Iran and that  he  could
    truthfully confirm if interrogated on return that he has no interest in
    separatist  politics  were  available  to  him  on  the  evidence.  The
    appellant would present as nothing more that a  Kurdish  male  with  no
    political profile and, as such, is not at real risk on return.

 8. For the reasons I have given, the appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

     The appeal is dismissed.



         Signed                              Date 22 April 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


