
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02473/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th June 2019                    |On 01st July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                    m D K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lee counsel instructed by Tuckers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1. Anonymity having previously been ordered in the First-tier Tribunal and
    there being no application to remove the order, I see no reason  to  do
    so and the order remains in place.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
    court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any
    member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll
    promulgated on 22  February  2019  whereby  she  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the decision to refuse to grant asylum or ancillary  protection
    or leave on Family and  Private  Life  grounds  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's fear of ill treatment at the hands of her rapist and return
    as a lone woman with vulnerabilities to Albania.  Permission to  appeal
    was granted at the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Bristow on 08 May  2019
    on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge had not given adequate
    reasoning in respect of credibility, having taken  account  of  adverse
    credibility matters involving her father's immigration and  nationality
    history which were not raised by the respondent  and  about  which  the
    appellant had had no opportunity to reply.

 3. I find that the criticism of the Judge's assessment of the  credibility
    of the father are  unmerited.  Contrary  to  the  grounds  the  adverse
    findings do rely on matters which were put into issue  in  the  reasons
    for refusal letter, and, again  contrary  to  the  grounds,  and  as  a
    witness statement from the father shows the appellant was aware of  the
    dispute but took the opportunity to provide his evidence to refute  the
    assertions. The judge was entitled to assess his evidence and find that
    he lacked credibility,  giving  evidence  that  was  expedient  to  the
    immigration benefit of his daughter remaining in the UK. The judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the father's evidence as to what support  and
    family would be available to the appellant on her return to Albania was
    unreliable. I am satisfied that the findings in respect of  the  father
    are not infected by any error.

 4. However there is merit, as recognised by  Ms  Jones,  in  the  grounds'
    criticism that the FTTJ allowed the  adverse  credibility  findings  in
    respect of her father to  infect  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    credibility in respect of her evidence as to having suffered a rape and
    to have felt at threat from her rapist, and of her understanding of the
    availability of family support in Albania. As Mr Lee described  it  the
    appellant and her father have been lumped together. I am satisfied that
    that amounted to an error of law. Ms Jones did not seek to  argue  that
    this was a case where even if the error were corrected there  could  be
    no other outcome.

 5. The other matters relied on in the grounds  to  criticise  the  judge's
    conclusions that the appellant's evidence as to the use of social media
    was inconsistent, and that the supporting documents downloaded from the
    internet were  lacking  supporting  evidence  as  to  the  nature,  and
    therefore reliability, of the reporting outlet, had less merit  but  in
    light of  the  error  identified  being  sufficient  to  set  the  core
    credibility findings about the appellant aside, those are  all  matters
    that will be part of the rehearing.

 6. I find that the protection decision  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal  is
    vitiated by legal error in respect of the assessment of credibility  of
    the appellant. The decision must be remade.

 7. In respect of the grounds going to Article 8 ECHR there is merit in the
    criticism that when the judge concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not
    enjoy any protected family life in the UK with her  father,  with  whom
    she had lived since he engineered her illegal entry here in 2015 at the
    age of 15, the threshold of engagement in terms of Article  8  was  set
    too high, but in any event the Article 8 assessment is based  at  least
    in part on what I have found to be an erroneous credibility  assessment
    of the appellant, so that there was no issue before me that the Article
    8 position must also be redecided.

 8. I did not accept the contention that  the  credibility  issues  of  the
    father and daughter were so intertwined that if the findings in respect
    of the appellant were in error those in respect of  the  father  should
    also be set aside and the case heard de novo. The point is  that  there
    needed to be separate consideration of their credibility.  The  adverse
    credibility findings in respect of the father are preserved.

 9. Both representatives were agreed that the matter should be remitted for
    a new assessment of the appellant and her credibility with new findings
    of fact sufficient to determine the claim.

10.  The  fact-finding  exercise  is  considerable  to   the   point   that
    reluctantly, as  the  appeal  has  been  before  the  First-tier  twice
    already, I agree with the view of the representatives that  the  appeal
    should again be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed   [pic]         Date 27 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



