
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/02103/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Given orally at hearing                  |   On 21 November 2017               |
|On 30 October 2017                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     JS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan of Counsel, instructed by Loshana & Co
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appeals against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss his appeal against the  decision  of
    the respondent, refusing his asylum, humanitarian protection and  human
    rights claims.  Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal.



 2. The grounds of appeal, which  we  emphasise  were  not  drafted  by  Mr
    Mannan, who appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant  this  morning,  are
    seriously problematic, as Judge Reeds pointed  out  in  the  course  of
    submissions.  The grounds quite evidently in various places refer to an
    individual who is plainly not  the  appellant.   This  is  particularly
    problematic, given that in other areas the grounds do refer directly to
    the particular appellant with whom we are  concerned.   An  explanation
    for this has been demanded by the Upper Tribunal  from  the  solicitors
    who seemed to have been responsible for drafting the grounds.

 3. The judge was faced at the hearing by the  appellant  in  person.   The
    respondent was represented, it seems  by  Counsel.   The  gist  of  the
    issues in front of the judge was as follows.  The appellant had entered
    the United Kingdom with his daughter in 2011.  They were both dependent
    on his wife's student visa.  He was of Sinhalese  ethnicity  and  lived
    and worked near Colombo.  He had made an application for  asylum  after
    his leave to remain in the United Kingdom, which had  been  granted  by
    reference to his wife's presence here, had  been  curtailed;  and  also
    after an application to remain as a dependent spouse had been  refused.



 4. The appellant said that he had been involved with a  person  called  M,
    whom he assisted  in  what  are  alleged  to  have  been  LTTE  related
    activities in Sri Lanka.  The appellant had been detained  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities for nine months,  during  which  time  he  had  been
    questioned, tortured and beaten; these predominantly occurring  in  the
    first three months  of  his  incarceration.   He  had  eventually  been
    released without charge but, importantly for this  case,  he  contended
    that he was aware through communications with family members after  his
    release that the authorities continued to have an  active  interest  in
    him and that this active interest continued after he had left  for  the
    United Kingdom.

 5. The judge was presented with a medical report from Dr McNulty.  He is a
    general practitioner.  He is not a  psychiatrist,  a  point  which  the
    judge noted when referring to the passages in the report which  touched
    upon matters of depression  and  post-traumatic  stress  disorder.   Dr
    McNulty made a diagnosis of depression.  It is fair  to  say  from  his
    report that he is, understandably in view of his  lack  of  psychiatric
    qualification, less categoric about PTSD, although there is material in
    the report that suggests certain  diagnostic  criteria  for  PTSD  were
    present in the appellant's account and in other matters put forward  to
    the doctor by the appellant.

 6. The judge made a series of findings, beginning at paragraph 22  of  his
    determination.  Importantly, he stated at  paragraph  22  that  he  had
    looked at all the evidence in the round, taking it  all  into  account,
    whether he referred  to  it  specifically  or  not.   He  then  made  a
    statement in paragraph 23 that he did not find the appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness in respect of one element of his account, that element
    being the contention that the authorities in Sri Lanka had a  continued
    interest in the appellant.  In that regard, the judge applied section 8
    of the 2004 Act  which  states,  amongst  other  things,  that  adverse
    credibility may in effect  arise  where  there  has  been  a  delay  in
    claiming asylum where, in particular, asylum is claimed  only  after  a
    decision to remove or any other relevant action has been taken  against
    the person.

 7. At paragraph 24, the  judge  considered  the  medical  evidence  of  Dr
    McNulty, to which we have just made reference.  In paragraph 24 we find
    the following:-

         "I accept nonetheless that the Appellant will no doubt be suffering
         some psychological trauma from past events, combined  perhaps  with
         current concerns about possible return."

    The judge then correctly applied  paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which specifies that where, as the judge had found, a person  has
    already been subject to persecution  or  serious  harm,  that  will  be
    regarded as a serious indication of a well-founded fear of persecution,
    unless there are  good  reasons  to  consider  that  it  would  not  be
    repeated.  The judge went on to find that  such  ill-treatment  as  the
    appellant had suffered in Sri Lanka would not be repeated.  He  did  so
    because he reiterated that he did  not  find  the  appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness as to the evidence concerning the  continued  interest
    of the Sri Lankan authorities in the appellant.

 8. At paragraph 27, the judge applied the Country Guidance in the case  of
    GJ [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) to the facts the judge had found; particularly
    the absence of continued interest in the appellant. The judge concluded
    that the appellant did not fall  within  any  of  the  risk  categories
    identified in that case.

 9. Despite their other  flaws,  the  grounds  do  make  reference  to  the
    Presidential Guidelines concerning vulnerable witnesses.   That  is  in
    our view important for  the  following  reason.   As  we  have  already
    stated, the appellant appeared before the Tribunal unrepresented.   The
    judge had Dr McNulty's report before him, although he took  issue  with
    aspects of that report.  As we have observed, the judge did accept that
    the appellant would be suffering from some  psychological  trauma  from
    past events, possibly coupled with current concerns.  In the  light  of
    that  and  bearing  in  mind  the  particular  need  in  the  case   of
    unrepresented appellants to ensure that  issues  of  vulnerability  are
    taken into consideration in making findings  of  credibility,  we  have
    concluded that it was an error of law on the part of the judge  not  to
    have regard to his finding of psychological  trauma,  when  making  the
    adverse credibility findings in paragraph 26 of the determination.

10. Indeed, one does not really in  our  view  need  to  pray  in  aid  the
    Presidential Guidance or indeed  case  law  such  as  AM  (Afghanistan)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, in order to  identify  such  an  error.   It  was
    manifestly the case that the judge, having made  those  findings  about
    past ill-treatment, should have adverted to them in paragraph 26,  when
    making  his  credibility  findings  about  continued  interest  in  the
    appellant. He should have considered whether the  deficiencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence identified by the judge on the issue of  continued
    interest could be attributed to psychological trauma.   The  matter  is
    compounded by the fact that we look in vain for an  explanation  as  to
    what the contradictions were in the  appellant's  evidence,  which  the
    judge alluded to in paragraph 26(ii) of the determination.




Notice of Decision

11. For these reasons the Tribunal has concluded that there is an error  of
    law in this decision.  We conclude further that it is a material error.
     It did obviously affect the result and, in the circumstances,  we  see
    no alternative but to set the decision aside and remit the case to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which will need to make entirely new  findings  on
    all issues.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   [pic]                               17 November 2017




The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
President of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber



