





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02083/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 19 April 2017                 | On:  10 May 2017                        |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                        Master Mohammed Khalifa Omer
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, counsel (instructed by BHT Immigration
Legal    Services ILS)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At issue before the First-tier tribunal was whether the  appellant  who
    gave his date of birth  21 November 1999, was a national of  Syria,  as
    claimed.  He lived in Egypt between 2012 and 2015.


 2. His appeal against the decision of the  respondent  dated  16  February
    2016 refusing his application for asylum, was dismissed by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in a decision promulgated on 1 February 2017.


 3. On 27 February 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal. She found it to  be  arguable  that
    the Judge erred with regard to the application of the correct  standard
    of proof where nationality was disputed.


 4. She found that it was also arguable that in assessing the weight to  be
    given to the LOID  report,  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  that  the
    language analysis was conducted by a linguist who does not speak Arabic
    and does not appear to have any academic specialities  in  Arabic.  His
    two "analysts" speak Syrian Arabic  but  not  "Cairo  Arabic".  It  was
    arguable that he did not fully engage with the criticisms of  the  LOID
    report put forward by Professor Matras in his language report which was
    supportive of the appellant's case. There were misdirections  regarding
    the assessment of the psychological report by Mr Derek Gifford May  who
    rejected the possibility of  the  appellant's  feigning,  finding  that
    there were a number of possible  contributing  factors  to  his  memory
    problems, and not just his head injury.


 5. Moreover, it was arguable that the Judge failed to  take  into  account
    the appellant's correct answers to "knowledge"  questions  relating  to
    Syria in  general  and  Aleppo  in  particular.  Finally,  he  arguably
    misdirected  himself  by  finding  that  simply  because  the  Egyptian
    authorities came looking for  the  appellant's  father,  the  appellant
    thought his life was in danger, whereas  the  appellant's  account  was
    that he would be arrested in place of his father if his father did  not
    surrender himself. Nor  did  the  Judge  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant is a minor  when  considering  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


 6. Ms Capel, who represented the appellant at the hearing,  developed  the
    grounds of appeal. She relied on her detailed  grounds  for  permission
    from page 175 of the consolidated bundle  which  she  produced  at  the
    hearing. She also referred to the skeleton argument that was before the
    First-tier Tribunal.


 7. She contended that the Judge failed to apply the  correct  standard  of
    proof in this case.  The appellant's claimed nationality was  disputed.
    This was a central issue in the appeal. The  appellant  claimed  to  be
    Syrian. The respondent asserted that he is Egyptian.


 8. She submitted that where the respondent  positively  asserts  that  the
    appellant is a national other than that claimed, she must prove  it  to
    the higher civil standard.  She  referred  to  the  decision  in  Hamza
    (Disputed Nationality - Removal Directions - s.66(2)  1999  Act)  Kenya
    [2002] UKIAT 05185 at [12]. Mr Justice Collins stated that where  there
    are in reality only two possible contenders, either  the  country  from
    which the appellant alleges he or she came, or some other country which
    is the obvious candidate, if an adjudicator feels able  to  decide  the
    issue of nationality, he must bear in mind that if he is going to  make
    a positive finding against the appellant, then he must do so not on the
    asylum standard, but on a higher standard which would be the balance of
    probabilities.


 9. Ms Capel submitted that this is also reflected in the respondent's  API
    on Doubtful, Disputed and Other Cases: at 3.1.  There  it  is  provided
    that if the Home Office  considers  the  applicant  to  be  a  specific
    nationality other than that claimed, the burden of proof rests with the
    Home Office to prove that assertion. "He who asserts must  prove."  The
    Home Office will need to establish this according  to  the  balance  of
    probability standard. The test is met if it is  more  likely  than  not
    that the applicant is of the alternative nationality.


10. She accordingly submitted that the Judge in this case erred by  failing
    to acknowledge or apply the correct standard of proof. She referred  to
    [27] of the decision by way of example. There  he  stated  that  having
    considered the whole, and having applied the lower standard,  he  found
    that the appellant is not a Syrian but an Egyptian.


11. In addition, she submitted that in assessing the relative weight to  be
    attached to the LOID report which was supportive  of  the  respondent's
    case and the report of Professor Matras, supportive of the  appellant's
    case, the Judge failed to take into account  or  engage  with  relevant
    material and failed to resolve the conflicts in the evidence presented.
    The appellant put forward specific arguments in  respect  of  the  LOID
    report which were set out in the skeleton argument at [54].


12. The Judge in considering the LOID report, stated at [25] that it  would
    have been a better practice to have stated the  qualifications  of  the
    persons involved in preparing the report. However, he  did  not  engage
    with the point made that neither of the analysts speaks or has academic
    training in what the report refers to as "Cairo Arabic."  Nor  did  the
    Judge engage with the remainder of the specific criticisms put  forward
    in respect of the LOID language analysis report. He was required to  do
    so  having  regard  to  the  need  to  exercise  anxious  scrutiny   in
    considering the appellant's claim and to ensure that every factor  that
    could tell in the appellant's favour was taken into account.


13. The Judge took no issue with the expertise  of  Professor  Matras,  who
    stated that it is to be expected that both features  of  Syrian  Arabic
    and Egyptian Arabic appeared in the  appellant's  speech.  Prof  Matras
    provided a detailed and thorough analysis of the appellant's speech and
    concluded that there had  been  a  very  short  and  inadequate  sample
    provided. His conclusion was  that  the  appellant's  speech  is  fully
    consistent with his own narrative  about  his  personal  biography.  It
    shows a form of speech that is reconcilable with Syrian Arabic and also
    shows influences from standard Arabic which  is  ubiquitous  throughout
    the Arabic world, as well as individual features from  Egyptian  Arabic
    to which the appellant will have been exposed during his stay in Egypt.




14. Ms Capel submitted that the Judge accordingly failed to engage with the
    view that the features of Egyptian Arabic present  in  the  appellant's
    speech are explicable by the time he spent in Egypt.  That  was  highly
    relevant to the significance or otherwise of the existence of  elements
    of Egyptian Arabic in the appellant's speech. If Prof Matras's analysis
    on this point was to be rejected, sustainable reasons were required.


15. She further submitted that the Judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
    psychological report of  Mr  Derek  Gifford  May.  He  found  that  the
    appellant's performance  on  the  cognitive  assessment  provided  some
    evidence  of  memory  problems.  There  were  a  number   of   possible
    contributing factors to those problems.


16. The Judge's reference to R (on the application of  AM)  v  SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 521 was inapposite. The Judge appeared to suggest that in  the
    absence of physical scars to which "physical sciences" can be applied a
    report  cannot  constitute  independent  evidence  in  support  of  the
    appellant's account. That, she submitted,  is  an  error  and  the  key
    question in respect of any medical report is whether or not  it  merely
    repeats the appellant's account or adds to it by reaching an evaluative
    judgment. She referred to the  decision  in  Detention  Action  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 2245 (123-124). She submitted that it cannot  therefore  be
    said that Mr Gifford  May's  report  is  based  solely  upon  the  oral
    evidence of the appellant and merely repeats the appellant's account.


17. Ms Capel submitted that the reference by the Judge to "Mrs Miyajar"  at
    [12] is inexplicable. There  the  Judge  stated  that  "these  are  all
    entirely based on the oral accounts given by Mrs Miyajar. The resulting
    letters and reports are not independent of  Mrs  Miyajar  but  entirely
    dependent upon her." She submitted that this is most likely a reference
    to an appellant in another case.


18. She submitted that when  considering  either  incorrect  or  inadequate
    answers by the  appellant  relating  to  Syria  generally,  and  Aleppo
    specifically, the Judge failed to set  those  against  the  appellant's
    correct answers to various questions put to him   at  the   substantive
    interview. During his interview he named the neighbourhood in which  he
    lived - Bav -Al Haddad, which is an area in Aleppo. He  identified  the
    names of important buildings in his area. He referred  to  the  Umayyad
    Mosque in Aleppo. He stated that it takes about 15 minutes  to  get  to
    it. That is confirmed by country background evidence.  He  stated  that
    the mosque is popularly  referred  to  as  "Halib".  He  also  named  a
    football team in Syria - Al Wadha. He  identified  the  currency  used.
    Some of the denominations found in coin form  and  their  colours  were
    identified by him. He also identified the denominations found  in  note
    form. He noted that both the note and coin form are called  "Lira".  He
    was also aware that the flag of Syria had been changed.  He  named  the
    television station in Syria.


19. She submitted that in rejecting his account that  he  was  at  risk  of
    persecution by the Egyptian authorities who had  arrested  his  father,
    the Judge stated at [28] that in his view it is unrealistic that simply
    because the Egyptian authorities  came  looking  for  his  father,  the
    appellant thought his life was in danger.


20. However the appellant's account was that the Egyptian authorities  told
    him that he would be arrested in place of his father if his father  did
    not surrender himself.  She submitted  that  in  that  context,  it  is
    readily understandable why the appellant believed that he was  at  risk
    of persecution. The country background evidence was not referred to  by
    the Judge, but it was also supportive of his claim to  be  at  risk  of
    persecution in Egypt.


21. She referred by way of example to the country background evidence cited
    in the skeleton argument at [76-78]. She referred to  paragraph  14  of
    the appellant's witness statement where he stated that he was compelled
    to flee Egypt as the authorities came to his house for his  father  and
    told him he would be arrested and taken into detention in his place  if
    they returned again and he was not present. He felt  they  believed  he
    was involved in the same or similar way as his father. They  would  not
    have believed his protestations of innocence and would have  mistreated
    or even tortured him if they had returned and taken him away.  He  knew
    he had to escape.


22. Finally she submitted that as  the  appellant  is  a  minor,  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules does not apply to  him.  The  Judge
    erred in considering his case by reference to that provision.


23. In reply, Mr Clarke accepted that the findings at [28] of the  decision
    was clearly wrong. He also accepted that  there  is  a  burden  on  the
    respondent to the civil standard regarding  the  positive  findings  of
    nationality in this case. However, it was the  evidential  burden  that
    was on the respondent in this respect.


24. He submitted with regard to [27] that when everything is considered  in
    the round, and having applied the lower standard, the appellant is  not
    Syrian. That  he  submitted  followed  from  a  comprehensive  analysis
    undertaken in relation to his nationality.


25. Further, Mr Gifford May did not subject the  appellant  to  a  physical
    examination. He did not engage with the appellant's evidence  given  to
    the Judge that his loss of memory is down to a  head  injury  which  he
    sustained as a boy. There was no reference  to  poor  memory  resulting
    from a head injury. The Judge noted that the appellant forgot the  name
    of a street near his home. He claimed to have lived at  an  address  in
    Aleppo until he left for Egypt, on his account, for 13 years. In  those
    circumstances the Judge's finding that he would have forgotten the name
    of the street where he lived is sustainable.


26. The Judge  had  regard  to  the  linguistic  reports  setting  out  the
    assessment in  some  detail  from  [20]  onwards.  He  noted  that  the
    appellant challenged the report relied on by the respondent.  Professor
    Matras relied on the audio  recording  which  he  said  was  poor.  The
    appellant's voice was not clear. He did not get his own evidence of the
    appellant's speech. This amounts in effect to a disagreement  with  the
    finding by the Judge.


27. Moreover, the Judge noted Professor Matras's criticisms that there  was
    no indication that the principal author of the report had any knowledge
    of Arabic, nor that the language analysts had had any  formal  training
    in linguistics  analysis.  The  interviewing  was  identified  by  code
    reference and the verifiers are identified by code reference  as  well.
    The Judge found that it would have  been  a  better  practice  to  have
    stated the qualifications of the  persons  involved  in  preparing  the
    report but considering  the  totality  of  the  report,  he  found  the
    contents were cogent. He therefore attached weight to the  contents  of
    the report - [25].


28. The Judge had the benefit of all the evidence, and  was  not  bound  to
    accept  the  appellant's  account  on  the  basis   of   the   author's
    observations. He took the report into account,  having  regard  to  the
    totality of the evidence.


29. Finally, with regard to the  mistake  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    father, there had been bare assertions regarding the father. This is  a
    small point and would not change the outcome of his appeal.


30. In reply, Ms Capel submitted that if you get evidence relating  to  his
    father "wrong" that is a material misdirection.  She  referred  to  her
    grounds of appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  at  [77]  and  [78].
    Since 2013 when former President Morsi was ousted, Egyptian authorities
    have  adopted  a  "zero  tolerance"  approach  to  Muslim   Brotherhood
    activities of any kind. Amnesty International's  report  of  2016  with
    regard to Egypt noted the crackdown on members and perceived supporters
    of the Muslim  Brotherhood.  Further,  Human  Rights  Watch  noted  the
    existence of a broad arrest campaign targeting the Muslim  Brotherhood.
    Crucially,  the  country  background  evidence  indicated   that   even
    perceived membership of the Muslim Brotherhood is sufficient to attract
    a risk of persecution.


31. She submitted that contrary to the Judge's assessment, the  expert  did
    address the causes of the appellant's memory problems that he  claimed.
    Mr Derek Gifford May stated  that  he  believed  that  the  appellant's
    performance on the  cognitive  assessment  provides  some  evidence  of
    memory problems at this time, although he outlined a number of  caveats
    to this conclusion as well. It is not possible  to  conclude  what  has
    given rise to his memory problems in the first  place,  since  there  a
    number of possible contributing factors including  neurological  damage
    from brain injury.


32. He also stated that the results of psychological trauma and  depression
    scales  indicate  that  he  does  suffer  emotional   difficulties   of
    depression and post traumatic stress. He was able to mask these by  the
    protective mechanisms of  defensive  avoidance,  deliberately  avoiding
    memories and people who may trigger painfully  traumatic  memories.  He
    perceived changes in his affect which marked internal distress at  both
    memories of the war and separation from his parents.


33. Mr Gifford May asked him about his memory. The appellant  indicated  he
    was young when he fell down on a rock in a field. He stated that he was
    unconscious but could not recall anything else. Mr  Gifford  May  noted
    that there was no medical or corroborative evidence for this  statement
    and it is possible that he was simply trying to  explain  his  lack  of
    memory, whether or not falling on  a  rock  had  any  such  impact.  Mr
    Gifford May also noted that the appellant's account of the incident and
    the effect that  it  has  had  on  him  was  consistent,  coherent  and
    congruent with his emotions observed by him in the assessment.


34. Accordingly, she submitted  that  the  Judge  has  not  considered  the
    significance of all this evidence.


    Assessment


35. I have considered the competing submissions. I find that the Judge  has
    made errors of law.


36. In particular,  he  adopted  an  erroneous  approach  to  the  language
    reports. He was required to assess the relative weight to  be  attached
    to the reports supportive of the  respondent's  case  as  well  as  the
    report of Professor Matras in support of the appellant's. He failed  in
    certain respects to take account or engage with relevant material or to
    resolve any conflicts in evidence.


37. In SSHD v MN and KY (Scotland) [2014] UKSC 30, the  Court  referred  to
    the importance in any case of the  Tribunal  itself  examining  such  a
    report critically in the light of all the evidence and of the reasoning
    supporting its conclusion (not necessarily limited by the scope of  the
    criticisms or evidence that may be presented by the appellant).


38. In his appeal the appellant  had  put  forward  specific  arguments  in
    respect of the LOID report, which were comprehensively set out  in  the
    skeleton argument. This included the assertion that the sound recording
    is poor and did not  provide  sufficient  linguistic  material  for  an
    informed analysis. The report also incorrectly  cited  the  appellant's
    speech. The report cited examples of the appellant's speech  which  are
    absent from the recording. The report also failed to identify important
    features of the appellant's speech. All these criticisms were  set  out
    in the report of Professor Matras. Moreover, it was contended that  the
    LOID report incorrectly attributed weight to certain  features  of  the
    appellant's speech and incorrectly assumed that the appellant's  speech
    can be assigned unequivocally to  a  particular  location  and  that  a
    sample of the appellant's speech would coherently reflect  a  coherent,
    uniform local or regional dialect.


39. Further, the report failed to take into account the appellant's  period
    of residence in Egypt, or to explain why this could not account for the
    features of "Cairo Arabic" present in his speech. Nor  did  the  report
    explain the presence of aspects  of  Syrian  Arabic  which  the  report
    acknowledged appeared within his speech.


40. The Judge did not consider the point that neither of the analysts speak
    or have academic training in what the  report  referred  to  as  "Cairo
    Arabic."


41. Nor did the Judge engage with the remainder of the specific  criticisms
    put forward in respect of the LOID language analysis report.  There  is
    force in Ms Capel's submission that the  reasons  for  preferring  that
    report were in the circumstances inadequate. In particular, he does not
    appear to have considered Professor  Matras's  view  that  features  of
    Egyptian Arabic present in his speech are explicable by the time he has
    spent in Egypt.


42. Mr Clarke has accepted that there was a mistake of  fact  made  by  the
    Judge relating to the appellant's account  of  his  being  at  risk  of
    persecution by the Egyptian authorities who had arrested his father: He
    had not simply  stated  that  because  the  Egyptian  authorities  came
    looking for his father, he thought his life  would  be  in  danger,  as
    suggested by the Judge. Relevant country background  evidence  which  I
    have set out, was not considered by the Judge and  may  have  supported
    the appellant's claim to be at risk of persecution in Egypt.


43. Further,  the  appellant's  nationality  was  disputed.  The  appellant
    claimed to be Syrian, whereas the respondent positively  asserted  that
    he is Egyptian. I have referred to the decision in Hamza  as  reflected
    in the respondent's own Instructions at  paragraph  3.1.  It  does  not
    appear that the correct burden of proof was applied in this case.


44.  It  was  moreover  necessary  for   the   Judge   to   consider   that
    notwithstanding the absence of physical  scars  to  which  neurological
    science can be applied, Mr Gifford May's report nevertheless could,  in
    the circumstances, constitute independent evidence  supportive  of  his
    account. He had undertaken various cognitive  tests  and  his  findings
    were in  the  circumstances  not  based  solely  upon  the  appellant's
    account.


45. For these reasons I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.
    Ms Capel submitted, without opposition, that in the circumstances  this
    is an appropriate matter to remit to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision to be made.


46. Having regard to the extensive  judicial  fact  finding  that  will  be
    necessary, amounting to a complete re-hearing, I find that it would  be
    just and fair to remit the case.


    Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and the decision is set aside. The appeal is remitted to  Hatton
    Cross for a fresh decision to be made before another Judge.


    No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed                             Date 5 May 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









