
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02111/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 15th May 2019  On 26th June 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  M A G S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by ABN
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant claimed protection on 2 December 2016. He entered the
      United Kingdom on a valid visit Visa, valid from 2 March 2007 until 2
      September 2007. Thereafter he overstayed.

   2. His claim is that he is a Sri Lankan national of Sinhalese ethnicity.
      He lived in the coastal city of Negomba with his parents and made a
      living as a tour guide. His mother died on 3 April 2006.Shortly after
      this he allowed a Tamil called Karuna, whom he had recently met, to
      stay at his home.

   3. In December 2006 Karuna left, saying he would be away for a few days.
      Whilst away the police called to the appellant's home. The appellant
      was not present but his father was. They asked about Karuna and then
      left. They returned on 5 January 2007 and arrested the appellant. They
      took a statement and then released him.

   4. The police returned on 22 February 2007 and searched the property and
      found a satellite phone and bullets amongst Karuna's belongings. They
      took the appellant away and he was shown a picture of Karuna dressed
      in LTTE uniform. The appellant was tortured by the police before being
      released on 6 March 2007 following a bribe paid by his father.

   5. The appellant's father was fearful for him and made arrangements to
      obtain a visa for him to the United Kingdom. The appellant stayed at
      his aunt's house in Colombo until 14 March 2007 when he left for the
      United Kingdom. He used his own passport and travelled through airport
      control without difficulty.

   6. He claimed he would be at risk if returned from the Sri Lankan
      authorities as they believed he supported the LTTE.

   7. His claim was refused by the respondent on 29 January 2018. It was
      accepted he was Sri Lankan. The respondent did not find the appellant
      to be credible. His claim was considered inconsistent and implausible.
      There was a significant delay before he made his claim. He said the
      claim was prompted by the police visiting his home in December 2016.
      However, the claim related to events in early 2007.Furthermore, he
      said he was detained until 6 March 2007 whereas the Visa application
      form confirmed 4 days earlier he had been in Colombo to be
      fingerprinted. This was an obvious contradiction to his claim. The
      respondent then referred to details about airport control and
      highlighted the appellant's ability to leave unhindered. There is a
      database upon which passports are checked on exit.

The First tier Tribunal

   8. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas at Taylor
      house on 18 February 2019. In a decision promulgated on 7 March 2019
      it was dismissed. The parties were represented. On behalf of the
      appellant there was an appeal bundle of 45 pages. There was also a
      psychiatric report dated 3rd August 2018 and an addendum dated the
      17th of February 2019. There was also a medical report on scaring
      dated 16 February 2019.This and the addendum report were submitted on
      the day of hearing.

   9. At hearing, the appellant adopted his statement. He sought to explain
      the timeframe discrepancy, saying he had been released by the police
      on 28 February 2007 and told to report back on 6 March 2007. He
      claimed that a warrant had been issued shortly before he made his
      claim for protection. He was unable to produce this but did provide a
      letter said to be from a lawyer in Sri Lanka inferring this.

  10. The medical report of 16 February 2019 commented upon scarring to the
      appellant's head, face and right leg and left forearm. In submissions
      the appellant's Counsel relied upon this medical report as supporting
      the truth of the claim made. It was also argued that the appellant
      would be at risk of self-harm on return and reference was made to the
      psychiatric report which said that he suffered from major mental
      health issues.

  11. Beyond adopting his statement the appellant did not give evidence at
      the appeal hearing. This was on the basis he was a vulnerable witness.
      The judge referred to his not giving evidence as curious. Beyond the
      addendum report served on the morning of the hearing the judge said
      there was no other medical evidence indicating he would be unable to
      give evidence.

  12. The judge referred to the plausibility of the appellant's account
      bearing in mind this was a time the Civil War was taking place in Sri
      Lanka. Judge did not find it credible they would accommodate an
      unknown unrelated Tamil as described. The judge also questioned why
      the attention appeared to be upon the appellant and not his father.
      The judge referred to the inconsistency in the timeframe and his
      explanation was considered implausible. The judge commented on his
      ability to leave on his own passport. The judge referred to the
      significant delay before the appellant claimed protection and found no
      adequate explanation was given. The judge rejected the claim that the
      police in Sri Lanka had become interested in him of late.

  13. Regarding the psychiatric reports submitted, the Judge commented that
      no other independent evidence of any mental health issue had been
      provided. He placed little weight upon the reports. The judge stated
      it was largely based upon what the appellant said. Regarding the
      scarring report, the report described the scarring as typical of the
      abuse claimed. However, the judge commented that the author did not
      provide any meaningful analysis of how the scarring may have occurred
      and the report lacked detail.

The Upper Tribunal

  14. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge did not adequately deal with the scarring medical report. The
      judge had referred to the absence of independent medical evidence
      without indicating what was required. The judge had also referred to
      the report lacking detail whereas it was submitted the report was
      detailed and no explanation to the contrary was given.

  15. The grounds also contended the judge failed to engage with the
      psychiatric report or consider if there were adequate facilities for
      treatment in Sri Lanka, irrespective of the underlying cause of his
      condition.

  16. Mr Paramjorthy referred to these points at hearing and said that the
      medical evidence was probative and material, particularly the scarring
      report in supporting the truth of the underlying claim.

  17. The presenting officer maintained there was no material error in the
      decision. She submitted the judge was entitled to make the findings
      arrived at. She pointed out the appellant travelled here in 2007 on
      his own passport yet did not claim protection until December 2015. The
      makers of the medical reports had not been provided with supportive GP
      records and the reports were made at a late stage and only produced on
      the morning of the hearing.

Conclusions

  18. The judge's comments on the report being lodged late. However, despite
      Directions not being complied with, there has been no argument that
      the respondent was prejudiced by this. Consequently, I do not see this
      is a factor which should detract from the reports.

  19. The report recounted the history from the appellant of being beaten
      with wooden batons and metal bars about his head, arms, back and leg.
      He said a broom handle had been inserted into his anus and his hands
      were cut with a blade.

  20. The A &E Consultant found some small areas of scarring typical of
      trauma. Some, such as the scarring on the head and right leg
      represented injury was a blunt object and others, such as the scarring
      to the left forearm and thumb were consistent with being inflicted by
      a sharp object. Based upon the positioning of the injuries and their
      apparent severity the doctor concluded these were inflicted by someone
      other than the appellant.

  21. The doctor referred to the Istanbul Protocol and hierarchical
      categories of findings:(a) not consistent-could not have been caused
      by the trauma described; (b)consistent with-could have been caused as
      described but there are many other possible causes; and (c)highly
      consistent with the trauma described with few other possible
      causes(d),typical of the trauma claimed but there are other possible
      causes and finally,(e) diagnostic of- they could not because in any
      other way than that described. The doctor found (d) appropriate.

  22. The judge referred to the report lacking detail and it did not provide
      a meaningful analysis about how the scarring could have occurred. The
      doctor saw the appellant on 14 February 2019 and is commenting upon an
      incident said to have happened on 22 February 2007. The doctor refers
      to the shape of the scars stating some are typical of trauma from a
      blunt object and some from a sharp object. The doctor discounts the
      scarring being consequent upon skin infection, such as a boil or an
      insect bite. The doctor gives the opinion that the positioning of the
      scars make it unlikely to have been done by the claimant himself but
      more likely cause by 3rd parties. The doctor cannot comment on the age
      of the scars beyond stating they are mature.

  23. The doctor's conclusion is that applying the Istanbul protocol the
      scarring is typical of what could be expected with the trauma
      described but there are other possible causes. Mr Paramjorthy makes
      the point that on the Istanbul protocol this is the 2nd highest
      category short of the pinnacle where scarring is diagnostic of the
      claim. The Supreme Court in KV (Sri Lanka) (Appellant) v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2019] UKSC 10 said  the
      references in the Istanbul Protocol to the "trauma described" by the
      reporting doctor do not relate only to the mechanism by which the
      injury is said to have been caused, but to the degree to which medical
      findings correlate with the patient's allegations of abuse . the
      conclusion about credibility always rests with the decision-maker
      following a critical survey of all the evidence.

  24. I am unclear as to what the judge meant in referring to the absence of
      other independent medical evidence. Possibly the judge meant early
      references to being assaulted in GP records and so forth. However,
      given the appellant's circumstances I do not see this as a significant
      omission.

  25. The judge also refers to the absence of any meaningful analysis about
      how the scarring may have occurred. I have some difficulty in seeing
      what more the doctor could have said. The doctor discounted skin
      infections or insect bites. The doctor distinguished the scars into
      those consistent with blunt trauma and those with cutting.

  26. I have considered the medical report and the comments by the judge.
      The doctor is commenting on relatively small scars. The scarring could
      not be considered as extensive. Whilst I appreciate on the Istanbul
      hierarchy the doctor has placed the scarring in the `typical' category
      this still carries the caveat of other possible causes. In the
      circumstance there was a limit to what the judge could have said about
      the report beyond what was said.

  27. There were other significant issues going to credibility. In the
      circumstance the medical evidence only provided one part to the
      overall credibility assessment. Looking at the decision as a whole and
      the points taken against the appellant I do not find any material
      error of law established in how this report was dealt with.

  28. Mr Paramjorthy has placed less reliance upon the psychiatric report.
      An obvious reason for doing so is that is much more difficult to
      establish a nexus between the diagnoses and the claimed incident. JL
      (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) advised
      that representative should consider what it was about a report that
      supports what the appellant has said and which is not dependent on
      what they have told the doctor .In this instance the judge made the
      valid comment that it was difficult to attribute the appellant's
      presentation  in August 2018 to a claimed occurrence in 2007. For this
      reason the reference to other evidence, such as medical records
      covering a wider timescale, was highly relevant. Consequently, I find
      no fault with the judge finding the absence of a nexus.

  29. It was also argued the judge should have considered the risk of self-
      harm on return. A stand-alone article 3 claim was raised in the
      skeleton argument. There is a high threshold to establish this. This
      is set out in paragraphs 76 onwards of the refusal letter. The
      consultant psychiatrist engaged on behalf of the appellant did provide
      some very helpful extracts in relation to studies on self-harm in Sri
      Lanka as well as more general items on post-traumatic stress. The
      information records that in recent decades Sri Lanka has one of the
      highest rates of suicide in the world. The assessment of the risk is
      dependent upon the medical evidence. The consultant concluded the
      appellant was of the view the risk of suicide on return was moderate
      to high and that he resented is suffering from a serious psychiatric
      disorder. The doctor referred to finding it very difficult to take a
      clear history from him and concluded he would be on fit to give
      evidence before the court.

  30. The judge did question the reliability of the report and refers to the
      absence of other independent evidence to support the appellant's state
      of health. The judge pointed out the report was heavily reliant upon
      what the appellant said to the doctor. The psychiatric report would
      suggest it was only recently that he had been referred to the National
      Health mental health team. These were legitimate comments and whilst
      the judge did not refer to the medical facilities available in Sri
      Lanka in the circumstance this was not necessary because the judge had
      not accepted he was at risk.

  31. In conclusion I do not find any material error of law established

Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated in the decision of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Lucas. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appeal shall stand

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.


Dated 24 June 2019
