
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02020/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 October 2018                    |On 23 April 2019                      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge MacKenzie promulgated on 28 March 2018.

 2. The appellant's case is he is at risk on return to Iraq as  the  result
    of death threats made to him by AN, the uncle of a boy,  AM,  whom  the
    appellant had accidently killed.  The appellant had previously come  to
    arrangements with AM's family their paying 5,000 Iraqi dinar.

 3. The appellant says that he had lost his Iraqi identity documents whilst
    travelling to the United Kingdom.  In this case the documents were lost
    when he and his family had to be rescued from a  boat  by  the  Italian
    coastguard as it was sinking.

 4. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's account.

 5. Judge MacKenzie made a number of strong, adverse  credibility  findings
    against the appellant set  out  at  paragraphs  [30]  to  [40]  of  his
    decision.  In summary,  he  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account
    finding the credibility of the core  of  the  claim  was  significantly
    damaged [38] and that his credibility was damaged  by  his  failure  to
    claim asylum en route to the United Kingdom.  The judge  does  at  [41]
    accept that the appellant is from Daquq town within Kirkuk  Governorate
    but accepted the submission that the appellant  would  be  returned  to
    Erbil International Airport and  thus  the  issue  as  to  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk within the IKR.

 6. The judge found [43] that the appellant would be able to obtain a  CSID
    and would have the benefit of  a  resettlement  package  and  thus  his
    overall situation and that of his family  would  fall  short  of  undue
    harshness.  The judge did not accept either that the appellant had lost
    his Iraqi identification documents [44] but even so  following  AA  and
    the Country Policy Information Note  Iraq:  return/internal  relocation
    (September 2017 that he would be able  to  obtain  a  replacement  CSID
    card.  The judge also found at [46] the appellant would be able to  get
    assistance from family in Iraq.

 7. The judge then went on to conclude at [47] to [50] that it would not be
    unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate  to  another  part  of  Iraq
    which is not a contested area or an Article 15(c) area as he  would  be
    able to travel to Erbil Airport and relocate  from  there.   The  judge
    also found that the appellant had not failed to prove  that  he  cannot
    reasonably relocate to an area within Iraq  which  is  not  an  Article
    15(c) area if he is unable to return to the village where he previously
    lived [49].

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  judge
    had erred:-

      i) In concluding that the appellant's place of  origin  and  residence
         were within the IKR but in fact the Kirkuk Governorate within which
         the appellant's village of Mansur within Daquq town was part of the
         Kirkuk Governorate.  On that  basis  return  should  have  been  to
         Baghdad;

     ii) by not considering the fact that the governorate of residence  fell
         within an Article 15(c) area when assessing whether  the  appellant
         would be able to obtain a CSID

    iii) in failing to consider whether it would be reasonable to expect the
         appellant and his wife and their three children aged 3, 12  and  14
         to return to Baghdad;

     iv) in failing to provide any reasons for concluding that the appellant
         had not lost his Iraqi identification documents when rescued  on  a
         boat;

      v) in failing to provide any reasons for a finding that the  appellant
         has family members in Iraq to whom he could turn for the process of
         obtaining a CSID.

 9. The Secretary of State in his Rule 24 response accepted that it was  an
    error for the judge to conclude the  appellant  would  be  returned  to
    Erbil  Airport,  the  judge  regrettably  having  been  misled  by  the
    Presenting Officer.  It is accepted  also  the  Kirkuk  does  not  fall
    within the IKR. The Secretary of State did not, however, consider  that
    there was any error in the adverse credibility  findings  made  by  the
    judge.

10. Ms Loughran submitted that there  was  an  implicit  challenge  to  the
    credibility findings made between paragraphs 30 and 40 of the  decision
    in that the error with regard to the point of return was so fundamental
    as to undermine these.  I do not  agree.   The  judge  clearly  made  a
    mistake in concluding Kirkuk was within the IKR and it is evident  that
    he was led into this by the respondent.  It cannot,  however,  be  said
    that he misunderstood the appellant's claim, or the details as to where
    he came from; the only error was as to whether Kirkuk fell  within  the
    IKR or not. Whether or not the appellant's home area was within the IKR
    did not form a part of the reasoning of the  judge  in  concluding  for
    cogent and sustainable reasons that the  appellant's  account  was  not
    credible.  The judge's decision in assessing this issue is confined  to
    the difficulties of return.

11. In the context of these strong and cogent  credibility  findings  which
    are in reality unchallenged there were adequate and sustainable reasons
    for the judge in that context concluding that he was not  satisfied  by
    the appellant's evidence either that he had lost his CSID card or  that
    he had no family to contact  in  Iraq.  Had  the  appellant  wished  to
    challenge these findings, he needed to make such  a  challenge  in  the
    grounds. He did not and accordingly, I conclude that they must stand.

12. The finding that the appellant's claim to be at risk from a  particular
    individual, AN, as not made out is not infected  by  error.  The  judge
    did, however, err in concluding that the  appellant's  home  area  fell
    within the IKR and that return would  be  to  Erbil.  Accordingly,  the
    findings as to risk on return are infected  by  that  error;  that  is,
    whether the home area was within the IKR (it is accepted it is not).

13. It is necessary to remake the decision in the light of AAH (Iraq  Kurds
    - internal relocation) Iraq  CG  UKUT  00212  which  in  turn  requires
    further evidence and questions to be put to the appellant and for  that
    reason I heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  given  through  an
    interpreter.

14. The appellant adopted his witness statements adding he said he had lost
    his CSID in the sea near Italy.  He said the boat  was  about  to  sink
    when they were rescued and they were told to come out one  by  one  and
    that their bags would be rescued later.  This however did  not  happen.
    He said that all the documents that they had possessed were in that bag
    including the marriage certificate,  driving  licence  and  citizenship
    documents.

15. The appellant said that the area in  which  he  lived,  Layla,  between
    Daquq and Kirkuk is no longer the same as it has  been  taken  over  by
    Hashd Al-Shaabi an organisation which was as  bad  if  not  worse  than
    Daesh.  He said he could not get replacement documents as  has  escaped
    from the man and could not go back there but that it would be okay  for
    him to go there if that man was no longer there and  he  would  return.
    Asked if there was any other risk to him in Iraq  he  said  that  other
    dangers would be the same as for any other Iraqi.

16. The appellant said that he had not had contact with  his  family  since
    Hashd Al-Shaabi had taken over and that they would not permit Kurds  to
    live in those areas under their control, Hashd Al-Shaabi being Shia and
    the appellant and his family being Sunni.

17. The appellant said that the did not know anyone in Baghdad and  had  no
    family there.

18. The appellant says that he could not get  other  ID  documents  as  the
    offices in his home area were burnt down and also that to go there  you
    had to go in person to give fingerprints.

19. The appellant said that he had previously had contact with  his  family
    until around October last year, being in contact using Viber via mobile
    phone.  The last contact had been about ten days before the  attack  on
    the home area in which a lot of people were  attacked  and  killed  and
    displaced by Hashd Al-Shaabi.  He said he  had  tried  to  contact  his
    brother but the phone was switched off but he  had  no  contact  either
    with his parents neither of whom had a mobile phone.  He said he had no
    phone number for cousins or uncles, only recalling his brother's number
    which he had memorised.

20. In cross-examination the appellant said that his wife does have  family
    in Kirkuk including her father, aunts and she had a brother but she had
    not had contact with them since she left  Iraq  and  does  not  have  a
    phone.  He said that she did not know the telephone numbers.

21. The appellant said that initially he would borrow a friend's to contact
    his brother and they had done this when they moved from place to  place
    en route to the United Kingdom.  It was only later that they had enough
    money  to  put  together  to  buy  a  mobile  phone  then  contact  him
    themselves.

22. The appellant said that he contacted the Red Cross to try to  get  back
    in contact with his eldest son who appears to have been separated  from
    them in Italy.

23. The appellant said that he had funded his travel to the United  Kingdom
    at the cost of $30,000 by selling animals and that he had been a farmer
    in Iraq.

24. The appellant said that he and his family would now be too scared to go
    back to the area repeating that in order to get an identity you have to
    go there in person for fingerprint purposes that he had learnt what had
    happened to his  village  on  the  news  the  reports  being  that  the
    registration office had been burnt down.

25. He said that in Iraq they had kept the CSID documents safely in  a  bag
    where his wife had put them but they had been lost in  the  water  when
    they transferred to a bigger boat.

26. He said that they had had some money on the journey to pay  for  living
    costs and that his wife had be able to conceal money within her bra.

27. Ms O'Brien  submitted  that  given  the  various  credibility  findings
    nothing the appellant said could be said to be treated as truthful  and
    it was convenient for him to say that not only had he lost all  contact
    with his family whom he had previously said (AIR Q8)  he  had  been  in
    contact with it was not credible his wife would not have obtained a way
    of contacting her family.  She submitted that a positive finding should
    be made that he does have contact and is  able  to  get  assistance  in
    Iraq.

28. Ms O'Brien submitted also that the appellant's account  of  losing  his
    valuable documents was not in itself implausible but we had to take his
    word for it.  Further she submitted  that  he  had  family  connections
    which would enable a replacement and the fact that he had been able  to
    raise $30,000 suggests the family business had some significance.   She
    submitted he had been able to rely on wider family support on return to
    Baghdad and he would either have access to a CSID card or would  be  to
    procure an alternative.  She  submitted  that  following  AAH,  as  the
    appellant had male family support to assist him, he was not entitled to
    protection.  She submitted that there was in fact no real evidence that
    the relevant registries  had  been  destroyed  this  being  solely  the
    unsupported testimony of the appellant.

29. Ms Loughran submitted that the humanitarian protection appeal should be
    allowed in light of the fact it appeared accepted that the appellant is
    from the Kirkuk Governorate which is still an area in which there is an
    Article 15(c) risk.  She submitted further that it was evident that  he
    does not  have  the  relevant  documentary  ID  documents  and  it  was
    plausible that he had lost contact with family in the  area  of  Daquq,
    objective ordinary evidence showing that that is an area  of  conflict.
    She submitted that if the appellant's evidence were accepted,  then  he
    cannot be relocated to an area which the  Article  15(c)  threshold  is
    met.

30. Ms Loughran submitted the appellant's  evidence  had  been  consistent;
    that the Article 15(c) area identified in AA had not  been  changed  by
    AAH and it would be unduly harsh for him to be returned.  She submitted
    that the reason he  had  given  for  the  breaking  of  a  contact  was
    plausible, that being the attack by Hashd Al-Shaabi.

31. After some discussion it  transpired  that  the  Home  Office  had  now
    produced an additional CIPN report in September 2018  relating  to  the
    point of removal to Iraq.  I was satisfied that  in  the  circumstances
    and also in light of the fact that other issues  arise  following  from
    AAH and the position of Hashd Al-Shaabi that it would be appropriate to
    adjourn  the  matter  for  further  submissions  to  be  made,   giving
    directions for additional material to be served  within  fourteen  days
    and for submissions thereon to be  cross-served  after  28  days.  Both
    parties complied with the directions.

32. Subsequent to that, it became necessary for yet further submissions  to
    be made as, given  the  apparent  change  in  circumstances  in  Kirkuk
    governorate, I was of the view  that  it  would  now  be  necessary  to
    consider whether there, as a result, the  appellant  was  now  at  risk
    there  on  account  of  his  Kurdish  ethnicity.   I  therefore  issued
    directions for further material and submissions to be made.

    Remaking the decision

33. In reaching my findings of fact, I have taken fully  into  account  the
    material placed before me and the background evidence in assessing  the
    risk to the appellant on return. I adopt the lower  standard  of  proof
    applicable to asylum claims in assessing that risk.

34. The starting point for any analysis is the findings made by the  First-
    tier Tribunal which have been preserved. the appellant  is  from  Daqoq
    town. The judge also found [44] that the appellant  had  not  told  the
    truth when he said he had lost his identify documents. The  judge  also
    found that the appellant had not lost contact with his family [46].

35. Those findings were not infected by the errors found; and,  despite  Ms
    Loughran's efforts in seeking to  overturn  those  findings,  as  noted
    above they were not properly challenged in the grounds of  appeal,  nor
    am I satisfied that those findings were undermined by any of the errors
    of law found which stem from the error about whether  Daqoq  is  within
    the Kirkuk governorate.

36. Further, and in the alternative, although I  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant that all the ID documents had  been  lost  when  he  and  his
    family had to be rescued, given the preserved credibility findings made
    by the First-tier Tribunal I am not satisfied that although what he has
    said is plausible, that he has told the truth about this.

37. It is necessary also to bear in mind the most recent  Country  Guidance
    handed down by the Upper Tribunal in AAH insofar as it supplements  and
    amends the guidance given in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944

38. A consolidated version now extends to some 4 sides and for  convenience
    is set out as an annex to this decision.

39. In addition, I  have  taken  into  account  the  more  recent  material
    provided to me by the appellant's representative as well  as  the  CPIN
    entitled "Iraq: Internal relocation, civil documentation and returns."

40. I turn first to the situation in Kirkuk governorate. I accept that  the
    situation there has changed since AA was promulgated in that it  is  no
    longer under Daesh control. But that is not the whole picture.  As  can
    be seem from the most recent  material  adduced  by  the  appellant  in
    Inventory IV, there is extensive material  from  a  number  of  sources
    which show a further change  in  the  situation  on  the  ground  since
    Daesh/ISIS were removed.

41. That said, since they were displaced, the  appellant's  home  area  has
    come under the control of Hashd al-Shaabi a Shia  militia  group  which
    has attacked Kurds and attempted to drive them  out,  seizing  property
    and handing it over to Arabs.  As much as 70% of Kirkuk is under  their
    control, as confirmed by  the  news  articles  set  out  in  the  third
    Inventory of Productions at 29, 32 and 33.  These are from a number  of
    sources, and are broadly consistent. It appears also from the  material
    provided in the fourth Inventory of Productions that, under the  excuse
    of seeking out Sunni militants, abuses against  Sunnis  including  show
    trials Kurds has extended to the families of those accused of assisting
    terrorists.  It  appears  also  from  the   Australian   DFAT   Country
    Information Report, which I also consider reliable, that Arab  families
    have been brought from different parts of Iraq to the disputed  Kurdish
    territories to supplant Kurdish farmers  who  are  evicted  from  their
    land.

42. The CPIN of October 2018 is of little evidential value in assessing the
    position of Kurds in the Kirkuk governorate as at 8.1.1 given that  the
    source is April 2016. Further, the March 2018 CPIN  pre-dates  Hashd-al
    Shaabi taking control in Kirkuk Governorate which occurred  during  the
    summer/autumn of 2018.

43. The CPIN of November 2018 has little to say  about  the  situation  for
    Kurds in Kirkuk, and is reliant primarily on earlier sources which pre-
    date the events of the summer/autumn of 2018.  At 6.3.1 it  deals  with
    people in need in Kirkuk, that is from a plan from  February  2018  and
    much of the rest of the information on  that  area  also  predates  the
    serious incursion by Shia militia, although it is noted at 6.17.1  that
    there have been evictions. No further detail is  given.   I  note  that
    there is evidence at 8.1.4 of continuing ISIS  related  insecurity  but
    that is recorded at a time when the Kurdish  Peshmerga  were  assisting
    the army and police, again prior to October 2018.

44. Similarly the more recent CPIN of February 2019 on Internal Relocation,
    civil documentation  and  returns,  does  not  address  the  particular
    problems in Kirkuk governorate for Kurds as a result of the  activities
    of Shia militias or Hash al-Shaabi in particular.

45. There is nothing in the  CPIN  notes  which  contradicts  the  material
    provided by the appellant from reliable sources indicating  that  Kurds
    are at risk of persecution on account  of  their  ethnicity  in  Kirkuk
    governorate. There is cogent evidence of them being driven  from  their
    farms and homes on account of  ethnicity.    Further,  given  that  the
    militia are acting under the auspices of the  state  and  there  is  no
    indication of the state being able to prevent this or to be willing  to
    do so, there is no state protection available to the appellant  or  his
    family.

46. For these reasons, on the  basis  of  the  facts  as  established,  the
    appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution in his  home  area  on
    account of his ethnicity.

47. The question then arises as to whether it is reasonable to  expect  him
    to relocate within Iraq,  bearing  in  mind  that  return  will  be  to
    Baghdad. I do so on the basis  that  he  has  a  CSID  and/or  has  the
    necessary documents to obtain  a  passport,  given  the  findings  made
    above.

48. I turn now to the guidance set out in  AA  (Iraq)  as  amended  by  AAH
    (Iraq) bearing in mind that these cases address almost exclusively  the
    difficulties faced by single men, or, rarely, single women. They do not
    address the significantly different situation that faces a family being
    returned where the  issue  of  undue  harshness  has  to  consider  the
    position of suitability of accommodation for children, their  different
    welfare needs, education and health needs.

         D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


         14.  As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,
         likely to be relevant:


             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see
             Part C above);


             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less
             likely to find employment);


             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able
             to accommodate him;


             (d)  whether P is a lone female (women face greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel room or
             rent accommodation;


             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;


             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


         16.  There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling
         from Baghdad airport to the southern governorates, suffering
         serious harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article
         15(c).


49. The starting point here is that it will not in general be unduly  harsh
    to expect the appellant and his family to go to Baghdad,  and  that  15
    (a) is met.  I am not satisfied that any of them speak Arabic, and they
    are all, including the children, from a minority community. There  will
    be  limited  support  for  them,  and  it  is  reasonably  likely  that
    accommodation will be a significantly greater problem than for a single
    adult.  It would, I consider, be unduly harsh for the appellant and his
    family to remain in Baghdad for anything other  than  a  short  period,
    effectively in transit to the IKR.

50. As I am satisfied that the relevant documents are  held,  and  that  if
    necessary passports could be obtained, then on the basis of AAH, travel
    from Baghdad to the IKR for the family could easily be  arranged  in  a
    matter of days. Given that there would be funds made available to  them
    on removal, I conclude that they would have the means to do so.

51. I therefore turn next to consider whether that would be unduly harsh or
    unreasonable, bearing in mind that the family are a unit.  Of relevance
    here is the guidance given in AAH at 8 - 10:

         8.   If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
         require that family to  accommodate  P.  In  such  circumstances  P
         would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as
         to lead a 'relatively normal  life',  which  would  not  be  unduly
         harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for   decision-makers   to
         determine the extent of any assistance likely to be provided by P's
         family on a case by case basis.


          9.  For those without the assistance of family  in  the  IKR  the
         accommodation options are limited:


             (i)  Absent special circumstances it is not reasonably  likely
             that P will be able to gain access to one of the refugee camps
             in the IKR; these camps are already extremely overcrowded  and
             are closed to newcomers.  64%  of  IDPs  are  accommodated  in
             private settings with the vast  majority  living  with  family
             members;


             (ii) If P cannot live with a family member,  apartments  in  a
             modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent  at
             a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;


             (iii)    P could resort to a 'critical  shelter  arrangement',
             living in an  unfinished  or  abandoned  structure,  makeshift
             shelter, tent, mosque, church or  squatting  in  a  government
             building. It would be unduly harsh to require P to relocate to
             the IKR if P will live in a critical housing  shelter  without
             access to basic necessities such  as  food,  clean  water  and
             clothing;


             (iv) In considering whether P would be able  to  access  basic
             necessities, account must be taken of  the  fact  that  failed
             asylum seekers are entitled to apply for  a  grant  under  the
             Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could give P access to  �1500.
             Consideration should also be given to  whether  P  can  obtain
             financial support from other sources such as  (a)  employment,
             (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the availability of
             ad hoc charity or by being able to access PDS rations.


          10. Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed on  a
         case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


             (i)  Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to secure
             legitimate employment;


             (ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR is
             70%;


             (iii)    P cannot work without a CSID;


             (iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be  important  factors
             in securing employment. A returnee with family connections  to
             the region will have a significant advantage in that he  would
             ordinarily be  able  to  call  upon  those  contacts  to  make
             introductions to prospective employers and to vouch for him;


             (v)  Skills, education and experience. Unskilled  workers  are
             at  the  greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in   the
             construction industry reducing the number  of  labouring  jobs
             available;


             (vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with ISIL,
             that may deter prospective employers.


52. Addressing each  of  these  in  turn,  I  conclude  that  although  the
    appellant has not told  the  truth  about  family  in  Iraq,  there  is
    insufficient material to show he has family within  the  IKR,  or  that
    they would be able to accommodate the appellant and his family.

53. Of particular relevance to the situation in which the family would find
    themselves is what was held in AAH at [125] - [127]:

         125. For the individual with no family in the region, the immediate
         priority would be  finding  accommodation.  We  accept  Dr  Fatah's
         evidence that a single returnee would not be able to rent somewhere
         in what he termed the  'traditional  neighbourhoods'  of  Erbil  or
         other towns. The homes in those areas have been built to cater  for
         the default social unit of large extended families and the  concept
         of single strangers 'lodging' is alien to the  culture:  it  simply
         does not happen. We further accept that entry into one of the  many
         refugee camps in the region is no longer an option. The  camps  are
         full, and where space is being made by the expansion  of  camps  or
         opening new ones, priority is given to those  families  already  in
         the  camp  system,  who  are  living  in  desperately   overcrowded
         conditions.


         126. There are two other options. In the short term it would remain
         open to the returnee to rent an  apartment  in  one  of  the  newer
         neighbourhoods, where modern blocks have been erected to cater  for
         NGO workers, other ex-pats and Kurds who have chosen to  come  back
         to the region from the West. We say 'in  the  short  term'  because
         rents for such flats are said by Dr Fatah to be  between  $300  and
         $400 per month. Even taking the VRS resettlement grant into account
         it is difficult to envisage that a returnee would be  able  to  pay
         that rent beyond the first few weeks of  his  arrival.  It  may  be
         possible for someone who is highly skilled, has the connections  to
         obtain a well-paid job, is independently wealthy  or  has  external
         support such as remittances from abroad, but for the vast  majority
         of returnees that level of rent would be  prohibitively  expensive.
         For the same reasons we are satisfied that paying for a hotel  room
         would only be a temporary solution.


         127. That leaves the 'critical shelter arrangements'. Approximately
         26% of IDPs in the  IKR  are  living  in  abandoned  or  unfinished
         buildings, makeshift shelters  erected  on  spare  ground,  or  are
         squatting in government or religious buildings. The  conditions  in
         such shelters vary. You may be living in a mosque  where  you  have
         access to clean water and sanitation  facilities  and  are  fed  at
         least one hot meal every day; on the other hand, you may be  living
         in a makeshift tent on the verge of a busy road and not know  where
         your next meal is coming from. In  the  middle  of  those  extremes
         there will be  buildings  in  various  stages  of  dilapidation  or
         development, some with roofs, some with access to water or heating,
         and some without. Some of these living arrangements will  be  of  a
         comparable standard to those widely found elsewhere in Iraq,  where
         basic standards of sanitation and protection from the elements  are
         provided; some fall substantially below such standards.


54. There is no reliable evidence before me of the  appellant's  resources.
    He clearly had access to significant funds to fund his and his family's
    journey to the United Kingdom.   He  has  been  disbelieved  about  his
    protestation that he has no resources in Iraq.

55. I accept that requiring the family to live in a refugee camp or in  the
    "critical shelter arrangements" would unduly harsh and it would not  be
    reasonable to expect them to do so.

56.  Whether  the  appellant  and  his  family  would  be  able  to  access
    accommodation in "traditional neighbourhoods" is less clear. The  level
    of rent for the larger properties is not stated, nor is it  clear  that
    these houses (as opposed to newer flats) would be available to rent.

57. I bear in mind that having rejected the appellant's account as  to  his
    financial circumstances, and as to  the  position  of  his  family  and
    contact he has with them, that does not constitute evidence that he has
    contact or resources at any specific level.

58. That said the level of  rent  quoted  for  more  modern  properties  is
    substantial and given that the appellant and his family  cannot  access
    the property which  they  may  have  owned  in  Kirkuk,  and  may  face
    difficulty in accessing any moveable property there, and even  allowing
    for the lack of credibility on the part of the  appellant,  I  conclude
    that given that he will have to provide for a  wife  and  children  who
    have their own needs.

59. Taking all of these factors into account, and bearing in mind that this
    is a family unit with young children,  I  conclude  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect them to relocate to the IKR or Baghdad.

60. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant has a well-founded
    fear of persecution in  his  home  area  in  Iraq  on  account  of  his
    ethnicity and that it would be unduly harsh to expect him,  given  that
    he has a family including children, either to Baghdad or to the IKR.

61. I therefore allow the appeal on that basis that his removal would be in
    breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention
    and article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.    It is thus unnecessary
    for me to consider whether removal would be in breach of article  8  of
    the Human Rights Convention.

Notice of Decision

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

2.   I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on Refugee Convention  and
    Human Rights convention grounds.

3.   I make an anonymity order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 18 April 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



    ANNEX - CONSOLIDATED COUNTRY GUIDANCE ON IRAQ
    A. INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ: ARTICLE 15(C) OF THE QUALIFICATION
    DIRECTIVE
    1. There is at present a state of internal armed conflict in certain
    parts of Iraq, involving government security forces, militias of
    various kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL. The intensity of
    this armed conflict in the so-called "contested areas", comprising the
    governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah
    Al-din, is such that, as a general matter, there are substantial
    grounds for believing that any civilian returned there, solely on
    account of his or her presence there, faces a real risk of being
    subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm within
    the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.
    2. The degree of armed conflict in certain parts of the "Baghdad Belts"
    (the urban environs around Baghdad City) is also of the intensity
    described in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving rise to a generalised
    Article 15(c) risk. The parts of the Baghdad Belts concerned are those
    forming the border between the Baghdad Governorate and the contested
    areas described in paragraph 1.
    3. The degree of armed conflict in the remainder of Iraq (including
    Baghdad City) is not such as to give rise to indiscriminate violence
    amounting to such serious harm to civilians, irrespective of their
    individual characteristics, so as to engage Article 15(c).
    4. In accordance with the principles set out in Elgafaji (C-465/07) and
    QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ
    620, decision-makers in Iraqi cases should assess the individual
    characteristics of the person claiming humanitarian protection, in
    order to ascertain whether those characteristics are such as to put
    that person at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.
    B. DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)
    5. Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be
    to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad. The Iraqi
    authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to
    enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi
    passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.
    6. No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in possession
    of one of these documents.
    7. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and
    Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
    1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by
    reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of a
    current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer, if the Tribunal
    finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account of a lack of
    any of those documents.
    8. Where P is returned to Iraq on a laissez passer or expired passport,
    P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of return by reason
    of not having a current passport.
    C. The CSID
    9. Regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it will be necessary to
    decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably
    soon after arrival in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in order for
    an Iraqi to access financial assistance from the authorities;
    employment; education; housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there
    are no family or other members likely to be able to provide means of
    support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
    amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to P by
    the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's return have been
    exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have no CSID.
    10. Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P should as a
    general matter be able to obtain one from the Civil Status Affairs
    Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi passport (whether
    current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such a passport,
    P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether P knows the page and
    volume number of the book holding P's information (and that of P's
    family). P's ability to persuade the officials that P is the person
    named on the relevant page is likely to depend on whether P has family
    members or other individuals who are prepared to vouch for P.
    11. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered if P
    is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's Governorate
    because it is in an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring.
    As a result of the violence, alternative CSA Offices for Mosul, Anbar
    and Saluhaddin have been established in Baghdad and Kerbala. The
    evidence does not demonstrate that the "Central Archive", which exists
    in Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need of
    them. There is, however, a National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P
    could apply for formal recognition of identity. The precise operation
    of this court is, however, unclear.
    Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee (P) to obtain
    a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or do so within a reasonable
    time frame, will depend on the individual circumstances. Factors to be
    considered include:
         (i)  Whether P has any other form of documentation, or information
             about the location of his entry in the civil register. An INC,
             passport, birth/marriage certificates or an expired CSID would
             all be of substantial assistance. For someone in possession of
             one or more of these documents the process should be
             straightforward. A laissez-passer should not be counted for
             these purposes: these can be issued without any other form of
             ID being available, are not of any assistance in 'tracing
             back' to the family record and are confiscated upon arrival at
             Baghdad;
         (ii)    The location of the relevant civil registry office. If it
             is in an area held, or formerly held, by ISIL, is it
             operational?
         (iii)    Are there male family members who would be able and
             willing to attend the civil registry with P? Because the
             registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant to
             consider whether the relative is from the mother or father's
             side. A maternal uncle in possession of his CSID would be able
             to assist in locating the original place of registration of
             the individual's mother, and from there the trail would need
             to be followed to the place that her records were transferred
             upon marriage. It must also be borne in mind that a
             significant number of IDPs in Iraq are themselves
             undocumented; if that is the case it is unlikely that they
             could be of assistance. A woman without a male relative to
             assist with the process of redocumentation would face very
             significant obstacles in that officials may refuse to deal
             with her case at all.
    D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)
    14. As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
    for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad City or
    (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.
    15. In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P to
    relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however, likely to be
    relevant:
    (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see Part C
    above);
    (b) whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely to
    find employment);
    (c) whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
    accommodate him;
    (d) whether P is a lone female (women face greater difficulties than
    men in finding employment);
    (e) whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel room or rent
    accommodation;
    (f) whether P is from a minority community;
    (g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there is
    some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are provided with the
    support generally given to IDPs.
    16. There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
    Baghdad airport to the southern governorates, suffering serious harm en
    route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).
    E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION
    17.  There are currently no international flights to the Iraqi  Kurdish
    Region (IKR). All returns from the United Kingdom are to Baghdad.
    18.  For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish origin in possession
    of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from Baghdad to the IKR,
    whether by air or land, is affordable and practical  and  can  be  made
    without a real risk of P suffering persecution, serious harm, Article 3
    ill treatment nor would any difficulties on the journey make relocation
    unduly harsh.
    19.  P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the IKR
    without either a CSID or a valid passport.
    20.  P will face considerable difficulty in making the journey  between
    Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or valid passport. There are
    numerous  checkpoints  en  route,  including  two  checkpoints  in  the
    immediate vicinity of the airport. If P has neither a CSID nor a  valid
    passport there is a real risk of P being detained at a checkpoint until
    such time as the security personnel are able to verify P's identity. It
    is not reasonable to require P to travel between  Baghdad  and  IKR  by
    land absent the ability of P to verify his identity  at  a  checkpoint.
    This normally requires the attendance  of  a  male  family  member  and
    production of P's identity  documents  but  may  also  be  achieved  by
    calling upon "connections" higher up in the chain of command.
    21.   Once at the IKR border (land or air) P would normally be  granted
    entry to the territory. Subject to security screening, and  registering
    presence with the local mukhtar, P would  be  permitted  to  enter  and
    reside in the IKR with no further legal  impediments  or  requirements.
    There is no sponsorship requirement for Kurds.
    22.  Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment during  the
    security screening process must be assessed on  a  case-by-case  basis.
    Additional factors that may increase risk include: (i)  coming  from  a
    family with a known association with ISIL, (ii)  coming  from  an  area
    associated with ISIL and (iii) being a single male of fighting  age.  P
    is likely to be able to evidence the fact of recent  arrival  from  the
    UK, which would dispel any suggestion of having arrived  directly  from
    ISIL territory.
    23.  If P has family members living in the  IKR  cultural  norms  would
    require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances P would, in
    general, have sufficient assistance from the family so  as  to  lead  a
    'relatively normal life', which  would  not  be  unduly  harsh.  It  is
    nevertheless important for decision-makers to determine the  extent  of
    any assistance likely to be provided by P's family on a  case  by  case
    basis.
    24.  For those  without  the  assistance  of  family  in  the  IKR  the
    accommodation options are limited:
         (i)    Absent special circumstances it  is  not  reasonably  likely
         that P will be able to gain access to one of the refugee  camps  in
         the IKR; these camps are  already  extremely  overcrowded  and  are
         closed to newcomers.  64%  of  IDPs  are  accommodated  in  private
         settings with the vast majority living with family members;
          (ii) If P cannot live with a family member, apartments in a modern
         block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent at  a  cost  of
         between $300 and $400 per month;
          (iii) P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement',  living
         in an unfinished or abandoned structure, makeshift  shelter,  tent,
         mosque, church or squatting in a government building. It  would  be
         unduly harsh to require P to relocate to the IKR if P will live  in
         a critical housing shelter without access to basic necessities such
         as food, clean water and clothing;
          (iv)    In considering whether P would be able  to  access  basic
         necessities, account must be taken of the fact that  failed  asylum
         seekers are entitled to apply  for  a  grant  under  the  Voluntary
         Returns Scheme, which could give P access to  �1500.  Consideration
         should also be given to whether P can obtain financial support from
         other  sources  such  as  (a)  employment,  (b)  remittances   from
         relatives abroad, (c) the availability of  ad  hoc  charity  or  by
         being able to access PDS rations.
         25.  Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a
         case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:
          (i)  Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be  able  to  secure
         legitimate employment;
          (ii)  The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the  IKR  is
         70%;
          (iii) P cannot work without a CSID;
          (iv)  Patronage and nepotism continue to be important factors  in
         securing employment. A returnee  with  family  connections  to  the
         region  will  have  a  significant  advantage  in  that  he   would
         ordinarily  be  able  to  call  upon   those   contacts   to   make
         introductions to prospective employers and to vouch for him;
          (v) Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are at the
         greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in  the   construction
         industry reducing the number of labouring jobs available;
          (vi)  If P is from an area with a marked association  with  ISIL,
         that may deter prospective employers.
      F. EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS
    22. This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq




