

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/02532/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |           Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 8 May 2017                         |           On 6 June 2017            |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                                  d a s e e
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Appiah, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Kuwait. His  application  for  asylum  was
   refused by the Respondent on 3 March 2016. The Respondent  accepted  that
   he was from Kuwait but not  that  he  was  an  undocumented  Bidoon.  The
   Appellant appealed against that decision under  section  82  (1)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (NIAA).  His  appeal  was
   dismissed on all grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page in a  decision
   promulgated on 30 September 2016.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to
   appeal against that decision and permission was granted on renewal on all
   grounds by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer.


2. The Appellant argues  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal failed to give adequate consideration to the evidence  regarding
   whether the Appellant was an undocumented Bidoon. In the first ground  it
   is asserted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to have  regard
   to witness evidence that the Appellant was an undocumented  Bidoon;  made
   flawed credibility findings on the evidence before him in relation to the
   literacy of the witnesses; misinterpreted the evidence  in  the  expert's
   report's as to the Appellant's knowledge of where  he  lived  in  Kuwait;
   erred in his assessment of the evidence in relation to  the  difficulties
   faced by Bidoons in registering and approached the Appellant's  claim  to
   be  Bidoon  in  a  manner  inconsistent   with   the   guidance   in   NM
   (documented/undocumented Bidoon: risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356 (IAC).
    The second  ground  asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
   consider or attach any weight to the evidence  from  the  Harrow  Kuwaiti
   Community Association which went to the heart of the Appellant's claim to
   be an undocumented Bidoon.


3. The Respondent relies on a Rule 24 Response which states that the  First-
   tier Tribunal noted that the Appellant's expert did not say that  he  was
   an undocumented Bidoon, further his witnesses  did  not  say  he  was  an
   undocumented Bidoon and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  findings
   that were open to him on the evidence.


The Hearing


4. At the hearing Mr Appiah expanded on his grounds  of  appeal.  He  argued
   that the First-tier Tribunal's finding at paragraph 18  that  neither  of
   the Appellant's two witnesses said that the  Appellant  was  undocumented
   could not stand in view of their pro-forma witness statements at pages 41
   and 42 appended to the letter from the Kuwait  Community  Association  in
   which they confirmed that the Appellant was an  undocumented  Bidoon.  Mr
   Diwnycz confirmed that the Appellant's witnesses were not  cross-examined
   on whether they knew him to be an undocumented Bidoon. Mr Appiah took  me
   through the evidence referred to in the grounds. Mr Diwnycz relied on the
   Respondent's Rule 24 response and had nothing further to add.


Discussion

5.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's found, at paragraph 18 of  the  decision
   that the Appellant's evidence that he was  an  undocumented  Bidoon  came
   from the Appellant himself. He found that neither of his  witnesses  said
   that he was undocumented. He records that what they said in their witness
   statements was that they knew he was a Bidoon from Kuwait who belonged to
   the same community as they did. He then comments  that  neither  of  them
   were in a position to give cogent evidence that he was undocumented.
6. The Appellant's witnesses provided statements at pages 5  and  9  of  his
   bundle. In those witness statements they state that they know  him  as  a
   Bidoon from Kuwait from their community. Neither states in those  witness
   statements that the Appellant is  undocumented.  However,  the  Appellant
   also relied on a letter from the Kuwaiti Community Association at page 38
   of his bundle. The letter states that they had  witness  statements  from
   two members of the Bidoon community who confirmed that the Appellant  was
   an undocumented Bidoon. The witness statement at page 41  of  the  bundle
   purports to have been made by the witness who appeared at the hearing and
   whose statement is at page 9 of  the  Appellant's  bundle.  Although  the
   statement at page 41 is a pro forma, the witness does  confirm  that  the
   Appellant is an un-documented Bidoon from Kuwait.


7. The First-tier Tribunal did not refer to this evidence in  the  decision.
   It is clear from the reasoning in the determination that  a  core  reason
   for rejecting the Appellant's  case  was  that  the  claim  that  he  was
   undocumented was not supported by his witnesses. This  finding  was  made
   without taking the evidence from the Kuwaiti  Community  Association  and
   the attached witness statement into account and therefore failed to  take
   into account a material matter. It cannot be said that the Tribunal would
   have reached the same  conclusion  had  this  evidence  been  taken  into
   account and I find therefore that the error was material. No findings are
   preserved.


Notice of decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
asylum grounds involved the making of a material error of law.

I set the decision aside and the appeal will be determined  de  novo  having
regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statements  due
to the nature and extent of fact finding required  by  a  Judge  other  than
Judge Page.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date 1 June 2017




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray



