
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02870/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 November 2018                           |On 16 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  KQ (IRAN)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sebastian Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Rowena Moffatt, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  ("the  Department")
    appeals on procedural fairness grounds from the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blake promulgated on 30 July 2018 in  which  he  allowed
    the claimant's appeal against the refusal of his protection claim.





The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 23 August 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "The grounds requesting permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
         argue that the Judge erred in committing a procedural  irregularity
         by failing to adjourn the hearing at the request of the  Presenting
         Officer.  The application was made because the  Presenting  Officer
         was only furnished with a witness statement that the medical report
         was based on at the hearing.   It  was  argued  by  the  Presenting
         Officer that the witness statement differed greatly  from  previous
         witness statements and the Secretary of  State  wished  to  address
         these inconsistencies in full.

         It is arguable that the Judge  erred  by  committing  a  procedural
         irregularity in failing to adjourn to allow the respondent a proper
         opportunity to examine a newly furnished witness statement."

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant was encountered by the police  on  17  June  2015,  having
    entered the United Kingdom hidden in the back of a lorry.   He  claimed
    asylum on the same day.  He said that he was  an  Iranian  national  of
    Kurdish ethnicity, whose date of birth was 17 June 1998.  He came  from
    Kani Zard near Sardasht.  He had  never  been  to  school  and  he  was
    illiterate.  His father and brother were smugglers.  He had worked as a
    shepherd, but he had also become a smuggler.  He had been detained  for
    six months when he was 12 years old for smuggling.  On 9  May  2015  he
    had attended a demonstration in  Sardasht  which  he  had  heard  about
    through social media.  The reason for the protest was  that  a  Kurdish
    woman named Farinaz Khosrawani had died in a hotel in Mahabad when  she
    was trying to rebuff the advances of an Iranian  Intelligence  Officer.
    The claimant went to the demonstration with two  of  his  friends,  but
    they were arrested when violence erupted.  He managed to run away,  but
    he believed that his friends had given his name to the authorities.  He
    had fled Iran the same day, and he had since heard that his parents had
    been  arrested  and  that  his  brother  had  been  shot  dead  by  the
    authorities.

 4. The claimant made two witness statements in support of his  claim.   In
    his witness statement of 25 August 2015, the appellant gave an  account
    of ill-treatment during his detention as a smuggler.  He said  that  he
    was beaten up and food had been thrown at him.  Near the  time  of  his
    eventual release, they tied him to a  chair  and  then  tied  his  legs
    together.  They put him on the floor, lifted his legs and  smacked  his
    feet with a wooden stick and hose pipes.  He had sustained bruises  but
    not any scars.  After he had been  detained  for  six  months,  he  was
    released to his family.  In  the  same  statement,  he  said  that  his
    problems in Iran had started on 9 May 2015 when  he  had  attended  the
    demonstration.

 5. On 2 March 2016 the  Department  gave  its  reasons  for  refusing  the
    claimant's protection claim.  He was questioned about his identity  and
    nationality, and his responses were not  consistent  with  the  Country
    Information about Iran.  With regard to his core  claim,  he  had  been
    inconsistent about the date of the demonstration in  Sardasht,  and  he
    had  also  given  details  about  the  demonstration  which  were   not
    consistent with the background evidence.

 6. It was acknowledged that he was 17 years and 8 months old, but  it  was
    not accepted that he was an Iranian national, or that he was wanted  by
    the authorities in Iran.  It was also not accepted that his parents had
    been arrested or that his brother had  been  killed,  and  it  was  not
    accepted that he had lost contact with his parents.

 7. The Department expressed no view one way or the other on his account of
    being detained for smuggling, as the claimant  did  not  rely  on  this
    detention as being a trigger for his departure from Iran.

 8. While his appeal was pending, the claimant's  solicitors  arranged  for
    him to be assessed by Dr Juliet Cohen at the Manor Hospital  in  Oxford
    on 14 December 2016.   In  her  subsequent  report,  she  detailed  the
    witness statements that she had been  shown,  and  she  said  that  her
    report was based on answers given to the questions asked by her in  the
    course of her examination, her observations and  her  findings  on  her
    physical examination of the claimant.

 9. In a section headed "History", she said as follows at paragraph 7:

         "He stated that his first arrest was when he was aged about 12  and
         he was detained for  two  years.   In  his  witness  statement  and
         elsewhere, he has described the first detention as six  months  and
         the second detention as two years.  He said he felt sure today that
         it was the two-year detention first."

10. The claimant gave Dr Cohen an account  of  ill-treatment  in  detention
    which represented a considerable expansion on what  he  had  previously
    said to the Home Office.  Amongst other things, he  said  that  he  was
    forced to take a tablet that made him very dizzy.  He  thought  he  was
    given this tablet a number of times when they wanted to do something to
    him.

11. Following the first detention, which lasted two years, he was  detained
    again six months after his  release  from  the  first  detention.   The
    second detention was because he was again accused of smuggling.  It was
    a different place of detention, but he was  treated  equally  brutally.
    One of the ways he was ill-treated was being forced to  fill  a  barrel
    with water using a small cup.  Also, he recalled that on one occasion a
    nail was repeatedly stabbed into the sole of his feet, and  on  another
    occasion they forced him to put his hands on the hot tar, causing burns
    to his palms.

12. At paragraph 35, Dr Cohen observed that his  memory  and  concentration
    were poor.  He repeated many times that his  memory  was  terrible  and
    appeared completely unaware of elements of the experiences recorded  in
    his witness statement when she asked him directly about them, since  he
    had not mentioned them during his free narrative.   He  looked  puzzled
    and slightly distressed, but  resigned  to  the  unreliability  of  his
    memory.  His narrative was not chronological  or  clearly  stated.   He
    appeared unaware of  any  importance  attached  to,  for  example,  the
    difference in his  account  to  her,  and  in  his  witness  statement,
    regarding the two detentions and whether the  two  year  detention  was
    first or second.

13. Dr Cohen found a large number of lesions and scars on  the  appellant's
    body. One of these  she  regarded  as  particularly  significant.   L22
    referred to a scar in the right groin  of  approximately  8cm,  running
    into the basis of the scrotum.  The condition of the scar was not  that
    of any standard surgical procedure.  The presence of such an injury  on
    an intimate part of the body was a red flag for  sexual  assault.   The
    claimant had told her that he was not sexually assaulted in  detention,
    but on finding this injury she had a very strong concern  that  he  had
    had experiences that he was not able to discuss  that  were  likely  to
    involve sexual violence.  He also identified scars on  the  right  palm
    and the left palm which were highly consistent with the attribution  of
    his hands being held onto hot tar while in detention.

14. At the end of her report, Dr Cohen reiterated  her  concern  about  the
    claimant's capacity to give evidence.  In her view,  he  needed  to  be
    treated  as  a  vulnerable  young  person   with   significant   memory
    impairment.  The clear physical  evidence  of  his  head  injuries  and
    assault injuries should be borne in mind, despite his  difficulties  in
    describing clearly all his experiences.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

15. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Blake sitting at  Taylor  House
    in the First-tier Tribunal on 19 June 2018.   Ms  Moffatt  appeared  on
    behalf of the claimant, and Ms Biririyu, Presenting  Officer,  appeared
    on behalf of the Department. In addition to  being  represented  by  Ms
    Moffatt of Counsel, the claimant had also been  assigned  a  Litigation
    Friend, who was Ms Jennifer Blair of Counsel.

16. For the purposes of the hearing, the claimant's solicitors had filed  a
    supplementary bundle containing an updated medical report from Dr Cohen
    dated 12 June 2018 and a Country Expert Report from Dr Mohammed  Kakhki
    dated 25 May 2018.

17. In her updated report, Dr Cohen said that she had seen the claimant  in
    interview at the Manor Hospital in Oxford for one hour on 31 May  2018.
    She was concerned that his memory and general  cognitive  function  was
    worse than when she assessed him in 2016.  He was less  able  and  less
    willing to access memories of his torture and he struggled to  describe
    events in the past few months.  His memory was affected  by  his  PTSD,
    past  head  injuries,  possible  forced  administration  of   a   drug,
    depression and sleep disorder.  In her view, he was  not  fit  to  give
    evidence or to properly instruct his solicitor.

18. At the outset of the proceedings,  Ms  Biririyu  stated  that  she  was
    concerned that the Department  had  not  been  given  all  the  witness
    statements made by the claimant.  It appeared to her that Dr Cohen  had
    seen  a  witness  statement  which  had  not  been  disclosed  to   the
    Department.

19. Judge Blake ascertained that Dr Cohen's first report had been disclosed
    to  the  Department  in  December  2016.   Nonetheless,   Ms   Biririyu
    maintained that the Department had been taken by surprise in respect of
    the issue of torture.  She said that she wished to see a  copy  of  the
    statement that had been referred to by Dr Cohen.  Ms Moffatt  indicated
    that she had a copy of this statement on her laptop, and the Judge gave
    Ms Biririyu some time to read it.

20. After reading the witness statement  on  the  screen  of  Ms  Moffatt's
    laptop, Ms Biririyu requested, and was granted, a short adjournment  to
    enable her to take further instructions.

21. Ms Biririyu returned nearly half an hour later.  She handed in  a  copy
    of a witness statement of the claimant, neither signed nor  dated,  and
    his solicitor's letter of instruction to Dr  Cohen  dated  12  December
    2016.   Judge Blake enquired of Ms Biririyu  if  she  was  raising  any
    points in respect of the witness statement and the letter.  She  stated
    that she was not.  She then applied for an adjournment of the  hearing,
    on the ground that the earlier  witness  statements  of  the  claimant,
    which had been made in August and November 2015 respectively, had  made
    no mention of  torture;  and  because  Dr  Cohen  had  made  a  medical
    assessment based in part on  an  undisclosed  witness  statement.   She
    stated that the Department  wished  for  an  adjournment  in  order  to
    "address this narrative".

22. Ms Moffatt opposed the adjournment request, as she  submitted  that  no
    prejudice had been incurred by the Department.

23. The Judge's reasons for refusing the adjournment request were  set  out
    in paragraphs [27] and [28] of his subsequent decision.   Firstly,  the
    Department had clearly been on notice  of  the  claimant's  case  since
    December 2016 as a result of receiving the report of Dr Cohen.  It  was
    also clear that the claimant had mentioned that he had been the subject
    of ill-treatment whilst in detention in his witness statement of August
    2015.  So an adjournment was not necessary for a fair disposal  of  the
    appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

24. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Kandola developed the  arguments  advanced  in  the  permission
    application.  In reply, Ms Moffatt directed my attention to  her  typed
    note of the hearing, and she submitted that no error of  law  was  made
    out for the reasons given in her Rule 24 response.

Discussion

25. Ms Biririyu had a legitimate complaint that there had been a failure to
    disclose to the  Department  the  draft  witness  statement  which  was
    apparently provided to Dr Cohen with a letter of instructions dated  12
    December 2016.  For reasons which are unclear, Dr Cohen listed the  two
    witness statements of 2015 as being part of  the  documentary  evidence
    that had been provided to her, but she  did  not  list  the  additional
    unsigned witness statement from the claimant that had been generated in
    2016 for the purposes of his appeal.

26. It was, however, apparent to the reasonable reader of her  report  that
    such a further witness statement existed, as Dr Cohen referred  to  its
    existence in her discussion of  the  narrative  given  to  her  by  the
    claimant.

27. The case which the Department addressed in  the  refusal  decision  was
    that the claimant had been detained for six months at the  age  of  12.
    The new case contained in the undisclosed witness statement was that he
    had in fact been detained on two  occasions.   The  difference  between
    what the claimant said in his unsigned witness statement  and  what  he
    told Dr Cohen in interview was that in the former he said that  he  was
    detained for six months and then two years, and in latter  he  said  he
    had been detained for two years and then six months.

28. The reason why the additional witness statement seen by  Dr  Cohen  was
    not disclosed to the Department was because his  solicitors  recognised
    that it was inherently unreliable; and, given the  claimant's  lack  of
    capacity, it was not appropriate for the claimant to endorse the  truth
    of its contents through affixing his signature to it.

29. Nonetheless, since it formed part of the material provided to Dr Cohen,
    it should have been disclosed to the Department with an explanation  as
    to why it was not signed.

30. However, it was clearly open to Judge Blake to hold that the Department
    was not prejudiced by its late disclosure. As indicated by Judge  Blake
    when giving his reasons for  refusing  the  adjournment  request,  from
    December 2016 the Department knew that it was now the  claimant's  case
    (a) that he had been much more  severely  tortured  in  detention  than
    hitherto disclosed; (b)  that  his  PTSD,  memory  loss  and  cognitive
    impairment consequential upon  his  experience  of  torture  reasonably
    accounted for the inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  in  his  earlier
    account which had led to the Department rejecting his claim  to  be  an
    Iranian national as well as  rejecting  his  claim  to  be  of  adverse
    interest to the Iranian authorities for his imputed political  opinion;
    (c) that his PTSD, memory loss and cognitive  impairment  consequential
    upon his experience of torture also reasonably accounted for  the  fact
    that  further  inconsistencies  in  his  narrative  had   emerged,   as
    identified by Dr Cohen.

31. It was open to the Judge to find that the Department was not  taken  by
    surprise by the contents of the hitherto undisclosed witness statement,
    and that no useful purpose was  going  to  be  served  by  granting  an
    adjournment in circumstances where the claimant did not  have  capacity
    to give  evidence,  and  hence  could  not  be  cross-examined  on  the
    inconsistencies in his narrative.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Respondent  to
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

