
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal No:
PA/02860/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 21 November 2019                     |on 26 November 2019               |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     A M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt, aged 26.  He sought asylum in  the
    UK on 11 January 2018.  The competent authority decided on  11  January
    2019 that he was the  victim  of  human  trafficking.   The  respondent
    refused his asylum claim for reasons  set  out  in  a  letter  dated  8
    February 2019.

 2. The respondent held that in Egypt the appellant would not  be  at  risk
    from his Algerian traffickers, and declined to accept that the Egyptian
    authorities had detained him from October 2010 to January 2011, when he
    said he escaped in a large-scale breakout, or would have  any  interest
    in him on return.

 3. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  Judge M MacKenzie heard his case on
    17 June 2019.   In her decision,  promulgated  on  31  July  2019,  she
    records  that  it  was  common  ground  that  the  case  tuned  on  the
    credibility of what the appellant said had occurred in Egypt.

 4. The judge declined at [55] to accept that the appellant had come to the
    adverse attention of the authorities or that he  fled  the  country  18
    months later as a result, and dismissed the appeal.

 5. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  set  out  in  his
    application dated 20 August 2019 under these headings:

      1 errors in relation to plausibility, (i) - (ii);

      2 impact of appellant's mental health issues; and

      3 inadequate reasons / insufficiency of evidence, (i) - (iv).

 6. On 6 September 2019 FtT Judge Loke granted permission:

      It  is  arguable,  by  a  narrow  margin,  that  notwithstanding   the
      acknowledgement of the appellant's  mental  health  issues  the  judge
      failed  to  properly  apply  Presidential  Guidance  when  making  the
      assessment regarding the appellant's credibility.

 7. Having heard the submissions of both  representatives,  I  reserved  my
    decision.

 8. The argument on  ground  [1  i]  was  that  the  FtT  applied  its  own
    perception  of  reasonability  at  [37]  when  finding  that   it   was
    implausible that the Egyptian authorities would mistake a passer-by  as
    having been involved in a demonstration, and that it  would  have  been
    easy to confirm he had been on his way home from school.

 9. Perhaps the Egyptian authorities are more likely that the UK police  to
    include an innocent bystander when  detaining  a  group  of  50  -  100
    people.  It would be easy to check whether the appellant was on his way
    home from school, which is the observation the judge made; but  perhaps
    those authorities are less likely to care whether  such  a  mishap  has
    occurred.   However, this is  a  question  of  fact  and  degree.   The
    appellant's criticism is in  effect  one  of  judging  from  a  western
    perspective.  There is no reason  to  think  that  the  judge  did  not
    understand that the claimed events took place in  the  quite  different
    context of Egypt.   The  appellant  does  not  show  that  the  judge's
    observations were untenable, allowing for that context.

10. Ground [1 ii] says that it was reasonable for the appellant to stay  at
    home, but that takes nothing away from the judge's points at [39]:  his
    ability to do so without coming to adverse  notice  suggests  that  the
    authorities had no interest in him, and if he and his family thought he
    was at risk, he could have relocated or left the country  much  earlier
    than  he  did.   The  rest  of  this  ground  is  only  insistence  and
    disagreement on the facts.

11. Ground  2  does  not  criticise  the  judge's  self-directions  on  the
    significance of mental health  issues  in  assessing  evidence.   Those
    directions are detailed and impeccable.

12. The criticism is that the judge paid only lip service to the principles
    rehearsed.  I find that reading  not  to  be  sustainable.   The  judge
    referred to the principles not only in general  but  in  resolving  the
    issues, for example at [33, 43, 53 and 57].  The ground looks  for  the
    psychological evidence to be taken as explaining away all  deficiencies
    in the  evidence,  which  goes  too  far.   Many  of  the  shortcomings
    identified by the judge in the appellant's claim could not sensibly  be
    attributed to his state of mental health; for example, the  absence  of
    contact from the authorities during the 18 months he remained at home.

13. Ground 3 (i) does not add to 1 (ii).

14. Ground 3 (ii) says that it was not a contradiction for the  appellant's
    father to be able to arrange the departure of the  appellant  from  the
    country but not the departure of the appellant's mother.

15. The appellant has not pointed to any meaningful distinction between the
    circumstances applying to him and to his mother.  There  may  not  have
    been a self-contradiction, but whatever  the  correct  linguistic  term
    might be, the judge was entitled to find the  matter  to  tend  against
    credibility.

16. Similarly, the observations at [40] on inconsistencies were open to the
    judge.

17. Ground 3 (iv) has force.  The judge thought there was no reason, if the
    authorities suspected connections to the Muslim  Brotherhood,  for  the
    appellant's mother and siblings not also to be  detained.   There  does
    not appear to have been any evidence that detentions  were  necessarily
    so far-reaching.  However, this is one reason among many,  and  not  to
    the fore of the decision.

18. Summing up, ground [1 i] does not rise  above  disagreement;  there  is
    force in ground 3 (iv); ground 2, and the rest of the grounds, are  not
    established.  The decision does not err in evaluating  the  bearing  of
    the mental health aspect on the quality of the  evidence.   Looking  at
    the decision in the round, this is a clear and thorough evaluation of a
    weak claim which failed for many reasons, most of which have  not  been
    challenged.  It is not shown to have involved the making of  any  error
    on a point of law, such that it ought to be set aside.

19. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  This decision is anonymised.

      [pic]

      22 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




