
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02907/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 February 2018                           |On 23 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     XA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Caseley, Counsel, instructed by the Migrant
Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 11 July 2017 of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fowell which refused the protection claim of XA.

 2. There is a somewhat lengthy history to the appellant's  claim  but  for
    the purposes of this decision I can focus on the outstanding ground  of
    appeal which concerns the appellant's connection  to  his  cousin,  YA,
    whose appeal was heard on the same day before Judge Fowell and who  was
    found to be a refugee.  This was because YA was found to have  shown  a
    real risk of mistreatment on return at the hands of criminal  gangs  in
    El Salvador. Her account, accepted as credible, was that  her  brother,
    ZA, was killed by a gang after he refused to pay  protection  money.  A
    death threat was then made to YA.

 3. The consideration of YA's claim is set out in [50] to [76] of the First-
    tier Tribunal decision.  The final paragraph indicates:-

         "... Essentially, the gang could find her if they were committed to
             do so, but otherwise internal relocation is  possible.   Their
             commitment in this case is very doubtful, for  very  much  the
             same reasons as I concluded that she does not come within  the
             risk category of witness.  She is no particular threat to  the
             gang, as  a  witness  or  informant  might  be,  and  has  not
             challenged them in any direct way.  She was not  present  when
             they demanded the rent from the business, and have not  sought
             to obtain further payment from her  or  to  harm  her,  beyond
             giving her the threatening message.  At all  times  they  knew
             where she lived and did not approach her again.  The  business
             has closed or been taken over, so there is no obvious gain  to
             them in making further demands of her.  On the other  hand,  I
             have also found that her brother was actually killed  by  them
             and I accept her evidence that she was approached by these two
             gang members and told that she would  be  next.   Although  it
             seems unlikely on  balance  that  they  would  in  fact  exert
             themselves to track her down, the balance of probabilities  is
             not the correct test here either, and I  conclude  that  there
             is, given their  tight  territorial  control  and  network  of
             communication, still a real  possibility  that  she  would  be
             located and seriously harmed on return. "

 4. The appeal of XA, on the basis of being a relation of YA, was addressed
    by the First-tier Tribunal at [48]:

         "48. The final basis on which he brings this further claim is  that
             there is (sic)  a  family  member  of  the  first  appellant's
             brother, he would also now be at risk on return.   Again,  the
             same question arises - what reason would [the  gang]  have  in
             pursuing him as the family member of  [ZA]?   His  cousin  was
             living in [B] in the far west of El Salvador and was  murdered
             in March 2016.  The second  appellant  and  his  family  were,
             until 2011, living in [C], which lies on the  coast  about  30
             miles southwest of [D] and (from the map provided at  page  44
             of the appellant's bundle) nearly 50 miles in  a  direct  line
             from [B].  They left [C] and moved to  a  rural  area  in  the
             mountainous region inland, but again, far from  [B].   And  at
             the time of his cousin's death he had been in the UK for  over
             two years.  Whether his home area is regarded as [C],  or  its
             rural hinterland, no reason has  been  suggested  why,  if  he
             returned there, he would be connected  in  any  way  with  his
             cousin's death, or that this  would  provide  any  motive  for
             further  threat  of  harm.   Whilst  I  accept   the   general
             proposition that family members of  gang  targets  may  be  at
             risk, I have seen nothing to suggest that they would be hunted
             down in different parts of the country, years  later,  in  the
             absence of any obvious purpose."

 5. The appellant's ground of appeal is that the country materials did  not
    allow for a conclusion that there would not be a real risk  to  him  on
    return as a family member of his  cousin.   Further,  the  reliance  on
    factors such as the geographical distance and  need  for  "any  obvious
    purpose" for a risk of harm to arise from gangs were not identified  as
    relevant or material factors in the country materials.

 6. As indicated by the First-tier Tribunal in [48],  there  was  certainly
    material in the extensive country evidence provided showing that family
    members of those of adverse interest to gangs could be at risk  because
    of the strong and widespread presence  of  gangs  across  the  country.
    Those materials were identified in the skeleton  argument  provided  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. They were also highlighted in a  "Schedule  of
    Essential Reading" which is at pages 1 to 43 of the appellant's  bundle
    of country materials.

 7. In that Schedule, attention was drawn to page 61  which  is  the  UNHCR
    Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs
    of Asylum-Seekers from El Salvador dated 15 March 2016.  That  document
    describes on page 61 how gangs operate in El Salvador:

         "Despite being the smallest country in Central America, El Salvador
         is the nation reported to be the most affected by the  violence  of
         street  gangs  (pandillas)   and   reportedly   has   the   highest
         concentration of gang members of any country in the  region  Across
         most of the departments that make up the territory of El  Salvador,
         many hundreds of local street gangs are reported to operate in both
         urban and rural  zones,  with  between  30,000  and  60,000  active
         members in total.  These gangs are considered to be the main  force
         that has been driving the increase of violence in El Salvador  over
         the  last  decade  and  the  surge  in   murders   and   population
         displacement over the past couple of  years.   Official  statistics
         show that 65 per cent of the  murders  registered  in  the  country
         between January  and  mid-November  2015  were  committed  by  gang
         members."

 8. Page 3 of the  Schedule  of  Essential  Reading  identified  a  further
    extract from the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines set out on page 63 of the
    country materials bundle.  This stated as follows:

         "The authorities estimated that in 2013 there were  470,000  people
         affiliated with the  gangs  in  El  Salvador,  as  family  members,
         friends or others; by mid-2015 this figure  had  risen  to  between
         600,000 and 700,000 people (i.e. 10 per cent of the population).

         Gangs are reported  to  exercise  extraordinary  levels  of  social
         control over the population of their territories (and, to a  lesser
         extent, over other territories where they practise  extortion).  In
         these zones, inhabitants are reportedly required to  'look,  listen
         and keep quiet' ('mirar, oir, callar') and often face a plethora of
         gang-imposed restrictions on who they can talk with and what about,
         what time they must be inside their homes, where they can  walk  or
         go to school, who they can visit and who can visit them, what  they
         can wear, and even, reportedly, the colour of their  hair.   It  is
         equally forbidden for inhabitants  to  show  'disrespect'  for  the
         gang, a subjective evaluation on the part of gang members that  can
         reportedly encompass a multitude of perceived slights and offences,
         such as arguing with a gang member or refusing a request, resisting
         a child's recruitment into  the  gang,  or  rejecting  the  amorous
         attentions of a gang member."

 9. The Schedule of Essential Reading also indicated on  page  12  that  at
    page 596 of the bundle a report on  gangs  in  El  Salvador  from  2010
    stated:

         "Our interviews revealed  that  gangs  increasingly  target  people
         outside their own territory, including neighbourhood residents  who
         happen  to  be  in  the  wrong  place  at  the  wrong  time,  local
         businesses, or those who do not  comply  with  gangs'  demands  for
         renta.  Gang violence has greatly limited the freedom  of  movement
         for ordinary people, who often live in fear  of  moving  around  or
         outside their neighbourhoods and who face violence because of their
         residence  in  gang-controlled  areas.   Former  gang  members  and
         community residents interviewed by our  researchers  reported  that
         residents of area controlled by gangs are constantly  subjected  to
         extortion and threats of violence by gang members."

10. The Schedule of Essential Reading on page  16  referred  again  to  the
    UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines on page 63 which went on to say:

         "Gangs in El Salvador are reported to achieve this degree of social
         control principally through the use  of  threats  and  violence  to
         create a pervasive atmosphere of fear among inhabitants, especially
         amongst those without family or other links to the local gang."

    and:

         "Persons who resist the authority of the local  gang  or  who  even
         just inadvertently cross it, or who collaborate with  the  security
         forces or with rival gangs, are reportedly subjected to  swift  and
         brutal retaliation from the gang.  Not only are such persons killed
         by the gangs but their family members are often targeted as  well."



11. The Essential Reading  Schedule  goes  on,  on  page  16  to  highlight
    extracts from the UN High Commissioner for Refugees  (UNHCR),  Guidance
    Note on Refugee Claims Relating to Victims of Organized Gangs dated  31
    March 2010. At page 104 of the  country materials bundle, that document
    states:

         "Gangs may direct harm at individuals  who  in  various  ways  have
         resisted gang activity or who oppose, or are perceived  to  oppose,
         the  practices  of  gangs.   Members  of  this  group  need  to  be
         understood in their specific country  and  societal  contexts.   In
         areas where criminal activity is widespread and law enforcement  is
         incapable  of  protecting  people  from  gang  violence,  a  person
         expressing opposition to gangs will often stand out from  the  rest
         of the community.  Such 'gang-resisters'  may  be  grouped  broadly
         into the following categories:

             ...

             c.   business owners and others unable or  unwilling  to  meet
                  extortion or other unlawful demands for money or  services
                  by gangs;

             ...

             g.   other individuals who are, or  are  perceived  to  be,  a
                  threat to gangs or as not conforming with their practices,
                  including ethnic and sexual minorities. "

    The same report goes on, on page 106 of the country materials to  refer
    to the risk family members:

         "Family members of the  above  categories  may  also  be  routinely
         targeted by  gangs.  Typically,  families  could  be  subjected  to
         threats and violence as an act of retaliation or to exert  pressure
         on other members of the family to succumb to  recruitment  attempts
         or extortion demands.  Even  though  the  applicant  may  not  have
         personally opposed the gangs or does not share the views of his/her
         family members, the gang or in some cases agents of the  State  may
         attribute such resistance or views to the applicant.  For  example,
         a woman (or girl) could be exposed to harm due to  being  perceived
         by gangs as  holding  the  same  anti-gang  views  as  her  father,
         husband, son or brothers."

12. On page 114 of the country materials bundle at paragraph 40,  the  same
    report indicates:

         "An applicant who is a family member of a 'gang resister' (or  gang
         member) could also be persecuted  for  reasons  of  his/her  family
         membership, for example, where the family has  a  known  record  of
         being opposed to a gang.  In such cases, the  applicant's  'family'
         may be regarded as a  relevant  particular  social  group.   Family
         members may also experience persecution because  of  their  imputed
         membership in any of the above-mentioned groups."

13. The Schedule of Essential Materials also identifies  relevant  extracts
    from  the  country  materials  concerning  the  ability   to   relocate
    internally.  These materials discuss the  manner  in  which  the  gangs
    control the population over a wide area.  On page 36  of  the  Schedule
    there is reference to page 133 of the  country  materials  which  is  a
    Canadian report, entitled "Canada: Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of
    Canada, El Salvador: Information Gathering Mission  Report  -  Part  1.
    Gangs in El Salvador and  the  Situation  of  Witnesses  of  Crime  and
    Corruption, September 2016".  On page 133 that document states:

         "Another way of controlling territory is by  detaining  people  and
         asking for  their  identification  documents  (Documento  �nico  de
         Identidad, DUI).  For example,  when  teachers  must  travel  to  a
         school in another neighbourhood  where  they  are  employed,  gangs
         detain them, ask them to produce their DUI, and interrogate them in
         order to obtain information  about  the  neighbourhood  where  they
         live, who their family members are, and  what  is  the  purpose  of
         their presence in the  neighbourhood.   Gangs  also  routinely  ask
         visitors or strangers to produce their DUI to find out  where  that
         person comes from and which gang operates there.   They  also  post
         closed circuit TV cameras outside  neighbourhoods  to  monitor  and
         control the movement of people."

14. On page 43 of the Schedule, the difficulties for those returning to  El
    Salvador are referred to and an  extract  from  the  UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines referred to and  which  is  contained  at  page  79  of  the
    objective materials bundle:

         "Deportees are reported to be easily identifiable by  gang  members
         at the point of return to El Salvador, putting  deportees  who  had
         left El Salvador because  of  specific  problems  with  a  gang  at
         particular risk.  In some cases, deportees and other returnees  who
         left the country due to insecurity or threats have been  killed  by
         gangs  shortly  after  arrival  in  El  Salvador.   Deportees   and
         returning migrants who  bring  resources  from  overseas  are  also
         reported to be an identifiable target for extortion  by  the  gangs
         and thus face heightened threats, as are children and other persons
         in El Salvador who receive remittances from family  members  living
         and working overseas."

15. The Schedule of Essential Reading also identifies an  extract  on  page
    133 of the bundle from  the  Canadian  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board
    report which states:

         "Gangs exert their influence all  over  the  country.   Authorities
         have lost control over territory to gangs, as the latter decide who
         enters and who leaves from neighbourhoods.  Gangs are very vigilant
         in controlling their territories and they question  whoever  enters
         these territories.  According to El Faro,  people  in  El  Salvador
         know which gang exerts its influence in the neighbourhood in  which
         he or she lives."

16. The appellant's challenge is that the country material did  not  afford
    for any other conclusion other than that he would be at risk on  return
    because of his connection to his cousin who had been killed by  a  gang
    and his cousin, YA, who had received death threats from the  gang.  The
    country materials made  extensive  reference  to  the  risk  to  family
    members of those even perceived to be in some way opposed to a gang and
    gave no indication that any "obvious purpose" or reason at all would be
    required for this adverse interest to arise regarding a family  member.
    The judge had noted "extensive evidence" of the  "territorial  control"
    which gangs exert and the difficulty of anyone being able  to  relocate
    in order to avoid a risk.

17. The challenge was also put on  the  basis  that  the  country  material
    provided no objective basis for the judge's conclusion that a period of
    time would be sufficient for the  risk  to  diminish.  The  appellant's
    cousin had been killed only a year and four months prior to the hearing
    and this was not found to be a relevant criterion such as to be able to
    diminish the risk to his cousin, YA.

18. Further, the respondent's Rule 24  letter  sought  to  argue  that  the
    appellant could not succeed because the evidence of the cousin had been
    that her mother and  grandmother  remained  in  El  Salvador  and  this
    undermined the risk to him.  There was also the matter of the appellant
    being a  cousin  of  the  refugee  relative  and  not  a  sibling,  the
    relationship which had led to the cousin herself being recognised as  a
    refugee.  As indicated for the appellant  by  Ms  Caseley,  neither  of
    these factors were matters which the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  relied
    upon here when finding no risk on return for the appellant. Nor, it was
    maintained, in the face of the  appalling  objective  evidence  on  the
    country situation in El Salvador, could they  be  said  to  be  factors
    capable of showing a sufficiently material reduction  in  risk  to  the
    appellant.

Discussion

19. It is my judgment that the country material was sufficiently cogent  so
    as to show a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusion in [48] that there was no risk on return to  the  appellant.
    In this part of his appeal, there is  no  issue  of  credibility.   His
    cousin, YA, was found credible as regards the murder of her brother and
    the threats of murder to herself.  The appellant's relationship to  her
    is not in doubt.  The appellant is a family member of someone who would
    face a continued risk of serious harm from  a  gang  on  return  to  El
    Salvador. The risk arose less than 2 years ago.  The  risk  to  someone
    merely on the basis of a family relationship is clearly  identified  in
    the materials which do not identify only immediate  family  members  as
    being at risk.  The country evidence does not refer to there needing to
    be more than a family relationship for a gang to act.

20. Further, the country evidence of the very extensive "tight  territorial
    control and network of communication" operated by criminal gangs across
    El Salvador indicated a real risk of identification, additionally so as
    a returnee  or  if  going  to  a  new  area.   The  country  materials,
    describing country-wide malign gang  activity  and  control  and  their
    strong information and communication operations,  did  not  permit  the
    finding that the geographical distances and different  home  towns  was
    capable of showing a diminished risk to the appellant.

21.  I therefore set aside this aspect of the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The parties were in agreement that the appeal  could  be  re-
    made in the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  the  materials  already
    provided. I therefore proceeded to re-make the decision.

22. The re-making is relatively straightforward given the narrow compass of
    the issue, whether the relationship to YA and ZA would lead to  a  risk
    to the appellant in the context of gangs in El Salvador.  Further,  the
    relevant  country  materials  have  already  been  analysed  above.  My
    conclusion is that the appellant's profile is  sufficient  for  him  to
    show a real risk of harm on return for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason,
    being a family member of someone murdered by a gang and having  another
    relative threatened with serious harm by a gang in  El  Salvador.   His
    profile is reasonably likely to become known because of  the  pervasive
    geographical spread  of  the  gangs  and  their  information  gathering
    techniques and control of the civilian population.  He is  additionally
    likely to be of adverse interest as a  returnee,  whether  he  goes  to
    areas where he is known or  to  new  areas.  The  simple  fact  of  his
    association with YA and ZA, following the  country  materials  provided
    here, is sufficient for him to be found to face a risk of serious harm.
    The strength of the country material is such that I remain of this view
    even after taking into account that the evidence did not indicate  that
    YA's mother and grandmother who have remained in El Salvador have  been
    harmed. That is also my conclusion after  considering  the  passage  of
    approximately 2 years since the death of the  cousin,  the  passage  of
    time not being identified in the materials as material  and  where  the
    applicant will be of heightened  interest  merely  on  account  of  his
    return.

23. I therefore find that the appellant succeeds  in  his  appeal  on  both
    refugee and Article 3 grounds.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law.

25. The appeal is remade and allowed on protection grounds.


Signed: [pic]                                Date: 21 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


