
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal number: PA/02226/2020 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 15th June 2021              |On the 28th June 2021              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     WMM

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For  the  appellant:      Mr  I  Hussain,  instructed  by  Lei  Dat  &  Baig
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


1. The appellant, who claims to be an Eritrean national with date  of  birth
   given as either 27.4.84 or 7.11.91, has appealed with permission  to  the
   Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
   promulgated 29.1.21 (Judge Holt), dismissing on all  grounds  her  appeal
   against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 19.2.20, to  refuse
   her claim for international protection.

2. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  2.3.21
   (Judge Keen), the judge considering the grounds  arguable,  stating  "The
   judge arguably did not embark upon that global assessment  which  is  the
   essence of an assessment of credibility". The judge  granting  permission
   also considered that the judge:  applied  a  higher  standard  of  proof;
   imposed their own expectations of behaviour; took into account irrelevant
   considerations and speculation; and  failed  to  take  into  account  the
   appellant's explanation.

3. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The  Tribunal  has  received
   the respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated 26.3.21, which in  essence  submits
   that the grounds are no more than a disagreement with the decision.

4. I bear in mind the counsel of Lewison LJ in Fage UK Ltd.  v  Chobani  UK
   Ltd. [2014] EWCA Civ 5,  who at  [114]  explained  the  caution  to  be
   exercised by appellate courts in interfering with evaluative decisions of
   first  instance  judges,  including  that  Appellate  courts  have   been
   repeatedly warned, by recent cases at the highest level, not to interfere
   with findings of fact by trial judges, unless compelled to  do  so.  This
   applies not only to findings of primary fact, but also to the  evaluation
   of those facts and to inferences to be drawn from them."

5. In MR (permission to appeal:  Tribunal's  approach)  Brazil  [2015]  UKUT
   00029 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that,  "A  judge  considering  an
   application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  must  avoid
   granting permission on what, properly analysed, is no more than a  simple
   quarrel with the First-tier Tribunal judge's assessment of the evidence."



6. Having carefully considered the submissions of Mr Hussain,  I  find  that
   this is an instance akin to that described in VW (Sri Lanka) [2013]  EWCA
   Civ 522 at [12], where LJ  McCombe  stated,  "Regrettably,  there  is  an
   increasing tendency in immigration  cases,  when  a  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge has given a judgment explaining why he  has  reached  a  particular
   decision, of seeking to burrow out industriously areas of  evidence  that
   have been less fully dealt with than others and then to  use  this  as  a
   basis for saying the judge's decision is legally flawed  because  it  did
   not deal with a particular  matter  more  fully.  In  my  judgment,  with
   respect, that is no basis on which to sustain a  proper  challenge  to  a
   judge's finding of fact."

7. Mr Hussain made three primary submissions of an error of law on the  part
   of the First-tier Tribunal  and  four  subsidiary  submissions  asserting
   material errors of fact.

8.  The  primary  issue  of  fact  in  contention  in  the  appeal  was  the
   appellant's claim to be of Eritrean nationality,  inconsistent  with  her
   application for a visa to the USA using an Ethiopian passport. Mr Hussain
   argued that at [37] of the impugned decision the judge failed to  give  a
   full and proper consideration to the evidence  of  the  witness  SY,  who
   claimed to have met the appellant and other  of  her  family  members  in
   Eritrea. However, it is clear that at [16]  of  the  decision  the  judge
   confirmed that she had carefully considered the evidence  as  a  totality
   stating,  "the  fact  that  I  have  not  referred  in  my  determination
   specifically to any particular pieces of evidence does not mean that  the
   evidence has not been considered in the way just described." It is  clear
   from [37] of the decision that the judge considered the evidence  of  the
   witness in the context of the whole,  which  included  the  inconsistency
   highlighted at [37] that in interview the appellant stated that  she  had
   no close relatives outside of Eritrean, failing to mention  her  maternal
   uncle in Sudan who co-ordinated her protection claim and who put  her  in
   touch with the  witness.  In  passing,  I  do  not  accept  Mr  Hussain's
   characterisation of the witness as 'independent.'

9. In summary, I am satisfied that the judge gave due consideration  to  the
   evidence of the witness, providing cogent  reasoning  for  rejecting  his
   account in the context of the  issue  as  to  whether  the  appellant  is
   Eritrean or Ethiopian. No error of law is disclosed.

10. Mr Hussain also complained that at [24] the judge held  it  against  the
   appellant  that  she  failed  to  produce  any  documentary  evidence  to
   corroborate  her  claim  to  be  Ethiopian.  Whilst,  in  general  terms,
   corroboration is not required in a  protection  claim  which  has  to  be
   proved only to the lower standard, it was relevant for the judge to  note
   that  the  appellant  had  sought   an   adjournment   to   obtain   such
   documentation. The judge was entitled to draw  from  this  the  inference
   that there was such documentation in existence and to express incredulity
   that in the 18 months since her nationality  was  put  in  issue  by  the
   respondent in the substantive asylum interview, she had not produced  any
   such documentation. The judge pointed out  that  the  supposed  documents
   could, for example, have been photographed and sent electronically.

11. However, the point being made by Mr Hussain about seeking  corroboration
   is entirely undermined by the judge making clear that  no  findings  were
   based on the absence of such documentation, the judge stating, "I  simply
   note my surprise." In the following sentence the judge confirmed that  no
   finding was made on this point. In the premises, there is no error of law
   in the judge's comments about the absence of documentation.

12. The third alleged material error of law is in relation to the  obtaining
   and use of the Ethiopian passport. Mr Hussain submitted  that  the  judge
   failed to consider all of the evidence,  despite  acknowledging  at  [35]
   that it might be possible to obtain such  a  passport  by  payment  of  a
   bribe, etc. However, reading paragraphs [26] through  [35]  it  is  clear
   that the judge made a careful and detailed consideration of the evidence.
   There were clearly identified  and  significant  inconsistencies  in  the
   appellant's account. As Mr Tan submitted, she  was  evidently  unable  to
   maintain a consistent account about the Ethiopian passport. Amongst other
   elements considered by the judge was that the appellant was very  evasive
   and unwilling to discuss the details at all, getting information from her
   being described as "like pulling teeth." It was only with reluctance that
   the appellant admitted that she and her husband had applied for visas for
   the USA using Ethiopian passports. I am satisfied that the conclusions of
   the judge that the appellant is in fact an Ethiopian  national  is  fully
   reasoned and justified on the evidence. No error of law is disclosed.

13. Mr Hussain went on to submit  that  there  were  a  number  of  material
   factual errors but in reality most of these  amounted  to  'scraping  the
   bottom of the  barrel'  in  seeking  points  with  which  to  attempt  to
   undermine the First-tier Tribunal decision. For example, the grounds  and
   Mr Hussain focused on the judge's reference to elaboration in [22] of the
   decision. The ground is predicated on an  interpretation  of  'elaborate'
   being equated to embellish' and misunderstand the meaning of the word. Mr
   Hussain admitted that this was not his strongest point.

14. The only factual error of any  substance  is  that  at  [23]  the  judge
   mistakenly stated that the appellant failed to  mention  in  any  of  her
   interviews or her letter that when the authorities came looking  for  her
   husband they did so with a summons requiring him to attend  their  office
   by a certain date. As Mr Hussain pointed out and as Mr Tan accepted,  the
   appellant had mentioned this in her response to Q102 of  the  substantive
   interview. I am satisfied that the judge made a mistake of fact, but I am
   not satisfied that this error was material to the outcome of  the  appeal
   in which the primary issue was whether  the  appellant  was  Eritrean  as
   claimed or Ethiopian as the respondent maintained. Once  that  issue  was
   resolved against  the  appellant  with  the  judge  concluding  that  the
   appellant is Ethiopian, the detail of alleged events  in  Eritrea  is  of
   marginal significance. I am not satisfied that  even  if  the  judge  had
   accepted that the assertion of a summons had been mentioned earlier  that
   this factor alone could have made any difference to  the  conclusion  and
   the outcome of the appeal, given  the  cumulative  effect  of  the  other
   adverse findings.

15. The remaining points raised in the grounds are  of  such  insignificance
   that even Mr Hussain did not pursue them in his oral submissions to me.

16. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   sufficient to require it to be set aside.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       15.6.21





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       15.6.21

