
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02162/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On  15 February 2018                 |On 8 March 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     SMH
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:      Mr S Clarke, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Rhys-Davies in which he dismissed the appeal of  the  Appellant,  a
         citizen of Ethiopia, against the Secretary of State's  decision  to
         refuse asylum and issue removal directions.

      2. The application under appeal was refused on 9 February  2017.   The
         Appellant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.
          This is the appeal which came before Judge Rhys-Davies on  2  June
         2017 and was dismissed. The Appellant  applied  for  permission  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The application was granted by First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie on 13 October 2017 in  the  following
         terms

             "It  is  arguable  that  the  learned   judge,   although   he
             acknowledged the appellant to be  a  vulnerable  witness  with
             "significant  mental  health  issues",  erred  in  failing  to
             identify and to record  the  effect,  if  any,  which  it  was
             considered the vulnerability  of  the  appellant  had  on  the
             evidence led  and  the  account  taken  of  the  same  in  the
             assessment of the evidence."

      3. By a rule 24 response dated 21 November 2017 the Respondent opposed
         the  appeal  arguing  that  the  Judge  referred   to   the   Joint
         Presidential Guidance and the vulnerability of the Appellant before
         considering his credibility and the evidence as a whole.

    Background

      4. The history of this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
         challenged, are that the Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Ethiopia  of
         Oromo ethnicity born on 16 January 1999. He left Ethiopia  in  2014
         travelling via Sudan, Libya, Italy and France  before  arriving  in
         the United Kingdom on 30 July 2015 and claiming asylum on  arrival.
         He was 15 years old when he left Ethiopia and 16 on his arrival  in
         the United Kingdom. The basis  of  his  claim  was  that  he  faced
         persecution  as  a  supporter  of  the  OLF  having  been  detained
         following a demonstration in April 2014 and only released  in  June
         2014 following the payment of a bribe. He had also  taken  part  in
         sur place activities in the United Kingdom. The respondent rejected
         his account of support for the OLF, attendance at the demonstration
         and detention afterwards and his sur place activities in the United
         Kingdom.

    Submissions

      5. At the hearing before me Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
         Secretary of State and Mr  Clarke  represented  the  Appellant.  Mr
         Clark said that  the  Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  a
         vulnerable witness and having done so had three duties.  The  first
         was to consider the Joint Presidential Guidance, the second was  to
         consider the impact of the diagnosis of mental  health  issues  and
         the Appellant's consequent vulnerability on his behaviour  and  his
         evidence including inconsistencies  and  late  disclosure  and  the
         third  was  to  consider  the  extent  to   which   the   diagnosis
         corroborated his claimed ill treatment. The Judge had attended only
         to the first of these duties. Turning to the grounds of  appeal  Mr
         Clark said that grounds one and two stand  together.  Referring  to
         ground two the Judge said at paragraph 39 that he could not attach

             "... any great weight as support for the Appellant's account"

         to the psychiatrist's report but he does not go on to say how  much
         weight, if any at all, he has attached.   The  question  the  Judge
         should have asked  is  whether  there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
         Appellant has PTSD and if so the effect this had on the  manner  in
         which he gave his evidence and it's potential as  corroboration  of
         his account. The  expert  takes  into  account  the  cause  of  the
         Appellant's depressive disorder but diagnoses depression and  PTSD,
         these are different mental health issues and reasons are  given  in
         the report. The report takes into account subjective behaviour,  it
         is not just self-reporting. The  Judge  goes  behind  the  expert's
         report, this is wrong, the Judge is not a psychiatric expert.

      6. Mr Clark did not expand on ground three. So far as ground  four  is
         concerned Mr Clark referred to  the  background  information  about
         surveillance and monitoring of telephone calls. This  material  was
         before the Judge.

      7. For the Respondent Mr Richards said that as he  read  the  decision
         the Judge rejected  the  expert's  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
         mental condition. He says at paragraph 10 that in the light of  the
         expert evidence he  has  treated  the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable
         witness for the purpose of the hearing. Where he takes issue is  at
         paragraph 42 where he says,

             "... his conclusions are undermined by his failure to  address
             the possibility that any mental health  issues  the  Appellant
             might  have  could  have  their  roots  in   the   appellant's
             separation from his family and hone culture, as  well  as  any
             arduous journey to get to the UK and the  ongoing  uncertainty
             as to his status".

         He is not rejecting the conclusion, he does not say  that  he  does
         not accept the conclusion. The findings  at  paragraph  21  onwards
         shows  that  the  Judge  has  taken  account  of  the   Appellant's
         vulnerability. The Judge then comes to conclusions that are open to
         him. So far as grounds three and four are concerned the Judge gives
         sound reasoning and ground four is no more than a disagreement with
         his findings.

      8. I gave an  oral  decision  announcing  that  the  appeal  would  be
         allowed, and I now give my written reasons.

    Decision

      9. The appeal was originally listed for hearing on 12 April  2017  but
         was adjourned so that an expert's report could be obtained  on  the
         Appellant's mental health and at the  hearing  on  2  June  2017  a
         report from Consultant Psychiatrist Dr Buttan was adduced.  In  the
         light of this report the Judge records (at paragraph 10) that  "the
         Appellant was treated as a vulnerable witness for the  purposes  of
         the appeal hearing" and that "The Joint Presidential Guidance  Note
         No 2 of 2010  was  applied  throughout".  The  credibility  of  the
         Appellant's account was a prime issue at the hearing  as  this  was
         the basis of the Respondent's refusal of the Appellant's claim.  If
         the Appellant's account was accepted he would be at risk  following
         the authority of MB (OLF and MTA - Risk) Ethiopia CG  [2007]  UKAIT
         00030.

     10. Dr Buttan's report is of fundamental importance to this appeal  and
         the treatment of this report and the consequent  treatment  of  the
         Appellant's evidence is the basis of the grounds of appeal and  the
         submissions made by Mr Clark.

     11. The starting point is that the Judge noted  the  report  and  self-
         directed to the Joint Presidential Guidance and  records  that  the
         Appellant was treated as a vulnerable witness for the  purposes  of
         the appeal hearing. As Mr Clark accepted the  Judge  has  completed
         the first of his duties.

     12. However, the Judge does  not  go  on  to  record  the  effect  that
         treatment of the Appellant as  a  vulnerable  witness  had  on  the
         conduct of the hearing. The decision  records  that  the  Appellant
         gave evidence in chief, was cross examined and re-examined and that
         the  Judge  also  asked  a  few  questions  (paragraph  16).   More
         importantly the Judge does not go on to record the effect  of  that
         treatment  of  the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness  on   his
         assessment of the Appellant's evidence.

     13. The Joint Presidential Guidance at paragraph 10 gives  guidance  on
         the conduct of the hearing including (at 10.3)  the  assessment  of
         evidence

             'The order and manner  in  which  evidence  is  given  may  be
             affected by  mental,  psychological  or  emotional  trauma  or
             disability

             Where there were clear discrepancies  in  the  oral  evidence,
             consider  the  extent  to  which  the  age,  vulnerability  or
             sensitivity of the witness was an element of that  discrepancy
             or lack of clarity.

             The decision should record whether the Tribunal has  concluded
             the appellant  (or  a  witness)  is  a  child,  vulnerable  or
             sensitive, the effect the Tribunal considered  the  identified
             vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it and thus
             whether the Tribunal was satisfied whether the  appellant  had
             established his or her case to the relevant standard of proof.
             In  asylum  appeals,  weight  should  be  given  to  objective
             indications of risk rather than  necessarily  to  a  state  of
             mind.'

         The recent decision in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123
         provides at paragraph 31

             "The PD and the  Guidance  Note  [Guidance]  provide  detailed
             guidance on the approach to be adopted by the tribunal  to  an
             incapacitated or vulnerable person.  I  agree  with  the  Lord
             Chancellor's submission that there are five key features:

                  a.   the early identification of issues  of  vulnerability
                  is encouraged, if possible, before any substantive hearing
                  through the use of a CMRH or pre-hearing review  (Guidance
                  [4] and [5]);

                  b.   a person who is incapacitated or vulnerable will only
                  need to attend as a witness to give  oral  evidence  where
                  the tribunal determines that "the evidence is necessary to
                  enable the fair hearing of  the  case  and  their  welfare
                  would not be prejudiced by doing so" (PD [2] and  Guidance
                  [8] and [9]);

                  c.   where an incapacitated or vulnerable person does give
                  oral evidence, detailed provision is to be made to  ensure
                  their welfare is protected before and during  the  hearing
                  (PD [6] and [7] and Guidance [10]);

                  d.   it is necessary to give special consideration to  all
                  of the  personal  circumstances  of  an  incapacitated  or
                  vulnerable person in assessing  their  evidence  (Guidance
                  [10.2] to [15]); and

                  e.    relevant  additional   sources   of   guidance   are
                  identified in the Guidance  including  from  international
                  bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to [27])."

     14. The decision does none of this. At paragraph 28 the  Judge  rejects
         the Appellant's account of his reasons  for  leaving  Ethiopia  and
         gives his reasoning at paragraph 30 onwards. In summary  the  Judge
         finds that the development of the  Appellant's  account  undermines
         his credibility. In his witness  statement  he  said  that  he  was
         detained and kept in terrible conditions,  at  interview  he  added
         that he was immersed in cold water when  questioned,  in  his  next
         witness statement he said that he was beaten and at  his  interview
         with Dr Buttan he adds that he was tortured. The Judge  finds  that
         this is a trend of more and more serious allegations being made.

     15. At paragraph 32 the Judge records the Appellant saying that he  had
         spoken to his family yet in the account recorded by  Dr  Button  he
         says that he has not spoken to them since he left Ethiopia.  It  is
         noted that this is also inconsistent with the account given by  his
         foster carer Mr Campbell.

     16. In my judgment it is possible, that if the Judge had considered the
         Presidential Guidance, rather than merely referring to it, he would
         have considered whether the order and manner in which the Appellant
         gave his evidence were affected by his vulnerability. Not only  was
         there Dr Buttan's report but also the Appellant was giving evidence
         of events that, if they occurred, occurred when he was  a  14-year-
         old child and giving evidence of those events when he was  still  a
         child and the Judge was assessing the evidence given  then  against
         his recollection of events occurring when he  was  a  child  as  an
         adult.

     17. At the outset of the hearing (paragraph 10) the Judge  accepts  the
         vulnerability of the Appellant "for the purposes  of  the  hearing"
         but in contrast at paragraph 42 the Judge finds that Dr Buttan's

             "... conclusions are undermined by his failure to address  the
             possibility that any mental health issues the Appellant  might
             have could have their roots in the Appellant's separation from
             his family and home culture as well as any arduous journey  to
             get to the United Kingdom and the ongoing  uncertainty  as  to
             his status".

         The Judge does not explain what he means by the  conclusions  being
         "undermined" but I can see little other potential explanation  than
         that his conclusions are rejected particularly with  the  reference
         "any mental health issues the Appellant might have". If this is the
         case then the judge,  having  accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  a
         vulnerable witness for the purposes of the hearing on the basis  of
         Dr Buttan's report has gone on to reject the  conclusions  of  that
         report and therefore  having  accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  a
         vulnerable person for the purpose of the hearing has  not  accepted
         that he is  a  vulnerable  person  for  the  consideration  of  his
         evidence. In my judgment there can  be  no  other  explanation  and
         indeed this explanation is borne out by the failure of the Judge to
         factor vulnerability in to the consideration of the evidence.

     18. Expert's reports should only be rejected when there are  clear  and
         cogent reasons for doing so. In my judgment the reason given by the
         Judge, that the expert has not considered alternative  reasons  for
         the Appellant's mental state are neither clear not  cogent  for  to
         consider alternative reasons there  must  be  acceptance  that  the
         mental state exists. Further it is clear that the  expert's  report
         does consider alternatives (at paragraph 3, page 21) and  in  doing
         so separates the two mental health conditions diagnosed,  PTSD  and
         depression. The conclusion rejected seems to be the  acceptance  of
         the Appellant's credibility by the expert and the diagnoses of PTSD
         and depression.

     19. In my judgement the Judge has fallen into  error  in  two  material
         ways. Firstly, by not taking account of the  Presidential  Guidance
         in  his  consideration  and  assessment  of  the  evidence  of  the
         Appellant who was a vulnerable witness both in  terms  of  his  age
         when the events claimed to have happened  occurred,  his  age  when
         initially giving his evidence of those events and his mental health
         throughout. Secondly  by  rejecting  the  expert's  report  without
         giving adequate and cogent reasons for doing so.

    Summary

     20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law. I allow the Appellant's appeal.

     21. The error of law identified goes to the heart  of  the  credibility
         finding made and, in these circumstances, I remit the matter to the
         First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.


Signed:                                 Date: 6 March 2018
[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
