
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/02690/2016
                                                               PA/02339/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 18th August 2016                  |On 2nd September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             mohammed sunu miah
                                 urfol sunu
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:    Mrs M Ahammed, instructed by RMS Immigration
                    Limited, London
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh, husband and wife.  They have
    no children.  They came to the UK in July 2005 with leave as  visitors,
    valid until January 2006.  There have been  various  proceedings  since
    then, during which they have not succeeded in establishing any right to
    remain in the UK, in or out of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The decision of the respondent giving  rise  to  these  proceedings  is
    dated 26th February 2016.  It finds that the appellants have  no  well-
    founded fear of persecution on return to Bangladesh, and rejects  their
    claim on all other available  grounds,  including  private  and  family
    life.

 3. In her decision promulgated on 19th May 2016 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Bird dismissed the appellants' appeals "under the  Refugee  Convention"
    and "under the Immigration Rules".

 4. The appellants were present at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Bird,  and
    initially had representation, but their representative withdrew  before
    the substantive hearing began.  They indicated that they were ready  to
    go ahead without representation.

 5. The grounds of appeal complain that the  judge  did  not  consider  the
    private and family life of the appellants, either  in  or  out  of  the
    Rules.  The appellants also assert again that they would be at risk  in
    Bangladesh.

 6. On 16th June 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  granted  permission
    to appeal, on the grounds that the judge arguably erred by  failing  to
    consider Article 8.

 7.  Mrs  Pettersen  advised  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  that   the
    respondent's file disclosed that while there did  not  appear  to  have
    been any significant submission about Article 8 at the hearing  in  the
    FTT, such matters had been part of the grounds of appeal  to  the  FtT,
    and there was no record of a concession.

 8. Mrs Pettersen tendered some further  documents,  which  she  said  were
    intended to bring out  the  complete  procedural  history.   The  first
    appellant had asked for a reconsideration of his case under  Article  8
    of the ECHR on 31st May 2013.  The respondent refused that  application
    by letter served on him on 4th February 2014, which advised him that it
    was not considered that he had private or family life in the UK such as
    to give him any right  to  remain,  and  that  his  claim  was  clearly
    unfounded in terms of section 94(2) of the 2002 Act, so that he had  no
    right of appeal.  Notwithstanding  the  terms  of  that  decision,  the
    appellant purported  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a
    decision dated 7th and issued on 13th  May  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Agnew held that there was no right of appeal.

 9. Mrs Ahammed had no objection to these documents being introduced.   She
    said that there  was  no  dispute  about  the  history  of  proceedings
    involving the appellants.

10. Further to the grounds, Mrs Ahammed said that it was now conceded  that
    Judge Bird failed to deal  with  Article  8.   That  was  bound  to  be
    material.  As to the substance of the Article 8 claim, she relied  upon
    a  skeleton  argument.   She  submitted  that  a  decision  should   be
    substituted, allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

11. The written submissions rely upon the length of time the appellant  and
    his wife have spent in the UK, the fears which they have if  they  were
    to return, and the general scope of Article 8 jurisprudence.

12. Ms Pettersen's response referred to pages 13 and 14 of the respondent's
    decision, which she  said  deal  thoroughly  with  Article  8  matters.
    Although Judge Bird had erred in not addressing  these,  there  was  no
    substantial basis on which any judge might reasonably have allowed  the
    appeal on private and family life grounds, in or out of the Immigration
    Rules.  The appellants would  return  together  as  a  family  unit  to
    Bangladesh.  They have spent a considerable time in the  UK,  but  they
    have spent more of their lives there.  There was  no  reason  to  think
    that they would have any significant  difficulties  on  return.   Their
    alleged problems had been thoroughly rejected by the judge, for reasons
    in which no factual or legal error  was  suggested.   There  were  some
    medical issues referred to, but no basis  on  which  the  appeal  could
    succeed.  It was clearly not disproportionate to require the appellants
    to leave the UK in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

13. In response, Mrs Ahammed referred again to the significant difficulties
    the appellants said they would encounter on return.  It  would  not  be
    easy for them to re-establish themselves.  It would not be easy for the
    first appellant to find a job.  There  were  significant  obstacles  to
    their reintegration in Bangladesh, so  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    either in terms of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules,  or  outside  the
    Rules.

14. I reserved my determination.

15. It may be understandable that the appellants prefer to continue  living
    in the UK, but they have failed over many years to establish that  they
    have any right to  do  so,  and  there  is  nothing  in  their  present
    circumstances which gives them a right  to  remain.   The  respondent's
    decisions involve no disproportionate consequences.

16. It is difficult to imagine that any judge might have found  sustainable
    reasons to allow the appeal on the basis of private and family life, in
    or out of the Rules.  However, it is preferable  for  there  to  be  an
    explicit resolution of the Article 8 grounds.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   The  following
    decision is substituted:  the appeal  is  dismissed  on  all  available
    grounds, including family and private life  grounds,  whether  advanced
    under the Rules or outwith the Rules.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                           [pic]


                           1 September 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


