
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
PA/02667/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |      Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                       |
|On 22 May 2017                         |      On 6 June 2017              |
|Prepared 22 May 2017                   |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                     Z Y
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Andrew Eaton, Counsel instructed by  Elder  Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan, date of birth  attributed  as
    1 January 1999, appealed against the Respondent's decision  of  1  June
    2016 to refuse an asylum and protection claim.  The matter came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Courtney (the  Judge)  who,  on  13  February
    2017, dismissed his appeal.

2.   On 22 May 2017, I decided for reasons given that the judge has made  an
    error of law in her assessment of the issue of internal  relocation  to
    Kabul.

3.   I therefore heard submissions from Mr Eaton and Mr Singh on  the  issue
    of internal relocation.  There was no interpreter in  Dari  booked  for
    the hearing and it was therefore not possible  to  hear  the  Appellant
    giving evidence. Mr Eaton indicated that the Appellant had confirmed to
    him that since the time of the hearing before the judge he had  had  no
    contact with any family in Iran or in Afghanistan.  Mr Singh  indicated
    that he was content for this remaking to be done in the Upper  Tribunal
    by me and without evidence being heard.

4.   A relevant issue which I look at separately arose  in  connection  with
    the age of the Appellant.  Mr Singh submitted that the Appellant's date
    of birth was the product of an exercise whereby the Appellant indicated
    his approximate age and the earlier date of 1 January of the year, when
    he was born, was taken as that date.  Mr Eaton argued that whenever the
    Appellant's birthday was, which is not known, the fact was that at some
    stage, within the date of the hearing before the judge, in January 2017
    at its best the Appellant was some twenty days or so over  the  age  of
    18.  Mr Eaton argued that if it was not that month and that date of his
    birthday the Appellant either was and remains or is of the age of under
    18: Even taken at its highest and he is now 18 years of age there is no
    bright line in terms of assessing age and the fact that someone has got
    to their 18th birthday does not simply mean risk falls away.

5.   In considering this matter, I have taken into account  and  applied  EU
    (Afghanistan) and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 32.  I also  take  into
    account KA Afghanistan [2012] EWCA Civ 1014, not  least  because  there
    again it has been confirmed that  there  is  no  temporal  bright  line
    across which risk to and the needs of the child suddenly disappear.  On
    any view, the Appellant is a young man.

6.   It was also unchallenged that the  Appellant's  family  came  from  the
    Tagab district of Kapisa province in Afghanistan and at an  early  age,
    too young for him to remember, he was taken to  Iran  with  his  family
    where they lived for many  years.   In  2016,  his  father  and  family
    decided to return to Afghanistan but within a few months, certainly  no
    more than a year, they had fled back to Iran and his  father  paid  for
    the Appellant's travel to the United Kingdom.  The Appellant was as  he
    explained in contact with his family in Iran from time to time and  but
    that the telephone line is not particularly  clear.  He  had  no  other
    friends, relatives or contacts in Iran or Afghanistan.

7.   The Appellant identified his fear of the Taliban in Afghanistan.  In  a
    statement originally, dated 6 July  2016,  but  signed  by  him  on  20
    January 2017, the Appellant indicated that he had a continuing fear  of
    returning to the home village in the province of Kapisa.  Currently  he
    is not able currently to speak to his parents who he thinks  are  still
    in Iran: The phone number he has is not working and he has not  managed
    to speak to them of recent times.

8.   The Appellant's case therefore was considered  by  Judge  Courtney  who
    accepted there was an increase in the  recruitment  and  deployment  of
    child fighters due to expanded Taliban operations  against  the  Afghan
    national forces and that the Taliban had created  training  centres  in
    various madrassas.  The Appellant's account of being given  lessons  in
    suicide missions at the mosque was found to be plausible and the  judge
    considered there was a serious possibility that the Appellant's father,
    concerned for his safety, had told him to stop attending such  classes.
    The Judge accepted that the Taliban had  visited  the  family  home  in
    order to encourage the Appellant to resume his studies.

9.   The judge accepted that the Taliban  posed  risks  but  concluded  that
    they were only confined to the Appellant in  his  home  area  and  that
    there was no reason to think that the Taliban would seek to  track  him
    down within Kabul city, even if he was to relocate in a community where
    his identity and history would be probed.  The judge therefore  decided
    that if the Appellant felt himself  vulnerable  to  forced  recruitment
    then in order to avoid that  he  could  relocate  away  from  the  home
    village to Kabul.

10.  Thus it was that with those findings the issue arose as  to  relocation
    to Kabul. There is no dispute that no tracing exercise was carried  out
    by the Respondent.  Similarly, there is no evidence to  show  that  the
    Appellant's  maternal  uncles,  who  live   in   different   parts   of
    Afghanistan, but not in Kabul, would be in a position to either  go  to
    Kabul and collect him or take him under their  wings,  collectively  or
    individually.  Similarly, there is no evidence that the  Appellant  has
    any family within Kabul city or surrounding area or province.

11.  The judge accepted that the Afghan government forces are  not  able  to
    protect individuals, including the Appellant from being targeted by non-
    state actors in their home  area,  due  to  limited  capacity  and  the
    ongoing conflict.   The  judge  therefore  considered  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the Appellant to relocate internally to Kabul  and  that
    involved a consideration of safety and reasonableness.  The  judge  was
    taken  to  relevant  authorities,  including  KA  Afghanistan  and   AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] and of course  AK  (Article
    15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163.  I note in the context of risk
    from indiscriminate violence contemplated and considered in AK that  in
    general there will not be a risk on return to Kabul on the basis of  it
    being unsafe or unreasonable.  However in AA, dealing  with  unattended
    children, [2012] UKUT 00016 the head note makes a  distinction  between
    children who are living with a family  and  those  who  are  not.   The
    distinction  between  the  two  emphasises  that  unattached   children
    returned to Afghanistan, depending on  their  individual  circumstances
    and the location to which they are returned, may be exposed to risk  of
    harm, inter alia  from  indiscriminate  violence,  forced  recruitment,
    sexual violence, trafficking and  lack  of  adequate  arrangements  for
    child protection.  Such risks will have to be taken into  account  when
    addressing the question of whether the return is in the children's best
    interests.

12.    In this context, I take into account that as  a  fact  the  Appellant
    may still be a child but I deal with him as recently becoming an adult.
     It seems to me that is the only course that can really follow,  unless
    there was contrary evidence of another date of  birth  which  had  some
    prospects of being established.  This is not the case  here.   But  the
    important point raised is that the Appellant, whether he is in Kabul or
    in the home area, would be without any contact with his family so there
    is no  family  or  network  protection  available  to  him  from  other
    relatives.  There is no evidence to  suggest  that  there  is  or  that
    anyone has the necessary power to provide protection to  him.   I  take
    into account his age as a young adult, the fact  that  he  has  largely
    spent his time away from Afghanistan living in Iran or  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and that he has never really grown up with Afghan culture or a
    context of experience from living in Afghanistan.  I have  no  evidence
    before me from which to conclude that his family could travel to  Kabul
    to meet him and nothing to suggest any other family  members  would  be
    either willing or indeed able to do so, if they exist.

13.  Thus, with no experience of living alone  in  Afghanistan  at  all  and
    none effectively in a role dealing with people or seeking to stave  off
    adverse attentions, it seems to me, whether or not the Appellant is  18
    or something less,  makes no real difference to the point.   He  is  on
    this basis a young man who has hardly lived in Afghanistan and who  has
    really no roots there.  Mr Singh argued that the lack of  communication
    between the Appellant and his parents is or could  be  attributable  to
    the fact that his father has paid many thousands of dollars to ship him
    to the United Kingdom and hoped on the basis of  him  having  a  better
    life: On that  basishat  he  would  not  cooperate  or  assist  in  the
    Appellant's return.

14.  It seems to me that that is certainly a possibility but one which  does
    not seem to me to be likely.  It does seem to me that there is a  point
    in the Appellant's favour in that he did not come to the United Kingdom
    and say from the outset he did not have contact with  his  family.   He
    did not present himself, on that basis, as many have,  rather  he  said
    that he had contact, it was reasonably regular at the  outset,  it  has
    just been diminishing and is now gone.  I  do  not  find  that  he  had
    exaggerated that element of his isolation as a result of coming to  the
    United  Kingdom.   It  may  well  be  that   part   of   his   father's
    considerations was to give his son a better  life  but  that  does  not
    avoid the elements of risk that the Appellant was found to face in  the
    home area.

15.  In these circumstances, Mr Eaton does not exaggerate the case in  terms
    of saying that the Appellant is very immature and  looks  younger  than
    his years or in other words is by his  nature  going  to  face  adverse
    interests. Inevitably, in my view, if someone has come  to  the  United
    Kingdom and has spent time here, in addition to the lengthy time he has
    spent away from Afghanistan, then the reality is that  he  will  be  of
    interest and as is clear on  the  background  evidence  susceptible  to
    adverse attention if removed to Kabul.

16.  The Refugee Support Network (RSN) report 2016 identifies a  significant
    number of such persons who have been removed to Afghanistan since  2007
    yet limited monitoring of the effects of return and  their  experiences
    has been conducted.  Their own monitoring exercise included a series of
    153 interviews carried out in Kabul over a period of  eighteen  months.
    Some of the returnees had made contact with their families in Kabul and
    others not so.  It was generally said that insecurity had been found to
    be a serious problem in the life of young returnees in coping with  the
    difficult situation including security incidents, threats to  children,
    targeting of them and targeting because of their status as a  returnee.
    The majority of the young returnees largely  were  unable  to  continue
    their education in Afghanistan and such education as they had  obtained
    in the UK had not significantly led to further education  opportunities
    in Afghanistan.

17.  The difficulties of finding sustainable work, let alone  accommodation,
    presents continuing problems but it does not seem to me in the light of
    AK that those of themselves would be a basis why  a  person  could  not
    return to Afghanistan. The Mukbarak et Al report (AB2 p325)  notes  the
    health problems associated with the stresses of return and  the  living
    conditions in IDP camps, or such like, are also referred to as being of
    concern.  The  RSN  report  provides  a  great  number  of  sources  to
    particular elements of it and I was taken to the  following  points  on
    reintegration.  In relation to reintegration notes

         "For young people without  family  remaining  in  Afghanistan,  the
         decision about where to live was often based  on  the  location  of
         less stable networks.  One returnee, who  returned  to  Afghanistan
         with no connections other than those he met on the  return  flight,
         said that "I am staying in Jalalabad.  I came here with some of the
         other returnees who came with me in the same plane."

18.  The problems of where to live were present not  just  where  there  was
    family present in Kabul but also where there was not.  Even  those  who
    had a relative or someone to care  for  them  nevertheless  encountered
    problems of meeting their basic financial  needs  following  return  to
    Afghanistan.  The majority of young people were using all they  had  to
    pay for food, shelter and other necessities and  sometimes  failing  to
    make ends  meet.   Incidents  were  reported  of  returnees  who  faced
    difficulties because, in the eyes of the Taliban  and  local  residents
    alike, those who had gone to Europe and had now come  back  represented
    the threat of spying (AB2 pp233, 234,  242,  253  and  257).   The  RSN
    conclusion was that without strong personal networks  and  connections,
    finding sustainable work would have  been  almost  impossible  for  the
    young returnees monitored, and setting up a business only  a  potential
    viable  option  for  the  small  minority  with  access  to  money  and
    resources.  Lack of work has made it  difficult  for  the  majority  of
    young returnees to establish a  life  for  themselves  post  return  in
    addition to the difficulty faced by internally displaced people  (IDP).
    It is well known that there are a significant number of IDP camps  with
    very substantial populations.  It  showed  that  families  struggle  to
    survive and difficulties of finding employment and  regular  employment
    are so great because there is the obvious  capacity  for  exploitation.
    It is also clear that further education and  learning  enough  to  lift
    oneself out of the difficulties is not a real option.

19.  It is also clear that in the IDP camps there are considerable  problems
    of hygiene and sanitation and IDP camps or slums pose significant risks
    to young and old alike.  It seems to me that the circumstances  of  the
    Appellant set out above indicate that the  generality  of  the  country
    guidance case AK stands  but  that  for  young  persons,  just  as  for
    children, there are real problems about return and what they  may  find
    to survive upon and be looked after.

20.  The Appellant's bundles contain a substantial number  of  reports  over
    recent years.l d I have  particularly  taken  into  account  the  Human
    Rights Watch Reports of 2017, other material of that date  and  the  UK
    Foreign and Commonwealth Office documentation of February 2017.

21.  It is clear to me that returning the Appellant unaccompanied  to  Kabul
    poses the real risk of it being unduly harsh. On the findings  of  fact
    and the background evidence I do not  find  internal  relocation  is  a
    reasonable or  acceptable  option  for  this  Appellant.   I  find  the
    Appellant has discharged the burden  of  proof  to  that  low  standard
    identified in Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 20 that there is  no  one  in
    Kabul to receive him and no network or  family  or  distant  family  to
    support him.  I therefore find also that there must be a real  risk  in
    the  circumstances  of  him  having  problems  finding   a   home   and
    accommodation, let alone employment, and there  is  the  real  risk  of
    poverty, destitution, abuse and exploitation. Similarly  there  is  the
    real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

ANONYMITY ORDER

Anonymity order continued.

DECISION

The Original Tribunal made an error of law and the  decision  cannot  stand.
The following decision is substituted.

The appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention.

FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid.  No fee award is appropriate.



Signed                                  Date 30 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


