
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02871/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 January 2018                     |On 24 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     MNW
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Nnamani, Counsel instructed by OJN Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity:

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal arises from a decision of the respondent of 7 March 2017 to
    refuse the appellant's claim for asylum. The appellant subsequently
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was dismissed by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego. The appellant is now appealing
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, which was promulgated
    on 24 April 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born on [ ] 1986. On 16 May 2016 he
    travelled to the UK by plane with his wife and young child whereupon he
    lodged an application for asylum.

   3. The basis of his claim, in summary, is that he faces a risk to his
      life from the authorities in Kenya because of comments he made in
      public on 23 April 2016 about the involvement of the police, Mungiki
      and Members of Parliament in the violence which took place in Navasha
      in 2008.

   4. The appellant claims that on 23 April 2016 he spoke at a prayer
      meeting or rally for the victims of violence in Navasha in 2008 and
      that during his speech he said that police, Mungiki and Members of
      Parliament were involved. He claims that a few days after the speech,
      on 27 April 2016, he received a letter telling him to report to the
      police station within the next 24 hours, which he duly did, on 28
      April 2016.  He claims that after arriving at the police station he
      was put in the trunk of a police car and taken to a forest by three
      police officers, whose intention was to kill him. He claims to have
      managed to escape and to have hidden in a large cave. He claims that
      after leaving the cave he came across men loading a lorry who took him
      to a nearby town where he booked into a hotel and telephoned his wife
      who then stayed with him at several different hotels.

   5. The appellant claims to have arranged a meeting for 5 May 2016 with a
      civil rights advocate, Jacob Juma, but that the advocate was killed
      before the meeting. He also claims to have had a meeting with a human
      rights lawyer called Paul Mwangi who advised him that there have been
      many cases of people going missing. The appellant then decided to
      leave Kenya.

   6. The appellant's account of leaving Kenya is that he, his wife and his
      child were able to avoid the police at the airport with the assistance
      of his brother-in-law, a baggage handler at the airport, who inter
      alia enabled them to use the staff entrance. He smuggled them airside
      and checked them in.

   7. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account of events in
      Kenya and rejected his claim to have a genuine and well founded fear
      of the authorities in Kenya. In the decision made on 7 March 2017, the
      appellant's application for asylum was refused.

   8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
      heard on 21 April 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   9. The core issue before the First-tier Tribunal was the appellant's
      credibility. The judge did not find the appellant's account of events
      in Kenya credible. She gave the following eight reasons for reaching
      this conclusion:


   a) The judge found there to be an inconsistency between the appellant's
      witness statement and oral evidence as to how he made an appointment
      with the human rights lawyer Paul Mwangi (paragraph 52). In his
      witness statement, he said that he had booked an appointment in a
      telephone call. In his oral evidence, he said that there was no
      telephone call and that he had called in without an appointment and
      spoken to a secretary/receptionist.


   b) The judge found there to be an inconsistency between the appellant's
      interview record and evidence at the hearing concerning his claimed
      escape from the three police officers who intended to kill him
      (paragraph 57). At question 46 of his interview, he said that he was
      led uphill in stages with the men going ahead, coming back after 8
      minutes and then continuing to climb. At the hearing, he said that the
      men were expected to go for something like 25-30 minutes, and that,
      after about 10 minutes, he pushed the remaining policeman over and ran
      away. The judge said that this was a crucial part of the appellant's
      account which was not consistent.


   c) The judge noted that there was no attempt to find the appellant or his
      wife which she said was unlikely given the narration of the threats
      (paragraph 58).


   d) The judge found it damaging to the appellant's credibility that no
      evidence was adduced to corroborate his appointment with (or the
      existence of) Paul Mwangi (paragraphs 51 and 52). There were also two
      other aspects of the appellant's evidence that the judge considered at
      paragraph 51 which she found incredible. The first was the fact that
      an attempt to search for Paul Mwangi on the internet was only made
      over the lunch break on the hearing day (paragraph 35) whereas the
      lack of supporting evidence from Paul Mwangi had been raised in the
      decision letter some six weeks previously. The second was that, when
      the internet search on the hearing day revealed that there was a Paul
      Mwangi, the appellant said that this was not the lawyer he had seen
      whose address he said was different.


        Plainly, the fact that there was a Paul Mwangi who was easily found
         on the internet raised the legitimate question why the appellant
         had not made any attempt to contact him.  In that context, it is
         easy to understand why the judge, in considering the appellant's
         explanation that there was another lawyer by the same name in
         Nairobi, said that it was unlikely that there were two such lawyers
         in Nairobi.


   e) The judge found it damaging to the appellant's credibility that no
      evidence was submitted to prove that his brother-in-law was a baggage
      handler at the airport (paragraph 53).


   f) The judge found it damaging to the appellant's credibility that a
      statement was not obtained from any of the congregants who heard the
      appellant speak about the events in Navasha or from the pastor of the
      church who he claimed received the letter summoning him to attend the
      police station (paragraph 54).


   g) The judge noted that the appellant did not provide details of the
      hotel bookings he claimed to have made before leaving Kenya (paragraph
      56).


   h) The judge found that the evidence of the appellant's wife only
      provided limited support because the appellant did not tell her many
      of the things he now says occurred (paragraph 55).


Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

  10. The grounds of appeal argue that the sole reason the judge rejected
      the appellant's account was the absence of corroborative evidence and
      that this was an error of law. The grounds contend that rather than
      assessing the material that was before the Tribunal, the judge
      approached the claim as if corroborative evidence was necessary, and
      that the judge required corroborative evidence rather than undertaking
      an assessment of the consistency of the appellant's account and his
      general credibility.


  11. The grounds also argue that the judge failed to follow the approach to
      corroboration set out in TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40.


  12. Ms Nnamani argued that the appellant gave a detailed and internally
      consistent account of events. She noted that the judge stated at
      paragraph 59 that the appellant gave his account "with apparent
      sincerity, and some animation, and detail." She also stated that the
      appellant's wife gave evidence which was consistent with that of the
      appellant and that the judge had, at paragraph 55, found her evidence
      to be credible.


  13. Ms Nnamani acknowledged that the judge stated in the decision on more
      than one occasion that there is no requirement for corroboration but
      she argued that notwithstanding this self-direction that is precisely
      what the judge had done. Ms Nnamani pointed to four instances in the
      decision where judge had rejected the appellant's account because of
      an absence of supporting material (these are summarised above, at
      paragraphs 9d, e, f and g) and argued that these findings were
      determinative of the overall credibility finding.


  14. A further argument advanced by Ms Nnamani was that the judge's
      approach to corroboration was not consistent with TK (Burundi). She
      submitted that, following TK (Burundi), the judge should have
      approached the issue of corroboration by asking herself: (a) whether
      the evidence was readily available; (b) what effect the evidence would
      have on the assessment of credibility; and (c) whether there was a
      credible explanation for the absence of the material. Ms Nnamani
      contended that by failing to follow this approach the judge had made
      an error of law.


  15. Mr Wilding made two arguments.


   a) Firstly, he argued that the absence of corroboration was not the only
      reason the appellant's credibility was not accepted and that there
      were significant other reasons given by the judge to explain her
      rejection of the appellant's account. He pointed to the reasons
      summarised above, at paragraphs 9a, b and c.


   b) Secondly, Mr Wilding argued that where the judge took into account the
      absence of corroboration she did so in a way that was consistent with
      the approach delineated in TK (Burundi).


  16. Mr Wilding also commented on the evidence of the appellant's wife,
      arguing that because she had very little first-hand knowledge of what
      occurred it was not capable of corroborating the core of the
      appellant's account. He highlighted the judge's summary of her
      evidence at paragraph 37, where, for example, she claimed to not have
      seen the letter summoning the appellant to the police station and that
      all her husband had told her was that he had been hijacked.


Assessment

  17. The judge gave five distinct reasons for finding the appellant not
      credible that were unrelated to whether or not his account was
      corroborated.


   a)  At paragraph 51, that his explanation, that there were two lawyers by
      the name of Paul Mwangi in Nairobi, was an attempt to explain away
      why, given that a lawyer by the name of Paul Mwangi who was easily
      found on the internet, he had not contacted the lawyer, an explanation
      which the judge said was not credible because she considered it
      unlikely that there were two lawyers by the same name in Nairobi.


   b) At paragraph 51, the judge also considered it incredible that an
      attempt to search the internet for a lawyer by the name of Paul Mwangi
      was only made at the hearing given that the respondent had raised the
      lack of  supporting evidence from Paul Mwangi as an issue in the
      decision letter.


   c) At paragraph 52 the judge found the appellant to have given an
      inconsistent account of his claim to have seen the human rights
      lawyer, Paul Mwangi. In his witness statement the appellant stated
      that he had booked an appointment with Mr Mwangi in a telephone call.
      However, in oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal he claimed to
      have called in on the lawyer without an appointment and spoken to the
      secretary/receptionist.


   d) At paragraph 57 the judge found that there to be an inconsistency
      between what the appellant stated in the asylum interview and at the
      hearing with respect to what she described as a "crucial" part of the
      appellant's account of how he was taken into the forest by the police
      officers and escaped from them.


   e) At paragraph 58 the judge described as "unlikely", given the
      appellant's account of the threat to his life, that there was not an
      attempt by the authorities to find him or his wife at their home.


  18. In assessing the appellant's credibility the judge has taken into
      account the internal consistency of the appellant's evidence
      (paragraphs 52 and 57) and the plausibility of his account (paragraphs
      51 and 58). It is therefore simply not the case, as argued in the
      grounds and maintained by Ms Nnamani, that the judge's sole, or
      determinative, reason for rejecting the appellant's account of events
      in Kenya was the absence of corroboration. Nor is it accurate to claim
      that the judge failed to assess the consistency of the appellant's
      account when she explicitly did this at paragraphs 52 and 57.
      Accordingly, the appeal cannot succeed on this ground.


  19. We now turn to the appellant's contention that the judge's approach to
      the absence of corroboration was inconsistent with TK (Burundi).


  20. In TK (Burundi) the Court of Appeal held that:


         "[W]here a Judge in assessing credibility relies on the fact that
         there is no independent supporting evidence where there should be
         supporting evidence and there is no credible account for its
         absence he commits no error of law when he relies on that fact for
         rejecting the account of an appellant."

  21. Although TK (Burundi) concerned evidence available from persons
      subject to this jurisdiction the same principles apply (and it was not
      argued otherwise by Ms Nnamani) to evidence outside the jurisdiction.


  22. As succinctly summarised at the hearing by Ms Nnamani, before relying
      on the absence of independent supporting evidence as a reason to
      reject an appellant's account, following TK (Burundi), there are three
      questions to consider:

   a) Is the independent supporting evidence readily available even though
      it is outside the UK?


   b) Would the evidence, if before the Tribunal, effect the assessment of
      credibility?

   c) Is there a credible explanation for the absence of the evidence?

  23. The judge was aware - and had in mind - that the principles outlined
      in TK Burundi were applicable to the appeal before her. This is made
      clear at paragraph 50, which immediately precedes the part of the
      decision in which the lack of corroboration is considered (paragraphs
      51-55), where the judge stated:


         "While there is no requirement for corroboration in asylum appeals,
         there are in this case three matters where TK (Burundi) applies."


  24. The most significant of the judge's findings against the appellant
      arising from the absence of corroboration is at paragraphs 51 and 52
      of the decision, where judge found as "greatly damaging to the
      credibility of the appellant" that he did not submit any independent
      supporting evidence to show either that he met with Paul Mwangi or
      that Mr Mwangi exists notwithstanding the fact that this was clearly
      raised in the decision letter


  25. Before reaching her conclusion that the absence of corroborating
      evidence about the meeting with Paul Mwangi damaged the appellant's
      credibility, the judge considered a number of factors.


   a) Firstly, she considered whether evidence from (or about) Mr Mwangi
      would be readily available and concluded that if, as claimed by the
      appellant, Mr Mwangi was a reputable human rights lawyer with whom he
      had met, it would be easy to obtain an email confirming the
      appointment.


   b)  Secondly, the judge considered the effect Mr Mwangi's evidence might
      have on the assessment of credibility and concluded that it would have
      "great evidential value".

   c) Thirdly, the judge considered the appellant's explanation for the
      absence of material from Mr Mwangi and found it lacked credibility for
      the following two reasons: (1) the appellant gave conflicting evidence
      about whether he booked an appointment with Mr Mwangi as stated in his
      witness statement or merely dropped into his office as claimed in oral
      evidence (the latter presumably would explain the absence of a written
      record); and (2) when it was drawn to the appellant's attention that
      there is a Paul Mwangi engaging in human rights work in Nairobi who is
      contactable through an internet search and website, the appellant's
      response was that this was a different Paul Mwangi without providing
      any evidence to show the existence of the Mr Mwangi he claimed to have
      seen.


  26. The analysis outlined above is entirely consistent with TK (Burundi).
      The judge has assessed the availability of the evidence, its
      significance to the case, and the reasons advanced by the appellant
      for its absence. We are satisfied that, having carried out this
      analysis, it was open to the judge to rely on the absence of
      independent supporting evidence from, or about, Mr Mwangi, in
      rejecting the appellant's account.


  27. The judge also, at paragraph 53, found damaging to the appellant's
      credibility that corroborating evidence was not submitted by the
      appellant to show that his brother-in-law worked as a baggage handler.
      Before relying on the absence of such evidence the judge considered
      whether it would be readily available and the lack of a credible
      account for its absence. Although the judge did not comment
      specifically on why evidence from the appellant's brother-in-law was
      relevant to credibility, the reason is clear: the appellant claimed
      that his brother-in-law helped him and his family evade detection at
      the airport when they fled Kenya. Accordingly, we are satisfied that
      the judge, for the reasons she gave, was entitled to rely on the
      absence of supporting evidence from the appellant's brother-in-law as
      a reason to reject the appellant's account.


  28. Ms Nnamani argued that the judge's conclusion on credibility was
      undermined by his finding that he was not critical of the evidence
      given by the appellant's wife (paragraph 55) and that the appellant
      gave his evidence with "apparent sincerity, and some animation, and
      detail" (paragraph 59).


  29. We do not consider there to be merit to this submission. Assessment of
      credibility is a highly fact-sensitive exercise where a judge will
      frequently need to take into consideration a range of factors, not all
      of which point in the same direction. In this case, as explained
      above, the judge gave multiple reasons for not finding the appellant
      credible. The judge also, as highlighted by Ms Nnamani, identified two
      factors that gave some (albeit limited) support to the appellant's
      account (namely, his wife's evidence and that he recounted his
      evidence in detail and with "apparent sincerity"). It was for the
      judge to decide upon the weight to attach to the various factors
      identified as relevant to credibility and she was entitled to find
      that the factors undermining the appellant's credibility outweighed
      those which supported it.


  30. There are two further references in the judge's decision to an absence
      of independent corroborating evidence:


   a) At paragraph 54, the judge found it damaging to the appellant's
      credibility that a statement was not obtained from any of the
      congregants who heard him speak about the events in Navasha or from
      the pastor of the church who he claimed received the letter summoning
      him to attend the police station.


   b) At paragraph 56, the judge noted that the appellant did not provide
      details of the hotel bookings he claimed to have made before leaving
      Kenya.


  31. The analysis of the judge in respect of these findings against the
      appellant's credibility is brief and it is not clear whether the judge
      has fully considered either the availability of the evidence or the
      appellant's explanation (if any) for its absence. However, given the
      multiple other material reasons that the judge gave for her adverse
      credibility assessment, we are satisfied that any error in relying
      upon the matters referred to at our paragraph 30 were not material to
      her overall credibility assessment on any legitimate view.

Notice of Decision


  32. The appeal is dismissed.


  33. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal stands.

|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  22 January 2018      |

