
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02648/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th October 2018                          |On 23rd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     MHL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Record of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Mathews  (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 4th May 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Vietnam born in  June  1996.   She
    arrived in the UK on 19th November  2017  and  claimed  asylum  on  6th
    December 2017 on the basis that she would be at risk of persecution  if
    returned  to  Vietnam  because  of  her  political  opposition  to  the
    Vietnamese government.

 3. The claim for international protection was refused on 8th February 2018
    and the FtT heard the appeal on 3rd April 2018.

 4. The judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant and did not  find  her
    to be a credible witness.  The judge rejected the Appellant's claim  to
    have distributed leaflets in Vietnam, and rejected her  claim  to  have
    been detained and beaten while in detention, and found that she had not
    been subject to any adverse interests from the authorities in  Vietnam.
    The judge did not find that the Appellant had undertaken any activities
    in the UK that  would  bring  her  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities in Vietnam.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  assessing
    credibility.  The judge had accepted that the  Appellant  had  attended
    four demonstrations in Vietnam, in 2014, 2015,  2016,  and  2017.   The
    judge had found that her account of arrest was not consistent with  the
    background material, and it was submitted that the judge had  erred  on
    this point.  The Appellant referred to the Respondent's Country  Policy
    and Information Note dated November 2016 at 7.1.3 which indicated  that
    in May  2016  peaceful  demonstrations  had  taken  place  against  the
    government's  poor  handling  of  an  ecological  disaster,  and  these
    demonstrations were met with excessive use of force and the arrest  and
    detention of hundreds of protestors.  The judge had found at  paragraph
    24 of his decision that it was leaders who were arrested,  and  it  was
    submitted that he was incorrect in making such a finding.

 6. It was submitted that the judge erred at paragraph 33 in  finding  that
    the Appellant had attended a demonstration in the UK simply in order to
    obtain photographs to bolster her claim.  It was  contended  that  this
    finding was at odds with the earlier finding  by  the  judge  that  the
    Appellant had attended demonstrations in Vietnam.

 7. The Judge had found that the Appellant had a lack of  knowledge  as  to
    who organised the demonstration but it was submitted that this did  not
    detract from her attendance.

 8. It was submitted that the Appellant is a  supporter  of  the  Viet  Tan
    Party and would be at risk of harm if returned to Vietnam  due  to  her
    political opinion.  It was submitted that given the express  acceptance
    by the judge of  the  Appellant's  activities  in  Vietnam,  the  judge
    thereafter erred in the credibility assessment, and should  have  given
    the Appellant the benefit of the doubt, and also  applied  the  country
    background material when assessing risk.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bird of the FtT and I set out
    below in part the grant of permission;

         "2.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against this decision
             on the grounds that the judge made  inconsistent  findings  on
             the  Appellant's  credibility  and   in   finding   that   the
             Appellant's account was not  consistent  with  the  background
             evidence.

         3.   It is arguable in finding that the  Appellant's  account  that
             she had attended demonstrations was plausible and finding that
             he was persuaded by the fact that the Appellant  had  attended
             the demonstrations as she claimed in  Vietnam  (see  paragraph
             17) and yet at paragraph 33 finding  that  the  Appellant  had
             simply attended a demonstration and meeting in the UK in order
             to bolster her claim, it is arguable that in finding that  the
             judge has failed to consider the finding made at paragraph 17.
              This gives rise to an arguable error of law  in  the  judge's
             assessment of the Appellant's evidence."

10. Following the grant of  permission  the  Respondent  did  not  lodge  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

11. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. Miss Record relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to  appeal,  and  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made
    findings which were confusing and contradictory.  Reference was made to
    paragraph 17 of the FtT decision in which  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had attended four  demonstrations.   This  was  confirmed  in
    paragraph 18.  It was also accepted that the Appellant had demonstrated
    once outside the Vietnamese Embassy in the UK.

13. It was submitted that the judge had made a contradictory or conflicting
    finding at paragraph 33 in which  he  found  that  "the  Appellant  has
    simply  attended  a  demonstration  and  meeting  in  order  to  obtain
    photographs to bolster her claim, I do not find that  she  in  fact  is
    politically active as claimed, or perceived to be so by the  Vietnamese
    government."  It was submitted that the judge had  erred  at  paragraph
    33, given his express acceptance that the Appellant had  attended  four
    demonstrations in Vietnam.

14. It was submitted that the findings made by the  judge  in  relation  to
    risk if the Appellant is returned to Vietnam are flawed, and the  judge
    erred at paragraph 35 by not accepting  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    detained in Vietnam.

15. It was further submitted that  at  paragraph  27  the  judge  erred  by
    drawing adverse inference from what he described as a  false  assertion
    of membership of the Viet Tan Party.  Miss Record pointed out  that  in
    answering questions 21-22 of her asylum interview,  the  Appellant  had
    explained that she had been a supporter of the Viet Tan Party, and  had
    not claimed to be a member.

16. I then heard submissions from Mr Howells who  contended  that  the  FtT
    decision disclosed no error of law.  It was submitted  that  the  judge
    was entitled to find at paragraph 25 that the Appellant's  account  was
    not consistent with background information, in  relation  to  political
    opponents of the Vietnamese government.

17. Mr Howells pointed out that the reference  by  the  judge  to  a  false
    assertion of membership  of  the  Viet  Tan  Party,  was  made  by  the
    Appellant in her oral evidence-in-chief, as explained in paragraph  26.



18. Mr Howells noted that there had been no challenge to the findings  made
    by the judge at  paragraphs  29-30  which  led  to  his  conclusion  at
    paragraph 31 that there  had  not  been  a  political  meeting  at  the
    Appellant's home in Vietnam as she had claimed, and therefore there had
    not been a raid by the authorities from which  the  Appellant  and  her
    mother had escaped.  I observed that there  appeared  to  be  a  typing
    error in paragraph 29, in that the judge referred to adequate evidence,
    when it appears that he meant to refer  to  inadequate  evidence.   The
    typing error is not material.

19. Mr Howells submitted that with reference to the acceptance by the judge
    that the Appellant had attended four  demonstrations  in  Vietnam,  the
    judge had made clear in paragraph 18 that she had  not  attended  those
    demonstrations as a supporter of the Viet Tan.

20.  In  response   Miss   Record   submitted   that   individuals   attend
    demonstrations for a range of reasons, and the judge had found that she
    had attended demonstrations, and therefore her activity would  be  seen
    as being opposed to the government in Vietnam.

21. I was asked to set aside the decision and direct a remittal to the  FtT
    so that the appeal could be considered afresh.

22. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

23. I commence by considering the point raised by Miss Record in  her  oral
    submissions that was not included in the grounds seeking permission  to
    appeal.  This relates to the finding by the judge at paragraph 27  that
    adverse inference should be drawn because the Appellant  made  a  false
    assertion of  membership  of  the  Viet  Tan  Party,  and  subsequently
    accepted that this was a false assertion and that she had not  in  fact
    become a member of that party.

24. I do not find that the judge erred on this issue.  I  accept  that  the
    Appellant when interviewed, in answering questions 21-22 claimed to  be
    a supporter, not a member of the party, but  the  judge  does  make  it
    clear at paragraph 26, that it was in oral evidence that the  Appellant
    claimed to have joined the Viet Tan  Party  in  the  UK.   When  cross-
    examined on this point she conceded that she was not a  member  of  the
    party and explained why she had not been able to become  a  member,  in
    that she lacked the age and experience that was necessary.   The  judge
    was entitled to draw an adverse inference from this  evidence  and  did
    not err in law.

25. I next consider the alleged conflicting or contradictory findings  when
    paragraphs 17-18 are compared with paragraph 33.  I do  not  find  that
    there is either a conflicting or a contradictory finding.  The judge at
    paragraphs 17 and 18 accepted that  the  Appellant  had  attended  four
    demonstrations in Vietnam, but did not find that she had attended those
    demonstrations as a supporter of the Viet Tan.  There is  therefore  no
    contradiction in the judge's finding at paragraph 33 that the Appellant
    had attended a political demonstration in the UK to obtain  photographs
    to bolster her claim.  The judge was entitled to find in that paragraph
    that the Appellant was not politically active as claimed, and would not
    be perceived to be politically active  by  the  Vietnamese  government.
    The judge pointed out at paragraph 32 that there had  been  a  lack  of
    political activity as claimed in Vietnam, which was consistent with the
    fact that the Appellant had not joined the Viet Tan Party  in  the  UK.
    In addition the Appellant had  accepted  that  she  did  not  know  who
    organised the demonstration that she attended in London, and the  judge
    found that she was only  photographed  with  a  banner  which  she  had
    borrowed from a fellow demonstrator.  She was  photographed  holding  a
    banner that sought religious freedom, but had made no previous  mention
    of that particular cause.   I  detect  no  material  error  of  law  in
    paragraph 33.

26. In my view the judge has considered the evidence in the round  and  was
    entitled to conclude on that  evidence,  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    proved that she had been detained as claimed.  The background  evidence
    referred to on behalf of the Appellant is the CPIN dated November 2016,
    included within the Appellant's bundle.   The  judge  did  not  err  at
    paragraph 24 in making reference to the CPIN at 6.1.3 which refers to a
    Freedom House report confirming that  it  is  leaders  and  members  of
    illegal opposition parties who are subject to arrest and  imprisonment.
    The judge did not err in that paragraph by recording that the Appellant
    "by her own account was not a member of the Viet Tan, certainly  not  a
    leader, and mentions no membership of any organisation."

27. As correctly pointed out on behalf of the  Appellant  in  the  grounds,
    there is reference in the CPIN at 7.1.3 to arrests of protestors taking
    part in demonstrations against the government's  poor  handling  of  an
    ecological disaster.  That  in  my  view  does  not  detract  from  the
    findings made by the judge that  the  Appellant  was  not  arrested  by
    reason of her political opposition to the Vietnamese  government.   The
    judge at paragraph 25 found that the Appellant's account  of  detention
    followed by release was "not consistent  with  the  objective  material
    before me as to the treatment of perceived opponents."  That  objective
    material is the CPIN of November 2016 in which it is  stated  at  2.2.2
    that the Vietnamese authorities detain  perceived  political  activists
    without charge indefinitely under vague national  security  provisions,
    and are reported to be subject to lengthy detention and  ill-treatment.
    That background material does not accord with the account given by  the
    Appellant and the judge was entitled to take note of that.

28. My conclusion is that the grounds upon which permission to  appeal  was
    granted, disclose a disagreement with the conclusions  reached  by  the
    judge but do not  disclose  a  material  error  of  law.   I  therefore
    conclude that this appeal must be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction.  I continue that direction because  the
Appellant has made a claim for international protection.  Unless  and  until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or
any member of her family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.  This direction is made pursuant  to  rule
14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date 13th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 13th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


