
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02745/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 September 2017              |On 29 September 2017                 |
|                                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                          ARGASH RAHMAN SHARIF TAZA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: did not appear
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant, a  national  of  Iran  was  born  on  20  July  1995.  The
   Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 6
   March 2016 to refuse to grant  an  application  for  refugee  protection.
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Sharkett dismissed the appeal and the Appellant
   now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.
3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant  entered  the  United
   Kingdom on 20 November 2015 claiming that he was at  risk  on  return  to
   Iran because he had a sexual relationship with a young woman  outside  of
   marriage and she died. The authorities and her family  were  looking  for
   him.
4. The Respondent refused the application because:
   a) It was not accepted that the Appellant was an Iranian but  was  rather
      an Iraqi national due  to  the  inconsistencies  in  his  geographical
      knowledge.
   b) The Appellants  account  of  his  relationship  with  the  female  was
      implausible  and  inconsistent  in  the  light   of   the   background
      information about honour killings in Kurdistan.
   c) The Appellants account is inconsistent as to whether the  girl  killed
      herself which the Appellant claimed in the screening interview or  was
      killed by her family as he claimed in the asylum interview.
   d) The Appellant claimed to fear an organisation in Iran called Pasga and
      to be wanted by them but his account was inconsistent.
   e) The Appellant failed to claim asylum in safe countries en route to the
      UK
       .
5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant  The
   Judge concluded that the Appellant was  not  a  credible  witness  as  to
   either his nationality or the core of his account..
6. The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor was  he  represented  at  the
   appeal. At the hearing before me the Appellant did not attend  court  and
   Mr  Bates  advised  me  that  the  Appellant  had  absconded  from   NAAS
   accommodation without permission. I am satisfied that due notice  of  the
   appeal was served upon the Appellant on 1 August 2017 at the only address
   that the Tribunal had for the Appellant. I am  therefore  satisfied  that
   having been served notice of the hearing and not attended it  is  in  the
   interests of justice to proceed  with  the  hearing  in  the  Appellant's
   absence as I am entitled to do by virtue of paragraph 38 of The  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
Error of Law
7. Having  heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law
8. Central to the appeal was the credibility of the Appellants account.  The
   Judge made a number of detailed findings in relation  to  the  Appellants
   credibility starting with his nationality at paragraphs 51-52 . The Judge
   was entitled to find  that  lying  about  his  nationality  significantly
   undermined his general credibility. She noted that  he  had  changed  his
   account in relation to why he was unable to produce an ID card in that in
   the screening interview he stated that he did not bring t to  the  UK  to
   suggesting in the asylum interview that he did bring it but it was  taken
   from him in Turkey by the agent. In oral evidence while he  claimed  that
   while he was in recent contact with his family he gave no reason for  not
   obtaining ID documents from them  as  he  claimed  he  would  do  in  the
   Screening interview.
9. While not addressed by the Judge(paragraph 65)  in any  detail  it  would
   also have been open to her to note that in  the  refusal  letter  it  was
   stated that the Appellant had  on  to  occasions  been  fingerprinted  in
   Dunkirk and claimed to be a Syrian  national  which  would  significantly
   undermine his general credibility but specifically undermine his  claimed
   nationality. The refusal letter at paragraphs 40- 46 also notes  that  in
   describing the village where he lived in relation to other cities in Iran
   and to the regional airport the Appellant gave  answers  that  were  more
   consistent with him originating from Iraqi Kurdistan  which  was  further
   confirmed by the fact that he used the Western calendar rather  than  the
   Iranian calendar.
10. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge erred in failing to give adequate reasons for reaching the
   adverse  credibility  findings  in  relation  to  his  account   of   his
   relationship with 'F' that she did and that she was 'arguably  condemning
   such accounts as not plausible.' I remind myself however of what was said
   in In MM (DRC) 2005 UKIAT 00019 (Ouseley) where the  Tribunal  said  that
   the  assessment  of  credibility  may  involve  an  assessment   of   the
   plausibility, or apparent reasonableness  or  truthfulness  of  what  was
   being said.   This  could  involve  a  judgement  on  the  likelihood  of
   something having happened, based on evidence or  inferences.   Background
   evidence could assist with that process, revealing the likelihood of what
   was said having occurred.  Background evidence could reveal that  adverse
   inferences  which  were  apparently   reasonable   when   based   on   an
   understanding of life in this country,  were  less  reasonable  when  the
   circumstances  of  life  in  the  country   of   origin   were   exposed.
   Plausibility was an aspect in the process  of  arriving  at  a  decision,
   which might vary from case to case, and not a separate  stage  in  it.  A
   story could be implausible yet credible, or plausible  yet  properly  not
   believed.  Plausibility is not a term of art.   It  is  simply  that  the
   inherent likelihood or apparent reasonableness of a claim is an aspect of
   its credibility and an aspect which may well  be  related  to  background
   material which may assist when judging it.  The Tribunal went on  to  say
   that "the more  improbable  the  story,  the  more  cogent  the  evidence
   necessary to support it,  even  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof."  In
   relation to the contention that there  was  an  alternative  satisfactory
   explanation for matters found to be implausible by the  Adjudicator,  the
   Tribunal said that it was for the claimant to put  forward  all  relevant
   evidence  and  to  recognise  and   explain   any   inconsistencies   and
   improbabilities and a conclusion was not necessarily erroneous because it
   did  not  contemplate  possibilities  that  were  not  raised   for   the
   Adjudicator's consideration
11.   The Judges assessment  of  the  Appellants  core  account  appears  at
   paragraphs 53-63. I am satisfied that in assessing the credibility of the
   claim of a long standing sexual relationship  outside  marriage  with  an
   unmarried girl of 19 in a nearby village  whose  parents  had  repeatedly
   refused his offer of  marriage  the  Judge  was  correct  in  making  her
   assessment of each aspect of his account by reference to the plausibility
   of such a claim in the cultural context of  Iran  where  she  noted  that
   strict standards of  behaviour  apply  to  women  and  there  are  severe
   sanctions for the smallest breach of expected behaviour.
12. Therefore by reference to such strict standards of behaviour  the  Judge
   made detailed findings at paragraphs 55- 62 that various aspects  of  his
   claim were incredible so for example: that 'F' and he could meet  in  his
   friends shop over an 8 month period and no one else saw them together  or
   remarked on a female being in company with two males neither of whom  she
   was not married to ((paragraph 55);  that  the  Appellant  would  make  6
   requests to marry 'F' having been rejected (paragraph  56);  that  having
   rejected him 'F' s parents would not have been alert to  the  possibility
   of him trying to contact her and sought to protect her honour  (paragraph
   57) .
13. The Judge contrary  to  the  suggestion  in  the  permission  mad  clear
   findings as to inconsistencies and thus noted that his claim that he  and
   'F' had sex to force her parents to agree to their marriage was  entirely
   inconsistent with the fact that he immediately fled after they were  seen
   having sex together before the  Appellant  found  out  what  her  parents
   response would be (paragraph 62)She also noted that the Appellants  claim
   that tribal elders met to  resolve  the  issue  on  25/26  September  was
   inconsistent if, as he claimed, 'F' had  been  killed  on  23  September.
   There was also a clear inconsistency between what the Appellant  said  in
   the Screening interview (4.1) that she killed herself and his later claim
   in his asylum interview (AI 186) that her family killed her.
14. The Judge also was entitled to note that a central feature of his  claim
   was that he was at risk from 'Pesga' but there was no background material
   to support his claim that such an organisation existed.
15. I find that the reasons given were adequate and the Appellant cannot  be
   in any doubt about why the appeal was dismissed: the Appellant had  given
   a dishonest account of both his nationality and events that caused him to
   come to the UK. The findings made were plainly open to the Judge  on  the
   material before her.

CONCLUSION

16. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

17. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
28.9.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell






