
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02352/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 13th September 2019              |On: 17th September 2019              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     BA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms Vasisht, Counsel instructed by EU Migration
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of  Albania  born  in  1987.   She  seeks
       protection on the grounds that she faces a real risk of serious  harm
       in Albania because of her membership of a  particular  social  group,
       viz women perceived to have strayed from social mores.

    2. Her account was one of rejection by her natal family and  a  fear  of
       ostracization and persecution because she has  had  a  child  out  of
       wedlock; these factors were  set  against  a  background  of  ancient
       patriarchal 'Islamic' values and socio-economic deprivation. Her case
       was that she qualified  as  a  refugee,  or  alternatively  that  the
       removal of her two young sons  (with  her)  would  be  so  manifestly
       contrary to their best interests that it would be a  disproportionate
       interference with their Article 8 rights to remove them today.

    3. The First-tier Tribunal rejected all of that. The  appeal  before  me
       concerns the terms in which that decision was  couched.  The  grounds
       submit that in  the  language  used  by  the  Tribunal,  and  in  its
       selective reading of the evidence, it has displayed bias towards  the
       Appellant. In granting permission  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyes
       found those grounds to have some merit, stating that:

           "paragraphs  30  to  36  are  concerning  in  terms   of   bias,
           unfairness, speculation and rudeness ...  [they]  arguably  show
           bias by virtue  of  the  language  used  and  the  tone  of  the
           dismissal of the appellant's version  of  events.  To  claim  an
           appellant has 'spun a story' is arguably an  unfortunate  choice
           of phrase"

    4. I need not dwell on the grounds, or that grant, since before  me  the
       Secretary of State conceded that the decision was drafted in  such  a
       way that a fair-minded observer in possession of all  the  facts  may
       perceive the Judge to have been biased against the Appellant.   I  am
       invited to set the decision aside and to remit it  to  a  differently
       constituted First-tier Tribunal so that the Appellant may have a fair
       hearing.

    5.  I  agree  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  concession  is   wholly
       appropriate in this case, for two reasons.

    6. The first is that the unremitting tone  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       determination can only be described as sneering.  The use of language
       such as "unreal" "bizarre" "completely unbelievable" and  "hopeless",
       taken with the quite unnecessary preponderance of exclamation  marks,
       leaves the reader with the strong impression that the judge  took  no
       part of this claim seriously. That may or may not be true,  but  that
       is the impression that is given, and in cases  of  bias,  it  is  the
       appearance that counts: Alubankudi (Appearance of bias)  [2015]  UKUT
       00542 (IAC). Judges are of course entitled to make robust credibility
       findings against appellants but they must express those findings in a
       measured, clear and balanced way.  It is no part  of  their  task  to
       mock or laugh at a claim.

    7. The second is that in at one particular paragraph the reader is  left
       with the strong impression that the Tribunal was  standing  in  moral
       judgement of the Appellant when it considered her evidence  that  her
       son is illegitimate:

           "I find it completely unbelievable that this appellant  who  was
           so clearly able to articulate all the things that her sons  will
           suffer from if returned to Albania would not have been aware  of
           those things when she had this 'one night stand'  with  this  so
           called British citizen man. She admitted to me that the reaction
           of her community to illegitimate children is something that  has
           existed for a very long time. Therefore, if anybody was aware of
           the disadvantages faced by  illegitimate  children  in  Albanian
           society, she would have been one. Yet I  simply  do  not  accept
           that she would have had a one night stand without any precaution
           knowing that this could result in the birth of a child  and  all
           the ills this child is likely  to  face.  She  was  already  the
           mother  of  a  child  so  she  would  have  been  aware  of  the
           consequences that follow from sexual encounters! Even if it were
           a spur of the moment thing, she has not explained  why  she  did
           not take steps immediately thereafter to  prevent  her  becoming
           pregnant".

    8. The Judge has here again adopted the unfortunate tone  identified  as
       rude by Judge Boyes. The effect of the reasoning here is that  it  is
       simply unbelievable that an Albanian woman would ever  fall  pregnant
       out of wedlock. That is difficult to  reconcile  not  only  with  the
       country background material, but with the judicial notice that  might
       be taken of known human behaviour.

    9. One further matter very fairly raised  by  Mr  Jarvis  was  that  the
       Tribunal was simply wrong as a matter of fact to conclude as it does,
       at its paragraph 36, that the Appellant would have been able to enter
       the name of the father on the birth certificate regardless of whether
       he admitted paternity. As the 'gov.uk' guidance relevant at the  date
       of registration demonstrates, the father's name will only be  entered
       on the register where the father is  present,  or  has  provided  the
       mother with the relevant identity documents and authority to do so.

   10.  The  parties  are  in  agreement  that  in  the  circumstances   the
       appropriate remedy for the Appellant is that the  decision  of  Judge
       Hussain is set aside in its entirety and the matter remitted  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo. I so order.

    Anonymity

   11. The Appellant seeks international protection, as do her  minor  sons.
       As such I am satisfied, having had regard  to  the  guidance  in  the
       Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity  Orders,  that  it
       would be appropriate to make an order in accordance with Rule  14  of
       the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in  the  following
       terms:

           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
           family.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  both  the
           Appellant and the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
           direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    Decisions

   12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law  and
       it is set aside to be heard de novo.

   13. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         14th September 2019
