
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/02724/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 March 2019                         |On 12 April 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                   mr m n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, counsel instructed by Iqbal Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant a national  of  Pakistan,  date  of  birth  1  May  1990,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 9  February  2018  to
    refuse an asylum and Humanitarian Protection claim to which was added a
    claim under Article 8  ECHR.   The  appeal  h  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge I Ross (the Judge) whose decision [D], dated  8  January
    2019, rejected the appeal.

2.   Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  on
    6 February 2019.  Mr Chakmakjian who did not appear  before  the  Judge
    stood in for Mr B Hawkin of counsel who had represented the  Appellant.



3.   A number of points are taken but the first was that the Judge  received
    an application to treat the Appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness  with
    reference to the Presidential Guidance. A copy of that guidance was  to
    be found on the appeal file.

4.   The Judge in the [D] made no  reference  whatsoever  to  the  issue  of
    vulnerability. The Judge also had an expert report of  Dr  Saima  Latif
    whose extensive qualifications  and  experience  are  set  out  in  her
    report. Of significance were the conclusions that she  reached  on  the
    Appellant's mental health.  In addition to her view that the  Appellant
    was experiencing post-traumatic stress disorder and a major  depressive
    disorder,  Dr  Latif  also  concluded  that  the  Appellant   was   not
    exaggerating, embellishing or fabrication the account that he had given
    her; presumably when she was taking his history.

5.   The overall conclusions were reached clearly in the  context  that  the
    Appellant  was  identifying  his  sexuality  (by  sexuality  or  gender
    identity) as being part  of  the  basis  of  his  claim.   Although  in
    fairness to the Judge, Dr Latif really did not address  the  extent  to
    which the Appellant had told her of  his  relationships  with  men  and
    women whilst in the United Kingdom.  As the report noted the  Appellant
    had identified that issue as  well  as  somewhat  historical  incidents
    involving his gender identity when in Pakistan many years previously.

6.   I concluded that the failure to address the evidence in  the  round  in
    the assessment of credibility as identified  in  [D36]  undermined  the
    reliability and confidence one can have in the  Judge's  assessment  of
    the Appellant's credibility.

7.   The Appellant had made a variety of claims  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and it was fair to say that the Judge did not correctly  recite
    the entirety of the timeline of claims made by the Appellant before his
    asylum claim.  The issue of the Appellant's gender  and  sexuality  had
    been raised by him at much earlier times; A matter that appears to have
    escaped the Judge's attention.

8.   Additional grounds raised the  point  that  the  Appellant  had  called
    evidence from different sources which were, on a fair reading, at least
    supportive of his claim.  In particular two witnesses  SC  and  AL  had
    given evidence of their own sexuality and their willingness  to  be  in
    the Appellant's company believing him to be bisexual.  Their belief  at
    least can be inferred from the  evidence  that  was  provided  and  was
    material in the overall assessment of the Appellant's claim as  to  his
    gender or sexual identity.  The Judge had accepted their evidence.

9.   I conclude, without I think doing full justice to the arguments  raised
    by Mr  Chakmakjian,  that  the  Judge  did  not  approach  this  matter
    holistically and did not look at the medical evidence as  part  of  the
    overall assessment of the Appellant's credibility  rather  than  having
    formed significant, by itself justified, views  about  the  Appellant's
    claim   but had lost sight of, for example SC and AL's evidence and had
    then gone on to reject the generality of the claim.  I  conclude  there
    was an error of law.
10.     I find in the context of this  case  that  the  Original  Tribunal's
    decision cannot stand.

  DECISION
          The appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the  appeal  will  be
    remade in the First -tier Tribunal

  DIRECTIONS

(1)  List First-tier Tribunal two hours.  No findings of fact to stand  when
    otherwise agreed in writing by the parties.
(2)  An Urdu interpreter is required.
(3)  List for hearing at Taylor House not before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    I Ross.
(4)  Any further evidence in connection with the asylum or Article  8  claim
    to be served not later than ten clear working days before  the  further
    hearing.  Any further directions to  be  obtained  through  a  CMRH  at
    Taylor House or on notice to the Resident Judge.

(5)  The anonymity direction made is continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 22 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
