
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/02049/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2018                       |     On 3 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     HAK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders, of Counsel instructed by Messrs J D
                    Spicer Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Khawar who in a determination promulgated on  9
    October 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the
    Secretary of State to refuse to grant asylum or other protection.

2.     The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq  born  on  1  January  1989.   He
    asserts that he left Iraq in June 2015 arriving in Britain in September
    that year.  The basis of his claim for asylum was that he had been in a
    relationship with a girl in Sulemaniya,  R,  whose  father  was  a  PUK
    leader. He had asked her father for her hand in marriage and  had  been
    refused on two occasions but had then met her  in  the  garden  of  her
    house.  Her father had returned home early and had tried to  shoot  him
    but missed and he had escaped in a taxi having received a call  from  a
    Peshmerga who told him that he should hide as he would be  sought  out.
    He was uncertain about the date of the incident  but  said  that  after
    that he had gone into hiding for a week before  leaving  Iraq  in  July
    2015 once he had received a visa which enabled him to travel to Turkey.
     His fear was that he would be  killed  by  the  girl's  father  if  he
    returned.

3.   The judge considered the appellant's claim  in  detail  and  noted  his
    evidence.  He noted that there was no  independent  evidence  that  the
    appellant's girlfriend's  father  had  any  position  of  authority  in
    Halabja as the appellant had claimed and in fact there was evidence  to
    the contrary.  He accepted  the submission of  the Secretary  of  State
    that  the appellant's assertion that if his girlfriend's father had  50
    peshmergas under his control it was not credible that they would be out
    all the time and particularly if  the  appellant  had  said  that  only
    fifteen would be on duty at a time.  It had therefore been stated  that
    if R's father's house needed to be guarded there would be more than one
    peshmerga there to guard the property.   In  any  event,  it  would  be
    inconsistent that R would be able to go out without a  guard  and  meet
    him at the restaurant where he worked.   Moreover,  the  appellant  had
    said that the incident had occurred on 22 July 2015  when  indeed  that
    was the date he left.

3.   The judge set out basic refugee law in paragraphs  15  onwards  of  the
    determination and in paragraphs 20 to 23 he  set  out  the  burden  and
    standard of proof.  In paragraphs 24 onwards he set out his  assessment
    of credibility and findings of fact.  He did not find the appellant  to
    be credible.  He stated in paragraph 25  "having  carefully  considered
    all of the evidence of the appellant both documentary and oral, and due
    to the various inconsistencies, contradictions and  high  improbability
    of events in his account I am not satisfied the appellant has proffered
    a credible account".  He had come to that conclusion both  in  relation
    to the appellant's claim that he had been involved  in  a  relationship
    with his claimed girlfriend and that her father was a  powerful  leader
    within Sulemaniya or indeed within the PUK.  He referred to the lack of
    objective evidence to establish R's father's status either as a  member
    of the PUK or as a leader within the  Sulemaniya  area  or  within  the
    Halabja area.  He stated that the appellant had claimed to have  met  R
    during his work as  a  baker  and  that  he  had  been  involved  in  a
    relationship  of  approximately  one  year.   He  stated  that  if  the
    appellant  had  been  genuinely  involved   in   a   relationship   for
    approximately one year with R and he genuinely proposed marriage to her
    through her father it  was  highly  likely,  given  the  religious  and
    cultural context within which the appellant lived in  Sulemaniya,  that
    his mother and/or uncles would have been involved in such  a  proposal.
    The appellant had failed to proffer any evidence of any involvement  of
    his family in relation to any such proposal for marriage.

4.   He went on to consider the fact that the appellant had  said  that  his
    proposal for marriage had been rejected on two  occasions  but  he  had
    still sought to continue with the relationship and that he had  visited
    R at her home climbing into the garden when he had been spotted by  her
    father who had returned from work with his guards.  He noted  that  the
    appellant had said that initially that he had been shot by  R's  father
    but had made good his escape by running away but that during  his  oral
    evidence the appellant had been questioned about who had  shot  at  him
    and he stated that R's father did not shoot at him because upon  return
    to the home he would have been tired and would "go to a room to have  a
    rest".  Further he did not know if the guards had given  chase  because
    he did not look back.  The judge stated he did not find the account  to
    be reasonably likely to be true.  He went on to say:-

         "In my judgment anyone in the position of H would immediately  have
         alerted the guards as to the appellant's presence and required them
         to seek to apprehend the appellant.  If H shot at the appellant  it
         is inevitable that any guards who had been left at the property  to
         guard H's home would also have  been  alerted  immediately  of  the
         appellant's presence and in my judgment would also have shot at the
         appellant and in all probability given chase  and  apprehended  the
         appellant."

5.   The judge went on to say that the appellant had said that  he  had  hid
    for one week but had then changed his account  from  one  week  to  two
    days.

6.   He then went on to say that the appellant, when  hiding  in  Sulemaniya
    had not contacted his  family to make sure they were okay but had  said
    that his lack of contact as to their  welfare  was  because  they  were
    females and therefore "nothing would happen to them".  He  stated  that
    that assumption was wholly undermined by the fact Iraq is an  extremely
    male  dominated  society  and  women  are  considered  subservient  and
    domestic violence remains a serious problem and that there  is  no  law
    prohibiting domestic violence.

7.   The fact that the appellant had waited around  for  a  visa  again  the
    judge considered undermined his claim:  if he were  genuinely  truthful
    he would not have waited around in Iraq to acquire a visa  -  he  would
    have simply escaped.  The judge did not  accept  that  the  appellant's
    family would not have a telephone given that the appellant had  $14,000
    with him to be able to pay for an agent to take him to  a  safe  place.
    Moreover, if he had been genuinely involved with R he would  be  likely
    to have attempted to maintain some type of contact with her  after  his
    alleged flight from Iraq.  The judge did not  believe  the  appellant's
    claim that he discarded the SIM card containing  her  telephone  number
    while he was fleeing her home in a taxi and wrote back to  Halabja  and
    they did not have  a  telephone  number.   He  considered  that  before
    discarding the SIM card the  appellant  would  have  written  down  R's
    number so that he could contact her.  If he had been genuinely involved
    with R he would wish to ensure that she was not harmed by  her  father.
    The judge also referred to paragraphs 10  to  27  of  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter and adopted the conclusions of the  Secretary  of  State
    therein - these  were  the  issues  to  which  I  have  referred  above
    regarding R's claimed membership in the PUK and how or whether  or  not
    it was guards or Rs' father who had shot at him when he left her house.



8.   Having found that the appellant was not credible the  judge  considered
    that the appellant would be able to return to  his  home  area  without
    difficulty - the IKR was considered to be virtually violence free.

9.   I note that the evidence that the  appellant  left  his  identity  card
    with his family: so there should be  no  difficulty  in  his  obtaining
    entry into the IKR nor, indeed, if he
         obtained his identity card  from  his  family,   in  his  obtaining
    passport from the Iraqi Embassy in London.

10.  The judge found correctly that Article 8 was not engaged in this  case.



11.  The grounds of appeal state that the judge had been wrong  to  consider
    that the appellant's "mother and/or uncles" would have been involved in
    any marriage proposal stating that the appellant specifically mentioned
    that he had  approached R's  father was his mother and uncle.  Moreover
    he had stated that he had sent his mother to talk to Rs' father four or
    five times.  It was stated that that evidence would not be  taken  into
    account.   Moreover  it  was  argued  that  the  judge  had  speculated
    regarding the shots fired at the appellant when he left R's garden, and
    that he would have left the  country  immediately  without  waiting  to
    acquire a visa and would not have just discarded the SIM card.  It  was
    stated that he had engaged in inappropriate speculation contrary to the
    judgment of HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.

12.  It was stated that the  judge  had  failed  to  apply  the  appropriate
    standard of proof referring to what the appellant would  have  "in  all
    probability" done.  It was also stated that  he  had  not  made  recent
    findings on relevant issues.

13.  At the hearing before me Ms Sanders emphasised the assertion  that  the
    judge had used speculation when reaching his conclusions.  She repeated
    that family members had been involved in  the  proposal  and  that  the
    judge should have taken that into account.  Moreover she said that  the
    judge had not applied the appropriate standard of proof but had  merely
    applied speculation as to what he considered might have happened.   She
    argued that the judge was assessing the  appellant's  evidence  against
    what a reasonable person would have done and not what the appellant had
    said he had done.  Moreover the judge had not properly  dealt  with  or
    given reasons for adopting the reasons in the Secretary of State's  the
    letter of refusal.

14.  Ms Pal in reply stated that the  fact  that  the  judge  had  not  made
    references or in terms to the various paragraphs to which  he  referred
    in the letter of refusal was not material to the outcome and should  be
    viewed  in the context of  the many  findings made by  the  judge.   He
    was entitled to consider the appellant's claim was not credible and had
    given reasons for doing so.  Clearly he had applied  the  correct  test
    which he had set out in paragraphs 20 to 22 of the determination.

15.  In reply Ms Sanders stated that the paragraphs 20  to  22  were  merely
    standard paragraphs and that did not indicate  the  standard  of  proof
    which the judge had used.

16.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the Immigration Judge.  The judge set out  the  correct  burden  and
    standard of proof at paragraphs 20 to 22 onwards and I  consider  there
    is absolutely nothing to show that he did not apply that  low  standard
    of proof.  The judge did  engage  with  the  evidence  and  gave  clear
    reasons why he considered that  the  appellant  was  not  credible.   I
    consider that those reasons were fully open to him.  There  is  nothing
    in his reasoning that is illogical or has been shown to be  irrational.
    The reality is that this appellant's claim is based on assertions which
    are not backed up by any supporting evidence and the judge was entitled
    to weigh up the appellant's claim stating what he accepted and what  he
    did not.  He was not bound to accept assertions made by an appellant if
    he considers that they cannot  be  supported  or  indicate  a  lack  of
    coherence or where there are discrepancies.  I consider, moreover, that
    the judge is not required to give detailed  reasons  for  every  single
    aspect of the appellant's claim.  He was  entitled  to  state  that  he
    accepted the analysis and conclusions of the Secretary of State in  the
    letter of refusal with regard to certain elements  of  the  appellant's
    claim.  It is not the case that  he  merely  adopted  the  reasons  for
    refusal.  He gives  detailed  reasons  for  his  conclusions  that  the
    appellant was not credible and these  were  properly  reached  after  a
    detailed analysis of the evidence.   I therefore can only conclude that
    the conclusions of the judge were fully open to him that  there  is  no
    error of law in his determination.  Accordingly  the  decision  of  the
    judge shall stand.


Decision

The appeal is dismissed


Signed: [pic]                       Date: 18 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
