

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/02805/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 May 2017                          |      On 3 May 2017                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     R W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:             Ms A Imamovic instructed by UK & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:          Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Suffield-Thompson ('the Judge'), promulgated on 6 October 2016,  in
        which the Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds
        against  the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant  him   international
        protection and/or leave to remain on human rights grounds.





Error of law


     2. The appellant is an Iraqi national who claimed asylum on the  basis
        he faced a real risk from ISIS and that his family were  supporters
        of the Ba'ath Party.
     3. The appellant stated that before he came to United Kingdom  he  was
        living in a village called Gamesh Tapa  near  Mosul  where  he  had
        lived until ISIS attacked the village, after which he left and went
        to work elsewhere. He claims he went to a village in the  Kurdistan
        area but did not know exactly where
     4. The respondent, in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  disputed  the
        appellant's claim that  his  village  was  in  a  'contested  area'
        stating that the village was within the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Zone,
        referred to in the decision as the IKR.
     5.  The  appellant  lodged  his  appeal  without  the  assistance   of
        solicitors and initial directions were issued on 4 April 2016. This
        included notifying the appellant of a prehearing review  and  dates
        of the final hearing, on 11th August and 25 August 2016  at  Hatton
        Cross respectively. The  prehearing  review  form  completed  by  a
        Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  noted  there  were  no
        applications for an adjournment and that the matter  was  ready  to
        proceed. That document is dated 11 August 2016.
     6. On 18 August 2016, a letter was written to the First-tier  Tribunal
        seeking an adjournment on  the  basis  the  appellant  was  in  the
        process of getting documents from Iraq which he was told were  with
        UK customs and that he hoped to find a  legal  representative.  The
        adjournment request was granted on 19 August 2016  and  the  matter
        listed for a further prehearing review  on  14  September  2016  at
        Newport with a substantive hearing listed for Monday, 12  September
        2016.
     7. The Judge who conducted  the  second  prehearing  review  placed  a
        question mark against the section of the form relating  to  whether
        further documentary evidence to be filed, but noted no  reason  why
        the matter should not proceed.
     8. Directions were  sent  to  the  parties  dated  15  September  2016
        advising the appellant to file all the documentation for  which  he
        was seeking to rely not later than 5 working  days  before  the  28
        September 2016. Those directions are  binding  upon  the  appellant
        even  though  he  was  acting  without   the   benefit   of   legal
        representation at that time.
     9. On 27 September 2016, the appellant handed in a further letter from
        the  previous  correspondent  confirming  he  was  attended   court
        unrepresented, confirming that following  the  adjournment  he  had
        attempted to find a solicitor  without  success,  and  he  had  not
        received the documents which he claimed he had been told were  with
        UK Customs.
    10. The  Judge  decided  to  proceed,  noting  the  appellant  was  not
        represented and has recorded the oral evidence given.
    11. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [29] to  [40].  The  Judge
        noted in [30] that it was essential to establish the credibility of
        the appellant and notes major  inconsistencies  between  the  three
        sources of evidence given by the appellant as part  of  his  asylum
        claim.
    12. The Judge noted the disputed areas in the appeal  at  [33]  and  in
        relation to the appellant's claim that the village that he was from
        was in a contested area, the Judge finds:


             35.  The Respondent has stated that he and his family lived in
                  a  village  called  Gamesh  Tapa,  in  Gweru,  Mosul.  The
                  Respondent   has   looked   at   independent    background
                  information and has included in the bundle (Page E1) a map
                  to  show  where  this  village  is  and  it  is   in   the
                  Sulaymaniyah  governorate  of  the  IRK.   The  background
                  information shows that  there  is  another  place  with  a
                  similar name in the Arbil province of  Iraq  and  this  is
                  also in the IRK.  No such area could be found outside  the
                  IRK.  The Appellant has not produced any evidence to  show
                  that his village is outside  the  IRK  and  I  accept  the
                  information provided by the Respondent is correct. I  find
                  therefore that the Appellant comes from the IRK.


             36.  As I find that the appellant has not told the truth about
                  his originating from the IRK I find  this  places  him  in
                  breach of section 8.


    13.  The  Judge  then  assessed  the  alleged  risk  arising  from  the
        appellant's father being a member of the Ba'ath party which was not
        found to give rise to an entitlement to  international  protection,
        which is in accordance with the country  guidance  caselaw  in  the
        light of the absence of evidence to show that his father's standing
        was such as to give rise to a real risk to a family member.
    14. The Judge considered the country guidance of AA  (Article  15  (c))
        Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544  (IAC)  before  concluding  that  as  the
        appellant has been found to come from the IKR it was  not  accepted
        he will be at risk if returned.
    15. The appellant challenges the finding in relation to his  home  town
        asserting that he did not originate from the IRK but rather an area
        formerly controlled by the Saddam regime and the Ba'ath party.  The
        appellant asserts the Judge erred  in  law  in  finding  where  the
        appellant's village was located without considering factual  issues
        and reached unsatisfactory adverse credibility findings.
    16. The grounds as pleaded disagree with the decision  reached  by  the
        Judge although permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
        location was a core issue and it was arguable the Judge misdirected
        herself and reached an erroneous finding that the appellant is from
        the IKR and not a contested area.
    17. Although the appellant's representative before the  Upper  Tribunal
        had before her a bundle  of  documents,  and  sought  to  introduce
        further fresh  evidence,  the  bundle  was  not  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal or indeed to the Presenting Officer although to  be  fair,
        Mrs Aboni did indicate she did not have respondents file with her.
    18. It was not disputed that before the First-tier Tribunal  there  was
        no bundle filed in  accordance  with  the  directions.  It  is  not
        disputed that  within  the  respondent's  bundle  was  evidence  of
        satellite photos showing Gamesh Tapa in the locations  recorded  by
        the Judge in the determination. It is not disputed that the finding
        in relation to geographical location was not reasonably open to the
        Judge on the evidence.
    19. The appellant's case was notwithstanding its geographical  location
        his village fell within  the  administrative  boundaries  of  Mosul
        which fell outside the IKR.
    20. The date of the refusal letter is 5 March 2016 in relation to which
        notice of appeal was given on 21 March 2016, six months before  the
        appeal  was  heard  in  Newport.  The  appellant  was  given  ample
        opportunity to  provide  evidence  to  support  his  contention  in
        relation to his home area which he was aware was  not  accepted  by
        the Secretary of  State  in  the  refusal  letter.  Notwithstanding
        having had a substantial period in which to  provide  evidence,  no
        such evidence was made available to the Judge.
    21. It is therefore my  findings  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to
        discharge the burden of proof upon him to the required standard  to
        show the Judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  making  a  decision
        contrary to the available evidence.
    22. The Upper Tribunal were advised that the bundle which has now  been
        prepared contained evidence that was never submitted to the  First-
        tier Tribunal and which therefore constituted new  evidence,  which
        it was argued supported the appellant's claim.
    23. If new material is now to hand it is open to the appellant to  make
        a fresh application to the Secretary  of  State  based  upon  those
        documents in which he will also  have  to  deal  with  the  current
        situation in Iran in which his home area, whoever was initially  in
        control of it in the past, appears now to be under the  control  of
        the  Kurdish  authorities,  and  the  internal  relocation   points
        identified by the Upper Tribunal in AA.
    24. Based on the evidence before the Judge no arguable legal  error  is
        made out.


Decision

    25. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 2nd of May 2017












