
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02384/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2019                            |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     a k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented and no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N J Bennett (the judge), promulgated on 13 June 2018, by
    which he dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's refusal  of  her
    protection and human rights claims.



The judge's decision

 2. The judge set out the evidence and submissions in some detail and  went
    on to provide detailed reasons  for  rejecting  core  elements  of  the
    Appellant's case (see in particular [32] - [42]).   In  particular  the
    judge rejected the claim that the Appellant had been  rejected  by  her
    family, having run away from them after being abused, and  having  been
    taken in by another individual who assisted her in leaving the  Gambia.
    The judge considered an  expert  report  produced  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's case but essentially found that because of his core adverse
    credibility findings, this expert evidence did not assist the Appellant
    in terms of risk on return.

 3. It was noted that Article 8 had not been relied on and the  appeal  was
    dismissed.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds of appeal are threefold: the first and  second  attack  the
    specific credibility findings, whilst the third asserts that the  judge
    failed to have proper regard to parts of the expert report relating  to
    a woman's situation as a single mother in Gambia.

 5. In granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley  made  particular
    mention of the third ground, concluding that it was arguable  that  the
    expert evidence had not been adequately addressed.




The Appellant's lack of representation and non-appearance

 6. At the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant
    had been legally represented.  However, by a letter dated  18  December
    2018 those representatives informed the Upper Tribunal that  they  were
    no longer acting and that the Appellant had apparently  "gone  missing"
    (they were told of this by a social worker).  An application  was  made
    to adjourn the error of law hearing which had then been listed  for  19
    December.  That application was refused  on  the  papers  by  an  Upper
    Tribunal lawyer.

 7. On 19 December 2018 the matter came before me.  The Appellant  did  not
    attend and there were no communications from her. It was impossible  to
    make any contact with her on the day.

 8. I adjourned the error of law hearing on the basis that the  Appellant's
    whereabouts may be detected in due course. I wanted to give  her  every
    opportunity to be able to attend the hearing.

 9. The appeal came back before me on 30 January 2019.  The  Appellant  did
    not attend and there were still no communications from her.

10. I considered Rules 2 and 38 of the Upper Tribunal's Procedure Rules and
    concluded that it was fair to proceed in her absence.




The Respondent's submissions

11. Mr Bramble submitted that there were no material errors  of  law.   The
    expert report was predicated on the Appellant's assertion that she  had
    been disowned by her family and could not turn to them for any form  of
    support on return.  References in the expert report  to  the  Appellant
    being a "lone woman" must be seen in that context and this included the
    passages from paragraph 184 onwards (that section specifically cited in
    the grant of permission). However, the judge had specifically  rejected
    this aspect of the Appellant's claim and Mr Bramble submitted that this
    was essentially fatal to her challenge.




Decision on error of law

12. I conclude that there are no material errors of law.

13. Dealing first with grounds 1 and 2, it is clear  that  they  amount  to
    nothing more than disagreements with the judge's thorough  findings  of
    fact and reasons in support thereof.

14. As regards the specific elements of the Appellant's claim, ground 3 has
    greater merit at first glance and I can understand  why  permission  to
    appeal was granted.

15. However, having read with care the relevant passages  from  the  expert
    report I agree with Mr Bramble that the question of risk  as  a  "lone"
    woman with a child born out of wedlock  was  to  a  significant  extent
    predicated upon the Appellant not having any familial support on return
    to Gambia.  It is of course the case that the  judge  had  specifically
    rejected this lack of familial support. therefore, when it came to [43]
    of his decision he was entitled to conclude  that  notwithstanding  the
    references to problems faced by single mothers in Gambia,  the  adverse
    credibility findings meant that the Appellant would not  be  reasonably
    likely to face such risks because  she  would  in  fact  have  familial
    support and there would effectively not be a "lone" woman with a child.



16. In my view this dealt adequately with the protection claim.

17. In respect of Article 8, I have already mentioned  that  this  was  not
    pursued before the judge. In any  event,  the  judge  did  address  the
    child's best interests and the conclusions reached were adequate.

18. In all the circumstances the Appellant's challenge fails.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law and it shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed        [pic]             Date: 16 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        [pic]             Date: 16 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

