
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/02158/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 January 2018                   |On 23 January 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    [A S]
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms B Asanovic, Counsel instructed by D J Webb and
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national of Tamil ethnicity [ ] 1973.
         He challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro who
         dismissed his appeal against deportation on asylum grounds  by  way
         of a determination promulgated on 9 August  2017.  The  matter  had
         been remitted to her following the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge M B Hussain on  25  July  2015  to  dismiss  the  asylum  and
         humanitarian protection claims but to allow the appeal on article 8
         grounds. No cross appeal was made by the respondent in  respect  of
         the article 8 decision.  Judge O'Garro accepted that the  appellant
         had been detained and tortured by the authorities in Sri  Lanka  in
         1997 but found that he would no longer be of interest on return  at
         the present time despite his sur place activities.


      2. The appellant entered the UK clandestinely in 1997 and applied  for
         asylum. Although his claim was dismissed on appeal in January 1999,
         he was subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain outside  the
         rules in June 2010. In March 2013 he was convicted of causing death
         by dangerous driving  and  driving  a  motor  vehicle  with  excess
         alcohol.  He  was  sentenced  to  15  months'  imprisonment  and  a
         deportation order was signed. He then raised asylum grounds.


      3. The respondent rejected his claim, relying on the determination  of
         the judge who had in 1999 found that it lacked credibility. It  was
         not accepted that the events concerning the family would place  the
         appellant at risk if  her  returned  now.  The  respondent  applied
         country  guidance  and  concluded  that  low  level  activities  or
         attendance at demonstrations would not  give  rise  to  a  risk  of
         adverse attention from the authorities. The appellant was found  to
         be excluded from humanitarian protection on account of his criminal
         conviction.


      4. Permission was granted by Judge Pooler on 30 October 2017.


      5. Submissions


      6. The matter  came  before  me  on  11  January  2018  when  I  heard
         submissions from the parties.


      7. For the appellant, Ms Asanovic submitted that this  was  a  limited
         challenge to the determination and the issue was only in respect to
         whether the appellant would express his political  opinion  in  Sri
         Lanka. The judge was required to consider whether the appellant had
         political beliefs and then whether he would conceal those for  fear
         that he would be persecuted if they were revealed. This was the  HJ
         (Iran) point. The judge summarized the test at paragraph 48 but she
         erred in requiring the appellant to hold a  deeply  held  political
         opinion.


      8. Ms Asanovic relied on RT Zimbabwe [2012] UKSC 38  where  the  court
         held that the HJ (Iran) principle applied to  any  person  who  has
         political beliefs and is obliged to conceal them (at 26)  and  that
         "A focus on how important the right not  to  hold  a  political  or
         religious belief is to the applicant is  wrong  in  principle"  (at
         42). She referred me to paragraph 51 where the court held  that  it
         was not relevant to determine how important the right  was  to  the
         individual. Given that guidance, she submitted that the  judge  had
         applied the wrong test when she required the appellant to show that
         he held deep political opinions and principles.  In  requiring  the
         appellant to show deep thoughts and principles  she  was  searching
         for something which did not form part of the rights test.


      9. Ms Asanovic pointed out  that  the  judge  had  accepted  that  the
         appellant had been tortured and detained. When concluding  that  he
         would not be of interest to the authorities,  she  failed  to  have
         regard to her own findings. The decision should be  set  aside  and
         the matter determined afresh.


     10. Mr Tufan responded.  He  submitted  that  the  photographs  of  the
         appellant attending some demonstrations would  be  insufficient  to
         bring him to the attention of the authorities. He  referred  to  GJ
         (post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) at
         paragraphs 335, 336 and 351 and submitted  that  someone  who  took
         part in protests would not be viewed as a threat to the Sri  Lankan
         state. The  judge  considered  this  issue  at  paragraph  48.  She
         employed a very generous criterion but the appellant did  not  fall
         into a risk category. Even if the wrong test had been  applied  his
         profile would not bring him to the attention of the authorities. He
         relied on E G v United Kingdom European Court of Human Rights on 31
         May 2011 (paragraphs 76, 77, 79 and 80). He reminded  me  that  the
         appellant had been away from Sri Lanka for over 20 years.


     11. Ms Asanovic replied. She argued that the case  law  cited  did  not
         apply to the appellant's circumstances. She submitted that the  Sri
         Lankan government was paranoid and had clamped down on human rights
         activists and journalists as well.


     12. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.


     13. Discussion and Conclusions


     14. I have considered the submissions and the evidence with  care.  The
         judge had regard to all the evidence before  her  (at  25-26).  She
         directed herself appropriately (at 27) and she set out the basis of
         the claim, the respondent's case and the background history (at 28-
         31). She took the findings of the first Tribunal  as  her  starting
         point and then proceeded to consider the account in  the  light  of
         the medical report and relevant case law (32-35). She then accepted
         that the appellant had been detained and tortured in the  past  and
         that he had been released on payment of a bribe (36-37).  No  issue
         is taken with any of these findings.


     15. The judge then comes to the  crucial  question  to  be  determined:
         "Having found that the appellant was detained by the authorities as
         he claims, I have to consider if on return to Sri Lanka he will  be
         of interest to the authorities because of his past detention  which
         occurred  nearly  20  year  (sic)  and  whether   the   appellant's
         activities in the UK which is attending demonstrations  would  have
         brought him to the attention of the authorities" (at  38).  Neither
         party  suggested  that  this  was  not  the   correct   issue   for
         determination. It is plain to me from what the judge says here that
         she did indeed have full regard to her own findings in  respect  of
         the appellant's  past  detention,  contrary  to  what  Ms  Asanovic
         maintained in her submissions.


     16. The judge next considers the  guidance  in  GJ  and  sets  out  the
         categories of individuals who would be at risk  on  return  to  Sri
         Lanka (at 39). She reminds herself that the objective  of  the  Sri
         Lankan government was to identify Tamil activists in  the  diaspora
         who were working for Tamil separatism and to destabilise the  unity
         of the Sri Lankan state. She notes that the government  had  access
         to sophisticated intelligence in respect of activities  within  Sri
         Lanka and outside it and that they had a computerised  intelligence
         led watch list (at 40).


     17. The judge then set out her findings. She confirms that she  accepts
         his ethnicity, his account of detention on one  occasion  (in  1997
         because of a sister's involvement with the LTTE), his 'escape'  (on
         payment of a  bribe)  and  the  absence  of  any  interest  in  him
         thereafter. She notes that his parents had remained  in  Sri  Lanka
         until at least 2007 (for around ten years after his detention)  and
         that they had not had any difficulties with  the  authorities.  She
         notes that the parents had then travelled to Switzerland where they
         claimed asylum but notes there was no evidence as to the  basis  of
         their claim or indeed its outcome (at 41). The judge notes that the
         appellant would have to complete a form and attend an interview  in
         order to obtain a travel document (at 42).  The  judge  finds  that
         given the sophisticated  intelligence  gathered  and  held  by  the
         authorities, they would know that the appellant  was  a  low  level
         LTTE supporter at best and that he had not been involved  with  the
         LTTE since he left detention  (at  43).  She  finds  there  was  no
         warrant issued against him and that he would therefore not be on  a
         stop list. As there had been no interest shown in him after he left
         detention and for the ensuing years until 2007, he would not be  on
         a watch list either  (at  44).  The  judge  concludes:  "For  these
         reasons, I find that the appellant has not established on the facts
         that there is a real risk or that it is reasonably likely that  the
         Sri Lankan  authorities  would  regard  him  as  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state" (at 45). Those are  sound
         findings properly made in the context of  the  accepted  facts  and
         country guidance.


     18. The judge then proceeds to consider the appellant's  activities  in
         the UK. These consist of attending protests outside the Sri  Lankan
         High Commission in London. The judge accepted that the  authorities
         would be aware of this but found that in accordance with  GJ,  such
         activities would not place him at  risk  particularly  due  to  the
         absence of any prior profile (at 46).


     19. It is what the judge says next that the appellant  takes  objection
         to. She takes account  of  the  HJ  principle  which  she  confirms
         applies to anyone who has  political  beliefs  and  is  obliged  to
         conceal them so as to avoid persecution. She then states:  "If  the
         appellant holds deeply held political opinion, critical of the  Sri
         Lankan government, then I accept that he would be at real  risk  of
         serious ill treatment on return as the Sri Lankan authorities would
         regard him as a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as  a  single
         state" (at 48). The case depends entirely on whereabouts or  not  I
         believe the appellant's claim about his political convictions"  (at
         48). These are the sections of the determination  singled  out  for
         criticism, it being argued that the importance of one's beliefs  is
         of no relevance. Heavy reliance was placed on RT  where  the  court
         held that: "A focus on how  important  the  right  not  to  hold  a
         political or religious belief is  to  the  applicant  is  wrong  in
         principle" (at 42 and repeated in similar terms at  51).  Whilst  I
         understand the point Ms Asanovic seeks to make, I consider that the
         judge's findings and standpoint have been taken out of context  and
         misinterpreted.


     20. It seems clear to me that  what  the  judge  was  saying  was  that
         because    the    appellant    is    not    a    committed     LTTE
         supporter/member/activist, the authorities would be aware  of  this
         via their sophisticated means of gathering and holding intelligence
         and would, therefore, not perceive him to be a threat to the  unity
         and integrity of the state.  Had  the  appellant  been  on  ongoing
         interest to the authorities because of his elder  sister  (who  has
         now been out of Sri Lanka  for  over  twenty  five  years)  or  his
         younger one  (who  died  in  2001  and  who  herself  had  no  LTTE
         involvement but was married to a supporter), then there would  have
         been some sign of ongoing interest in him after he left  detention.
         Whilst he appears to have left at some point  prior  to  1999,  his
         parents remained until 2007 and in those  ten  years  no  enquiries
         were made of his whereabouts and there was no suggestion  that  the
         authorities disapproved of his activities here and made their views
         known to  his  parents.  The  judge  was,  therefore,  entitled  to
         conclude he was not seen as someone with any  significant  profile,
         not perceived as a threat to  the  Sri  Lankan  state  and  despite
         knowledge of his activities in the UK he would be seen  as  someone
         who was a run of the mill Tamil and not one who was so committed to
         the cause as to amount to a threat.  That was what the judge meant.
         That was the approach she took and I cannot see that  that  amounts
         to an error  of  law  which  renders  her  decision  invalid.   Her
         analysis of how the appellant would  be  perceived  was  sound  and
         conclusions sustainable.


     21. In conclusion, therefore, I find that the judge did  not  make  any
         errors of law which necessitate the setting aside of  her  decision
         on asylum grounds. There having been no challenge by the respondent
         to the earlier successful article 8 appeal, that decision stands.


     22. Decision


     23. The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  any  errors  of  law.  The
         decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds is upheld.


     24. Anonymity


     25. I was not asked to make an anonymity order and there is  no  reason
         for me to do so.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge
    Date:  19 January 2018
