
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02301/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th November 2019                |On 24th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   mr md r
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner instructed by Lawmatic Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bonavero promulgated  on  8th  August  2019,  which
    dismissed the appellant's asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  13th
    February 2019.

 2. The appellant's claim was that he was  born  to  a  politically  active
    father in Bangladesh and his father was  a  member  of  the  Bangladesh
    Nationalist Party and encouraged the appellant along  the  same  lines.
    In 2007 the appellant joined the  Bangladesh  Jatiyatabadi  Chatra  Dal
    (JCD) student wing of the BNP and was  made  sports  secretary  of  his
    local branch.

 3. As a result of his political activities he was targeted by  members  of
    the  student  wing  of  the  Awami  League,  the  governing  party   in
    Bangladesh, and he was stabbed in the leg on Christmas Day in 2008  and
    stabbed in the arm in May 2009.  On  12th  February  2009  a  confected
    criminal case was filed against him accusing him of criminal damage and
    he was wanted by the police.  He describes his life  before  coming  to
    the UK in the following terms "as such I was  hiding  myself  here  and
    there with different costumes and led a gypsy live".

 4. The appellant's activities in the UK were that he  joined  the  UK  BNP
    East London branch on 17th August 2017 and had  been  appointed  as  an
    executive  member  of  that  branch  and  attended  demonstrations  and
    meetings.

 5. The judge made the following record of evidence and findings.

 6. At paragraph 26 the judge referred to the documentation emanating  from
    Bangladesh intended to evidence the appellant's  activities  there  and
    also identified the documents produced in the UK intended  to  evidence
    the sur place activities.  The judge referred and applied Tanveer Ahmed
    (documents  unreliable  and  forged)  Pakistan  *  [2002]  UKIAT  00439
    principles at the outset.

 7. The judge in relation to documents emanating from Bangladesh had regard
    to  the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  entitled   Bangladesh
    Background Information including  Actors  of  Protection  and  Internal
    Relocation dated 18th January and which identified  that  there  was  a
    significant prevalence of  fraudulent  documents  in  Bangladesh.   The
    judge stated at the outset of his decision "I  therefore  approach  the
    appellant's documents with a degree of circumspection".   He  proceeded
    to consider the two newspaper articles said to have been  published  in
    Bangladesh about the appellant.  The first newspaper to which he refers
    at paragraph 29 is the "The  Daily  Alokito  Bangladesh".   The  second
    newspaper article described the  fact  that  a  case  had  been  lodged
    against a variety of people including a  person  with  the  appellant's
    name in relation to criminal damage occurring the previous  day.   That
    article is said to come from a newspaper entitled "The Daily Nirapekhho
    Sapatkik" and was dated 12th February 2009.

 8. The judge noted at paragraph 30 that the  appellant  had  provided  the
    originals but considered it surprising that the two newspapers  printed
    two months apart had pages 2 and 3 as being identical.

 9. The judge put this to the appellant (as recorded at paragraph  32)  but
    he could not explain it except to say that  pages  2  and  3  contained
    advertisements.  The judge found "that does not in my view explain  why
    it should be that the two different newspapers published  months  apart
    should have precisely identical contents across half of its pages".

10. At paragraph 33 the judge proceeded "whilst on the topic of newspapers"
    to comment on the paper published in the UK namely "The  Weekly  Bangla
    Sanlap" published on 31st August 2018  which  was  a  Bengali  language
    newspaper containing a picture of the appellant and many  others  at  a
    demonstration followed by an article which named each  of  the  people.
    The judge was particularly concerned that beneath the article  the  two
    adverts, the paper contained the text:

         "Office to Late"

         "Wanted to teach Year 1 to GCSE.  Expart and 15 years experience in
         teaching"

11. At paragraph 34 the judge stated he compared these two adverts  to  the
    others appearing in that addition of the Bangla Sanlap and  could  find
    "no other  instances  of  such  flagrant  mistakes  let  alone  obvious
    misspellings in an advert placed by a teacher seeking  tutoring  work".
    He also found that the relevant pages were the centrefold and therefore
    easily replaceable.

12. As such the judge stated at paragraph 35 the following:

         "Taking all of those factors into account, I express doubts  as  to
         the  reliability  of  the  various  documents  I  have   described.
         Nonetheless, I consider them in the round and in line with the rest
         of my findings as to  the  appellant's  credibility,  applying  the
         lower standard of proof."

    Grounds of Appeal

13. The grounds of appeal contended that the judge erred in failing to have
    proper regard to  the  evidence  (i)  the  approach  to  the  newspaper
    evidence was flawed (ii) the application of Section 8 of the  Treatment
    of Claimant's Act 2008 was flawed and (iii) the approach to the witness
    evidence and sur place evidence was flawed.

    Analysis

14. In the first ground it was advanced that when dismissing the  newspaper
    evidence, the judge  misunderstood  the  newspaper  evidence.   It  was
    submitted that the two newspapers  The  Weekly  Bangla  and  The  Daily
    Alokito Bangladesh were by the same company.   It  was  not  improbable
    that the  newspaper  would  reuse  its  advertisements  between  issues
    especially given the period of time and the judge  concluded  that  the
    advertisements were identical between the two  newspapers  damaged  but
    misunderstood.  The appellant was unaware why the  same  advertisements
    were used but he was unaware that the issue  was  that  the  newspapers
    were believed to be owned by different companies.

15. At the hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal  Mr  Turner  repeated  that  the
    appellant would not have knowledge over what was in the  newspapers  or
    the editorial  content  or  why  the  newspapers  had  republished  the
    adverts.  It was an error to hold it against him.   In my view, however
    the judge had clearly, as plain from paragraph 32, put  the  issues  of
    the newspapers to the appellant and the appellant could not explain the
    repetition and did not give evidence that the two newspapers were owned
    by the same company.  That was an  explanation  that  was  produced  at
    later date and  cannot  be  used  to  form  criticism  of  the  judge's
    reasoning.  As the judge pointed out at  paragraph  32,  that  the  two
    different newspapers were published months  apart  and  have  precisely
    identical contents across half its pages was simply not credible.

16. The submissions also criticise  the  judge's  approach  to  the  weekly
    Bangla Sanlap dated 31st  August  2018  which  contained  the  spelling
    errors in advertisements and that the  advertisement  "printed  by  the
    newspaper is not edited by the newspaper the same way an article  would
    be: "It is published as received".  The appellant believed  that  these
    were genuine typing  errors.   It  was  submitted  in  the  grounds  of
    permission to appeal that the judge erred in respect of  Tanveer  Ahmed
    by failing to apply the appropriate weight to such evidence  especially
    in the light of the fact  that  the  appellant  provided  the  original
    documents and postal envelopes of any  evidence  which  was  sent  from
    Bangladesh.

17. In my view once again the judge applied the correct standard  of  proof
    and nothing in the language of the determination suggests that a higher
    or civil standard of proof was  applied  rather  than  the  'reasonable
    degree of likelihood'.  The judge gave unambiguous  findings  and  very
    clear reasons for why he rejected  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    newspapers.  He noted the content of the  advertisements  finding  that
    the relevant pages were at the centrefold of the relevant  edition  and
    therefore easily replaceable at  paragraph  34.    The  judge  did  not
    misunderstand the  evidence,  he  specifically  had  compared  the  two
    adverts to the others appearing in that addition a copy  which  was  on
    file and stated he could find  no  other  instances  of  such  flagrant
    mistakes.   The  appellant  clearly  had  the   opportunity   to   give
    observations in relation to the newspapers.  Mr Turner's point  was  if
    the appellant was going to fabricate the newspaper by putting an advert
    this type  of  obvious  illiteracy  should  not  be  held  against  the
    appellant and it was not said that the newspapers were false or do  not
    exist.  Mr Turner thought it daft to go to the time and trouble to  put
    in incorrect information and it was outside the appellant's control but
    that is also a post decision explanation.

18. However, the judge considered all the evidence, offered  the  appellant
    an opportunity to respond to his criticism and gave adequate  reasoning
    as indicated above for rejecting the credibility of the articles.   His
    conclusions were open to him.

19. Mere disagreement about the weight to  be  accorded  to  the  evidence,
    which is a matter for the judge, should  not  be  characterised  as  an
    error of law, Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412.  It is for the  judge
    to accord the weight given to a piece of evidence and the judge saw the
    evidence in the light of the previous observations in relation  to  the
    newspapers.

20. I find no error of law in the  judge's  approach  in  relation  to  the
    judge's approach or treatment of the newspaper articles.  Although  the
    judge referred to the principles of Tanveer Ahmed at the outset of  his
    findings, he has to start somewhere and he paid  adequate  and  careful
    attention to the evidence which shows that he did  treat  the  evidence
    holistically  and  with  an  open  mind  albeit  with   a   degree   of
    circumspection.  The judge confirmed that he took all the factors  into
    account.

21. Turning to the second ground of appeal, I am  not  persuaded  that  the
    judge erred  in  the  application  of  Section  8  of  The  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 ('the Act').

22. The grounds of appeal state that the

         "Appellant intended to return to Bangladesh following  his  studies
         under the impression that  the  BNP  would  come  back  into  power
         following the past election.  In  such  circumstances  he  did  not
         believe there was a need to claim asylum upon arrival in the UK  or
         whilst he was studying.  After 2014  when  the  Awami  League  were
         voted back into power the appellant became concerned...

         Unfortunately, his college's  licence  was  suspended  and  he  was
         unable to find another sponsor...

         he was afraid  if  he  claimed  asylum  he  would  be  returned  to
         Bangladesh".

23. The judge found at paragraph 36, that

         'he [the appellant] did not claim asylum until some 6  years  after
         his arrival here.  This strikes me as inconsistent with his claimed
         fear of persecution in Bangladesh, which had crystallised as  early
         as 2009'

24. The judge's findings were entirely open to him.  He had regard  to  the
    delay as enjoined by Section 8 of the Act.   There  was  no  indication
    contrary to JT  (Cameroon)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  878  such  that  he  had
    dismissed the appeal without considering the evidence as a whole or  on
    the basis of  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum  alone.   As  the  judge
    recorded, the appellant maintained that  as  early  as  February  2009,
    prior to him leaving Bangladesh that he was in fear of  his  life;  the
    judge also recorded at paragraph 8 and found at paragraph 36, that  the
    appellant did not claim asylum for some six years after his arrival  in
    the UK on 20th May 2011 as a Tier 4 Student, and until  28th  September
    2017.  The grounds of  appeal  appear  to  be  giving  a  post-decision
    explanation, particularly as the appellant knew that the  Awami  League
    had been re-elected in 2014 and did not  claim  until  3  years  later.
    Whilst the appellant was engaged in immigration litigation being in the
    process of lodging a notice of appeal in April 2014 and  became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 29th May 2014, he  still  failed  to  claim  asylum
    until some three years later.  The history of that claim  was  recorded
    in the determination and it is inconceivable that  the  judge  did  not
    take that into account when reaching his decision.   The  challenge  to
    the decision on this ground amounts to no more than a mere disagreement
    with the judge's findings at paragraph 36.

25. In relation to the third ground of challenge the judge having  rejected
    his account of the appellant's treatment in Bangladesh  turned  to  the
    appellant's sur place activities from paragraph 39 onwards  and  stated
    the following:

         "41.     As for the oral evidence provided by  Mr  B,  I  found  it
             problematic.  He was asked by Ms Lake whether his knowledge of
             the appellant's experiences and activities in Bangladesh comes
             solely from the appellant, or whether he has some other source
             of information.  He said that before inviting the appellant to
             become a member of the BNP he  contacted  a  gentleman  called
             Rahul in Bangladesh to confirm that  the  appellant  had  been
             politically active there.  Rahul  confirmed  this  to  be  the
             case.  However, Mr B never told the appellant that he had done
             this.  Asked why, he said that the appellant might  then  have
             contacted people in Bangladesh to lie on his behalf.  When  he
             was asked whether he was concerned about the fact that members
             of his organisation might lie in this way to him, he said that
             people in his organisation  would  not  be  prepared  to  lie.
             There are plainly a number of  problems  with  this  evidence.
             First, it is inconsistent on its face.  Second, it is entirely
             unclear how the appellant might know who was  being  contacted
             in Bangladesh in order to prime them to lie to Mr B.   Lastly,
             there was no reason at all why Mr B would not  have  told  the
             appellant about this course of action after he  had  completed
             his checks.  All in all, I found Mr B to be an  unsatisfactory
             witness.

         42.      The papers before me do show the appellant's presence at a
             number of demonstrations.  I take this into account.  However,
             it has not been demonstrated by the appellant that there is  a
             real risk that his mere presence at such demonstrations  would
             be known by the Bangladesh authorities, or that this would  in
             any event place him at risk of persecution.

         43.      I take the same view about the appellant's facebook posts.
              There is nothing before me to suggest  that  the  authorities
             would have access to or interest in the  appellant's  facebook
             account.  Whilst the country evidence shows  that  there  have
             been some prosecutions relating to political  material  posted
             on facebook, it does not follow that there is a real risk that
             the same would befall the appellant.  Given my finding that he
             is of no interest to the authorities, I  have  been  shown  no
             evidence that they would  nonetheless  scrutinise  his  social
             media accounts."

26. The grounds for permission to appeal challenged the  treatment  of  the
    witness, Mr B's  evidence  again  asserting  the  judge  had  erred  in
    approach to the credibility findings.  The BNP members were entitled to
    run checks on members, there was no obligation  on  the  organisers  to
    inform potential members of such and "the situation in  Bangladesh  was
    such that a person would need to be verified and checked to see if they
    were politically active in support of any party before being allowed to
    join a party".  It was not a question of whether  the  witness  thought
    members of the party would lie but whether  the  appellant  would  have
    someone inside the party acting on his behalf because of the risk  that
    a person may be spying on the BNP for the Awami League.  The judge  had
    concluded on the basis of his earlier findings that the  appellant  was
    not of interest but the standard of proof in asylum  claims  was  lower
    than the civil standard and his fear of persecution  was  supported  by
    the newspaper and criminal evidence provided.  The misunderstanding  as
    to the newspapers infected the entire decision and the judge failed  to
    properly consider the evidence including  the  witness  evidence.   The
    judge failed to consider all of the evidence in the round.

27. I am not, however, persuaded that any of the criticisms of the decision
    are well-founded in respect of the treatment of the witness.  The judge
    as can be seen above specifically addressed the evidence of Mr  B.   It
    was open to the judge to find the evidence inconsistent  on  its  face.
    On the one hand the witness stated that he did not tell  the  appellant
    in case he "primed" a member of the BNP in Bangladesh to  "lie  on  his
    behalf" but he then proceeded to state that "people in his organisation
    would  not  be  prepared  to  lie".   The  evidence  was  on  its  face
    contradictory.  It was thus open  to  the  judge  to  find  there  were
    plainly a number of problems with this evidence and secondly  that  the
    appellant would not have known who was being contacted.

28. The judge considered the sur place activity and it was open to  him  to
    find,  in  the  context  of  the  evidence  overall  mere  presence  at
    demonstrations,  as illustrated in this appeal,  would  not  place  the
    appellant at real risk from the Bangladesh  authorities;  simply  there
    was no  evidence  that  Bangladesh  authorities  would  scrutinise  his
    social media accounts.  Although there is a legal duty to give a  brief
    explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal
    is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a
    whole makes sense, which this determination does, having regard to  the
    material accepted by the judge, Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set
    aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

29. From a  careful  reading  of  the  determination,  the  judge  did  not
    misunderstand the evidence or misdirect himself or fail to consider the
    evidence in the round.  The Upper Tribunal has  been  cautioned  to  be
    slow to unsettle determinations on the basis of disagreement.   UT  Sri
    Lanka [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 held at [19]

         'although "error of law" is widely defined, it is not the case that
         the UT is entitled to remake the decision of the FTT simply because
         it does not agree with it, or because it thinks it  can  produce  a
         better one'.

30. I find no error of law in the determination and  it  will  stand.   The
    appellant's appeal remains dismissed.




    Signed       Helen Rimington             Date 20th December 2019

      Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


