
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02639/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1st April 2019                       | On 24th April 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    M M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Marwaha of Counsel instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  O'Hanlon
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd October 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1st January 2000.  He  is  a
    Sunni Muslim.  At the hearing before the judge it was conceded that  in
    October 2016 ISIS invaded Kirkuk and his  mother,  father  and  sisters
    were killed by them.  The sole issue before the judge  was  whether  it
    would be unreasonably harsh for the appellant to relocate  to  Baghdad,
    given that he has been out of the country for over two years.

 3. The evidence before the judge was that the appellant has a CSID and  he
    speaks  Arabic.   However,  it  was  submitted  to  him  that  he   was
    effectively a child when he left Iraq,  had  been  traumatised  by  the
    death of his parents and had no known  family  members  in  Baghdad  to
    accommodate or assist him.

 4. The judge referred to the relevant case law, in particular AA (Iraq)  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  At paragraph 37 he  said  that  he  was  not
    prepared to accept the UNHCR Report of 12th April 2017 which  suggested
    that Sunni Arabs originating  from  previously  ISIS  held  areas  were
    reported to be the subject of arbitrary arrest  and  detention  on  the
    basis of their perceived support for IS.   Having  considered  all  the
    relevant factors in the round,  he  did  not  find  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable for the appellant to  return  to  Baghdad.  He  reached  a
    similar conclusion in respect of the southern governorates.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had materially erred in law in his consideration of the  reasonableness
    of relocation, failing to make findings of fact on material issues, and
    failing to conduct a fact-sensitive analysis.

 6. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz accepted that  the  determination  could
    not stand for the reasons set out in the grounds.

Consideration as to Whether there is a Material Error of Law

 7. The judge erred in law in failing to take  into  account  all  relevant
    factors when concluding that it would be reasonable for  the  appellant
    to relocate.  His decision is set aside and will have to be re-made.

 8. Before the next hearing the appellant is directed to serve, seven  days
    before the hearing, a witness statement which should cover all possible
    areas of support which he may be able  to  access  in  Baghdad  or  the
    southern governorates. He should also serve any  medical  reports  upon
    which he intends to rely.

 9. The respondent must, seven days before the hearing,  serve  all  up-to-
    date evidence on the situation in Iraq,  both on the Tribunal  and  the
    representatives.

10. The resumed hearing will be on the basis that  the  appellant's  family
    were killed in 2016 in the circumstances as described by him.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
[pic]
Signed                              Date 19 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

