








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02862/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 15 November 2018              |On: 6 December 2018                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                  Fouad [D]

                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero, counsel (instructed by Virgo
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Lebanon, born on  2  January  2000.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
      refusing his  asylum,  and  human  rights  claims.  The  decision  was
      promulgated on 24 May 2018.

   2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant is an  economic
      migrant. His immediate family members have colluded  and  connived  at
      his arrival into the UK [15 (viii)].  Even  if  he  had  accepted  the
      appellant's core account that there is a real risk of his facing harm,
      there would be a sufficiency of protection. There  was  nothing  about
      the appellant's personal circumstances  which  would  make  it  unduly
      harsh for him to relocate to a predominantly Sunni Muslim area  within
      Lebanon. [19]

   3. On 11 October 2018, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted  the  appellant
      permission to appeal. She found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      failed to provide any reasons for his  finding  that  the  appellant's
      father had no conversation or discussion with the leaders of Hezbollah
      about the sexual attack on the appellant. He also failed to take  into
      account objective  evidence  relating  to  the  influence  exerted  by
      Hezbollah in Lebanon.

   4. She thus found it arguable that  he  did  not  consider  the  evidence
      before him in the round before dismissing the appellant's appeal.

   5. Mr Bonavero, who did not represent the appellant before the First-tier
      Tribunal, adopted the grounds of appeal, A-B.

   6. He referred to the findings at [15]. The finding at [15(ii)], that  he
      was "buggered" by at least one young male person was a 'misstatement'.
      He had in fact been raped.

   7. He submitted that the  finding  at  [15(iii)],  that  there  would  be
      adequacy of protection for the appellant against "common criminals  or
      those who commit sexual offences,"  fails  to  properly  identify  the
      nature and character of  the  appellant's  claim.  The  appellant  had
      asserted that the sexual  offences  committed  against  him  had  been
      politically motivated by Hezbollah, given that he is a  Sunni  Muslim.
      The correct issue therefore is whether  there  would  be  adequacy  of
      protection against Hezbollah.

   8. Further, the Judge erred in finding that the  appellant's  claim  that
      the sexual attack perpetrated on him had been by  members  of,  or  in
      some way associated with, Hezbollah,  was  not  based  on  any  proper
      foundation but was an assumption on his part.

   9. Mr Bonavero submitted that the  appellant's  evidence  on  this  point
      establishes that that finding was "problematic".  The appellant had in
      fact explained why they were from Hezbollah.

  10. In the appellant's statement in the respondent's  bundle  at  B1,  the
      appellant stated that on 16 April 2017 he was close to  his  home  and
      saw "some Hezbollah" on the street. They called him to come  to  them.
      They told him to come and play "bride  and  groom",  a  famous  sexual
      game. He then was shy about what happened and ashamed. He stated  that
      he had seen them around and they carry weapons and he knew  they  were
      Hezbollah.

  11. Again, at paragraph 5, the appellant referred to  an  incident  on  29
      April 2017. They told him that he was Sunni and that he was dirty  and
      they wanted them out of the area.  They  held  him  down  "and  I  was
      raped".

  12. Mr Bonavero referred to question 23 of the appellant's interview where
      he was asked to explain the incident  on  16  April  2017  in  greater
      detail. The appellant there referred to Hezbollah, stating  that  they
      were wearing black dress and most of the time  they  ride  motorbikes.
      These motorbikes do not have a numberplate. There is nobody who  rides
      a motorbike without a plate, except them.

  13. He was again asked at question 32 how he knew who they  were  when  he
      saw them. He replied that it was because of  the  clothes  they  wear.
      After they raped him, one of them said they do whatever they  want  in
      the country. He had to leave the country so the country could be  left
      for them only. He believes he was targeted because he is Sunni.

  14. In his reply to question 39, he stated that people from Hezbollah knew
      he was Sunni as they have their own intelligence.  In  Lebanon  it  is
      easy to know from the surname of your family whether they are Sunni or
      Shia.

  15. In the circumstances, Mr Bonavero submitted with regard to the finding
      at [15(v)], that the Judge did not  have  regard  to  the  appellant's
      evidence. He did give a proper foundation for his assertion that  they
      were from Hezbollah.

  16. With regard to [15(vii)], the  Judge  appears  to  have  rejected  the
      appellant's evidence that his father  had  approached  the  leader  of
      Hezbollah to complain about his treatment regarding the sexual assault
      on his son. The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant's  father  had  no
      conversation or discussion with any leader of Hezbollah

  17. Further, the Judge's finding that the appellant is an economic migrant
      in a context where he had accepted that he was a child  who  had  been
      raped, is not "an attractive finding."  Having  accepted  the  factual
      matrix  of  abuse,  such  a  characterisation   of   his   claim   was
      inappropriate.

  18. Mr Bonavero referred  to  the  Judge's  findings  at  [16],  regarding
      sufficiency of protection.  The  Judge  stated  that  no  country  can
      guarantee the safety of its citizens so that none of them will ever be
      the victim of  criminal  activity.  That  is  not  what  is  meant  by
      "sufficiency  of  protection."  However,  this  was  a  political  act
      committed by non-state actors.

  19. At [17] the Judge found that no argument was put before him, let alone
      supported by appropriate evidence upon which an  argument  that  there
      was an insufficiency of protection for citizens who were  targeted  by
      Hezbollah, could be properly founded. Mr Bonavero submitted that there
      had been such evidence. At page 8 of the appellant's bundle before the
      Tribunal, the executive summary of  the  USSD  Lebanon  Report,  2017,
      noted that civilian authorities maintain control over the armed forces
      and other security forces, although Palestinian security  and  militia
      forces, the designated foreign terrorist organisation  Hezbollah,  and
      other extremist elements, operated outside the direction or control of
      government officials.

  20. He referred to the executive summary at page 37 (of 49) of the  report
      from Crisis Group Middle  East  dated  20  July  2015.  The  executive
      summary states that massive military and organisational  strength  has
      discouraged or quelled any attempt to challenge Hezbollah.

  21. Mr Bonavero also submitted that the finding at [18] that the appellant
      could internally relocate to a predominantly Sunni Muslim area  within
      Lebanon fails to factor into the assessment of  "unduly  harsh,"  that
      the appellant has been the victim of sexual abuse when he was 17 years
      old.

  22. In that regard, he referred to the letter from Sarah Temple Smith, the
      Integrative Counsellor and Play  Therapist  and  the  manager  of  the
      Refugee Council's, My View  Children's  Therapy  Project.  They  offer
      short term (up to 12) sessions of personal counselling  for  separated
      child refugees under 18 years.

  23. She met the appellant for 12 therapy sessions between October 2017 and
      February 2018. She set out his presentation, noting that it was  clear
      from his narrative that he felt that he held a very real fear for  his
      safety both in Lebanon and in the UK. His descriptions of a  traumatic
      event were consistent in their detail and  his  physical  presentation
      while sharing the narrative. She referred to  the  symptoms  of  post-
      traumatic stress including flashbacks, re-experiences  of  the  trauma
      and somatic responses to the trauma. The outcomes  of  his  assessment
      were set out at page 1 of her report.

  24. Mr Bonavero submitted that this should have  been  properly  evaluated
      and assessed.  In  finding  that  there  would  be  openings  for  the
      appellant for jobs and employment opportunities in Lebanon, the  Judge
      did not recognise the impact of the appellant's experiences upon him.

  25. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Lindsay adopted the Rule  24  response
      where it is contended that in assessing the claim at its highest,  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge specifically noted the absence of background
      evidence relating to claimed sufficiency of protection. The grounds of
      appeal failed to address the Judge's observation that no such argument
      was relied upon in order to establish that  the  material  could  have
      materially undermined the Judge's conclusion given that  he  does  not
      suggest that Shia Hezbollah retained significant influence over all of
      Lebanon. Accordingly, no material error has been  disclosed  regarding
      internal relocation to a Sunni majority area.

  26. With regard to the letter relied upon by the appellant, there had been
      no diagnosis of PTSD. Limited weight only could be attached  to  that.
      He referred in particular to [16] where the Judge stated that  counsel
      who represented the  appellant,  without  reference  to  any  relevant
      evidence on the issue, simply asserted  that  there  would  not  be  a
      sufficiency of protection because there was  no  guarantee  that  harm
      would not befall the appellant.

  27. Moreover, the findings at [18] regarding help being given  to  him  by
      his parents and his ability to  find  suitable  employment,  were  not
      challenged. Accordingly the Judge  made  sustainable  findings  as  to
      appropriate safe areas. There was nothing to show that  the  appellant
      would not be able to go to a Sunni area in Lebanon.

  28. In reply, Mr Bonavero submitted that the letter should have been given
      proper weight. There is no indication of the Judge's approach  to  the
      letter. That letter was critical with regard to the issue of  internal
      relocation. The author has had considerable experience.  She  saw  the
      appellant on 12 occasions. She described his condition and how he  was
      affected. She set  out  his  symptoms  at  page  2,  which  were  PTSD
      symptoms.

  29. Given his history, the assertion that they can simply be ignored  does
      not give proper effect to the current state of the law. No exercise or
      assessment was undertaken as to whether his condition,  as  described,
      would affect his return or his ability to relocate internally.

  30. The contention that the Judge considered background  evidence  is  not
      borne out from the determination. In any event, it is  clear  that  he
      has not looked at it properly. He has in fact said nothing about it.

      Assessment

  31. In his witness statement, the appellant stated that when  he  returned
      home on the first occasion he was sexually assaulted, but did not tell
      his family what happened as he was shy about that and was ashamed.

  32. However, on the second occasion he was  raped,  namely,  on  29  April
      2017, he told his father what had happened. Five days later his father
      managed to speak with Hezbollah. His father and some  of  his  friends
      who knew one of the leaders in the area, went to meet the leader.  His
      father was told that the appellant was lying and he should not  repeat
      or spread lies about Hezbollah. He said if the family kept quiet  then
      they would not be in danger. He told his father that  they  would  not
      guarantee his safety.

  33. Given that evidence, the Judge has  not  given  any  reasons  for  his
      finding that the appellant's father had no conversation or  discussion
      with any leaders of Hezbollah about the sexual  attack.  In  addition,
      the appellant has identified his assailants as persons associated with
      Hezbollah. He has thus given a proper foundation which does not amount
      to 'a matter of assumption on his part' for claiming  that  they  were
      members of Hezbollah. This was moreover a politically motivated attack
      based on the fact that he was a Sunni Muslim.

  34. There was also evidence produced before the Tribunal that  in  Lebanon
      there is not a sufficiency of state protection for  its  citizens.  In
      addition, contrary to the Judge's finding at  [17],  it  was  asserted
      that the organisation and/or its members were above the law.

  35. Finally, although the Judge did refer at [14] to the letter from Sarah
      Temple Smith, he did not deal with any of her contentions as  part  of
      his assessment of whether, having regard to the  appellant's  personal
      circumstances, his return would be unduly harsh.

  36. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      involved the making of an error on a point of law. I  accordingly  set
      it aside.

  37. Mr Bonavero submitted that the appeal should be remitted. I  have  had
      regard to the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  regarding  the
      remitting of  an  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
      decision.

  38. In applying that approach, I am satisfied that the extent of  judicial
      fact finding which is necessary in order for a decision to be  re-made
      is extensive. There will be a complete  re-hearing  with  no  findings
      preserved. I have also had regard to  the  overriding  objectives  and
      find that it would in the circumstances be just and fair to remit  the
      case.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 30 November 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

