
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02433/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th May 2019                     |On 5th June 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Profumo, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in  this  determination  identified  as  MM.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings



      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig on 9th  August  2018  against  the
         decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Obhi  who  dismissed  the
         appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human  rights  grounds  for
         reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 13th July 2013.

         Immigration background

      2. The appellant is an Egyptian national, born  in  January  1999.  He
         claims he left  Egypt  on  14th  or  15th  April  2015,  eventually
         arriving in the UK on 13th June 2015 whereupon he  claimed  asylum.
         His claim was refused for reasons set out in a decision dated  25th
         January 2016 and his appeal came before a First-tier Tribunal judge
         on 26th January 2017 who dismissed it. That decision was set  aside
         by the Upper Tribunal and the appeal  remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for fresh hearing, no  findings  preserved.  It  was  thus
         heard by judge Obhi on 22nd June 2018 and it is her decision  which
         is the subject of the appeal before me.

      3. The grounds  upon  which  permission  was  granted  are  succinctly
         summarised by Judge Pullig:

          i) It is arguable that the judge's approach  to  the  appellant's
             claimed  vulnerability,  including  the  approach  to  medical
             issues, was flawed and this affected the judge's  approach  to
             the appellant's credibility.

         ii) It is arguable the judge failed to take  account  of  evidence
             relating to the appellant's account of how he had lost contact
             with his mother, and this  impacted  upon  the  findings  with
             regard to his mother.

        iii) It is arguable the  judge  failed  to  give  reasons  why  she
             concluded that the appellant had not given  good  reasons  for
             abandoning his Muslim faith; failed  to  address  evidence  to
             which she was specifically directed  in  connection  with  his
             loss of faith.

         iv) It is arguable the judge failed  to  make  a  finding  on  the
             appellant's Article 8 rights.

         Error of law

      4. The appellant had claimed to be younger than his  assessed  age  by
         almost two years. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that his  age
         was as assessed by  social  workers.  That  finding  has  not  been
         challenged. The judge nevertheless took the view in her  assessment
         of the evidence that the appellant was a  minor  at  the  time  the
         events he referred to occurred and that the claims he made  had  to
         be considered in the light of his age at the time of those  claimed
         events. There was no challenge to that approach by either party.

      5. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considered  the  two  psychiatric
         reports prepared by Dr Kumar.  She  notes  that  the  first  report
         refers to the appellant having an "adjustment disorder" and  having
         limited ability to speak English. She notes that Dr Kumar does  not
         respond to the query whether the appellant is suffering from  PTSD.
         In his second report, following reported serious episodes resulting
         in the appellant being taken to  hospital,  Dr  Kumar  changes  his
         diagnosis and concludes that the appellant is suffering  from  PTSD
         rather than "adjustment disorder". Dr Kumar then saw the  appellant
         again, by which time the appellant was using cannabis on a  regular
         basis. The First-tier Judge states that there was  no  evidence  of
         cognitive defect and, although Dr Kumar states that "on the balance
         of probabilities his mental health has deteriorated and  his  drink
         and drug habits would play a role in that deterioration", concludes
         that the appellant is not vulnerable through mental illness but  is
         vulnerable because of his age.

      6. This is difficult to understand. Firstly, the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge has not explained why  she  does  not  consider  PTSD  and  a
         deteriorated mental health with  nightmares  and  flashbacks  to  a
         claimed kidnapping does not render the appellant vulnerable because
         of  mental  health  difficulties.  Cognitive  impairment   is   not
         equivalent to mental health illness and that the appellant  is  not
         suffering from cognitive impairment does not lead to  a  conclusion
         that he is not vulnerable because of mental health issues. Secondly
         the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge   does   not   explain   how   her
         consideration of the appellant's vulnerability because of  his  age
         but not his mental health  impacted  upon  her  assessment  of  the
         appellant's evidence. Mental health issues are  not  restricted  to
         whether a person is able  to  give  evidence  or  provide  coherent
         evidence. the vulnerability that arises from mental health problems
         can impact on the evidence in a  number  of  ways;  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge has not considered this or if she has  she  has  not
         identified how it has affected her findings.

      7. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that  the  appellant  had  been
         kidnapped but does not accept that he was or is of interest to  the
         Muslim Brotherhood. Neither of these findings  is  the  subject  of
         direct challenge by either party. The appellant  does  submit  that
         the judge failed to make a clear finding on whether the appellant's
         father was arrested or involved with the  Muslim  Brotherhood.  The
         judge  (paragraph  56,  59)  considered  the  evidence  before  her
         including the background evidence. The finding reached by her  that
         she did not accept that his father was  involved  with  the  Muslim
         Brotherhood or that the authorities or the Muslim Brotherhood would
         have any interest in the appellant was a finding that was  open  to
         her on the evidence before her. Her  conclusions  were  drawn  from
         evidence that would not have been impacted upon by the  appellant's
         mental health  issues  which,  although  she  states  she  did  not
         consider him to be vulnerable because of those issues, were in  her
         mind during her consideration of the evidence as can be  seen  from
         her extensive recording of the evidence that was before her.

      8. Later in her decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  appears  to
         accept that the appellant is suffering from mental health  problems
         arising from having to leave his family and  Egypt.  She  describes
         the incidents of violence and the involvement of the social  worker
         who considers the appellant to be concerned  about  his  family  in
         Egypt. But she does not take this  into  account  in  reaching  her
         findings on the appellant's involvement with  the  Red  Cross.  Nor
         does she take this into  account  when  assessing  the  appellant's
         evidence with regard to his changing faith. That the  appellant  is
         vulnerable, has difficulty making friends, feels that he is not  in
         control of his life has not impacted upon her conclusions as to his
         faith and claimed abandonment of Islam.  She  has  only  considered
         these matters in terms of availability  of  treatment  in  Egypt  -
         despite having earlier found that he was not vulnerable because  of
         his mental state.

      9. The First-tier Tribunal judge factored into her conclusions on  the
         appellant's claimed change of faith, that this was as a consequence
         of needing emotional support. She did not consider the  explanation
         given by the appellant that he was disillusioned with Islam through
         his understanding of the actions  of  his  father  and  the  Muslim
         Brotherhood. This evidence by the appellant impacts on whether  his
         claimed conversion is 'opportunistic' or whether  it  has  occurred
         because he was disillusioned and was looking for alternative faith,
         which also had the product of  providing  emotional  and  practical
         support. Although there has been no direct challenge to the finding
         that the appellant's  father  was  not  involved  with  the  Muslim
         Brotherhood,  the  disillusionment  with  Islam  stems,  from   the
         appellant's evidence, from other factors in addition to  this;  the
         judge has not taken this into account.

     10. Nevertheless, although there are shortcomings  and  errors  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal decision, I am not satisfied that  they  amount
         to errors such as require the  decision  to  be  set  aside  to  be
         remade. Taking the appellant's claim at its highest namely that  he
         was kidnapped when he was about 7 years old, that  his  father  was
         involved with the Muslim Brotherhood and was arrested, that  he  is
         unable to make contact with his family in Egypt  and  that  he  has
         left the Islamic faith and embraced another faith,  the  background
         evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal  judge,  does  not
         support the  contention  that  as  a  family  member  of  a  Muslim
         Brotherhood member he would be sought either by the authorities  or
         the Muslim Brotherhood; nor does it support the submission that  he
         would be at risk of being persecuted either  because  he  has  left
         Islam or converted to Christianity (or Mormonism).

     11. In consequence I am satisfied  that  although  the  judge  did  not
         approach the issue of the appellant's vulnerability correctly, that
         failure does not have a material impact on the core  findings  that
         the appellant is not at risk of being persecuted for  a  Convention
         reason (either imputed political opinion or religious  affiliation)
         if removed to Egypt. There is no error of law such as to result  in
         the setting aside of the decision for this reason.

     12. Although the judge has not directly  addressed  Article  8,  it  is
         difficult  to  see  on  what  basis  the  appellant  would  have  a
         sustainable Article 8 claim  in  any  event.  Article  8  does  not
         provide for leave to remain to be granted  where  a  mental  health
         case does not meet the high threshold of Article  3;  nor  does  it
         provide for a general level of support in the UK.  The  appellant's
         evidence that he would be without familial support is a matter that
         ought to be considered but in this case, he will be returning as an
         adult, albeit with established vulnerability.  Although  there  are
         medical facilities available in Egypt they may well not be  of  the
         same calibre as in the UK and he may not  be  able  to  access  the
         social and emotional support networks that  have  been  established
         here in the UK. But despite all these factors, the evidence  before
         the First-tier Tribunal judge did not  support  a  submission  that
         there would be very significant obstacles to his reintegration into
         Egypt or that his mental health would deteriorate such as  to  meet
         the  Article  3  threshold.  Had  the  First-tier  Tribunal   judge
         addressed  Article  8  she  would  inevitably  have   reached   the
         conclusion that the decision to remove the appellant  as  a  failed
         asylum seeker was not disproportionate. There is no  error  of  law
         such as to result in the setting aside of  the  decision  for  this
         reason.

         Conclusions:

         The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law.

         I do not set aside the decision; the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge stands.

         Anonymity

         The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

         I continue  that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 3rd June 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
