
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02686/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st September 2017                         |On 13th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     TK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Jane Heybroek of Counsel instructed by Chelian
Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Hamilton
    made following a hearing at Taylor House  on  25th  August  2016.   The
    decision was not promulgated until 31st January 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1989.   He  arrived
    in the UK on 26th January 2006 and claimed asylum.  He claimed that  he
    was in danger from the authorities in Sri Lanka and in danger of  being
    forced to join the LTTE.  His father had been forced to work for  them,
    suffered mistreatment and was detained for three  days  in  1989.   His
    brother was also detained by the authorities but escaped and  has  been
    granted asylum in the UK.  The appellant himself worked  for  the  LTTE
    while he was at school.  The local pro Tamil group  in  his  area  knew
    about his activities as did the army.  He was detained in  a  round  up
    and beaten up but released after a few hours after the intercession  of
    a local official.  His father arranged for an agent to take him to  the
    UK.

 3. His application was refused in 2007 but, because the appellant  was  an
    unaccompanied minor, he was granted a  short  period  of  discretionary
    leave.

 4. The appellant claimed that he then made a fresh application but this is
    denied by the respondent.  He is making a complaint against his  former
    solicitors.  His new solicitors made further  submissions  in  December
    2015 which resulted in the  refusal  decision  before  the  Immigration
    Judge.

 5. The appellant said that he would be at risk on account of his sur place
    activities in the UK.

 6. He claims to be a member of the Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam
    (TGTE) but did not have a membership card.   He  is  a  member  of  the
    British Tamil Forum, but again has no  membership  card.   He  attended
    meetings and regularly attended the Great Heroes Day event which  takes
    place in November in London every year.  Photographs of him are on  the
    internet and on the National Liberal Party website.

 7. The appellant says  that  he  launched  a  website  called  [TM]  which
    promoted Eelam news and Eelam cinema news and  had  also  edited  songs
    relating to the LTTE which had featured in a  video  released  on  27th
    November 2015 on YouTube to mark Heroes Remembrance Day.

 8. On 20th June 2014 he helped his friends  at  the  Saathanathamizha  (an
    awards ceremony) by acting as cameraman.  He also  collected  an  award
    for best director on behalf of his friend at the ceremony.

 9. He did the photography at a function marking the  release  of  Koottaly
    and after the function was informed that the director of the  film  had
    been arrested in India.

10. Finally he had helped to create a  music  video  for  the  Tamil  Eelam
    Freedom Fighters filmed in Epping Forest on 25th November 2014.

11. The judge recorded the respondent's concerns about the  application  as
    set out in the Reasons for Refusal Letter, the documentary evidence and
    oral evidence which he had  considered,  the  applicable  law  and,  at
    paragraph 95 of the determination  started  the  consideration  of  his
    findings.

12. He concluded that there was not sufficiently clear  evidence  in  order
    for him  to  find  that  further  submissions  had  been  made  to  the
    respondent after the refusal in 2007 and he did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had remained in the UK in the mistaken belief that he had  an
    outstanding application.

13. So far as the original claim was concerned, he noted  that  there  were
    discrepancies between the appellant's oral evidence and the accounts of
    having been interrogated as set out in his SEF.  He  properly  reminded
    himself that the appellant was  a  minor  when  it  was  completed  but
    nevertheless recorded that the appellant confirmed  that  he  had  gone
    through the written record of his screening interview and his SEF  with
    his present representatives and they were accurate.  The judge set  out
    in some detail the discrepancies in the appellant's account,  not  only
    in relation to his own detention but also in relation to his father and
    concluded that the appellant had left Sri Lanka because his father  had
    a generalised concern about the situation there but  not  that  he  had
    ever suffered persecution in Sri Lanka or that there was a real risk of
    such treatment being repeated.  It may  have  been  that  he  had  been
    detained and questioned during the course of a  routine  round  up  but
    nothing more.

14. The judge then considered the sur place activities.  He did not believe
    that the appellant had failed to mention them before because he did not
    think that they were relevant.  He noted that he had failed to  produce
    photographs which he claimed were on the NLP website  and  did  believe
    that the appellant had established, to the lower standard, that he  was
    a member either of the BTF or the TGTE.

15. It was accepted that the appellant was associated with the  Thamilithal
    website but there was no mention of his name on it  and  acting  as  an
    uncredited cameraman on 20th June 2014 could not possibly bring him  to
    the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities.

16. So far as the involvement in the pro-LTTE film was concerned, again  he
    was uncredited.  He did collect the award on behalf of the director but
    his appearance was brief and he was referred to by his nickname and not
    his real name.  The judge did not accept that the Sri Lankan government
    spies would have attended an arts event of this sort.

17. In relation to the  YouTube  clip,  there  was  a  brief  shot  of  the
    appellant holding a poster for the film but there  was  no  independent
    evidence that Kootali was in fact a pro-LTTE film.  Even if it was, his
    brief appearance in the video clip would not be sufficient to bring him
    to the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities.

18. Finally, the judge said  that  he  watched  the  pro-LTTE  music  video
    released on Heroes Day but there was no mention of the appellant on the
    credits.  He  did  briefly  appear  in  the  film  but  was  completely
    unrecognisable and his face was obscured for most of the time he was on
    screen.  There was no evidence that his role was as significant  as  he
    claimed.   His  involvement  could  be  consistent   with   him   being
    politically active but equally consistent with having been taken  after
    taking part as an extra to make up the numbers.

19. The judge concluded

         "147.     Looking  at  the  evidence  as  a  whole  including   the
             background evidence and the photograph the appellant provided,
             I do not find that he has shown that he has  been  politically
             active for the Tamil separatist cause whilst in the UK.  I  do
             not find that he has shown he has any commitment to that cause
             except where it overlaps with his social life and his wish  to
             be involved in artistic media activities.  I do not find  that
             there is  any  risk  that  he  will  be  considered  to  be  a
             journalist or that anything he has done in the UK  would  lead
             the authorities in Sri Lanka to conclude that he was a  threat
             to the unity of the Sri Lankan state or involved in trying  to
             reignite the civil war.

         148. Also for the reasons given  above  I  do  not  find  that  the
             appellant has shown that he or his family would have a profile
             that would bring the appellant to the adverse attention of the
             Sri Lankan authorities.  Even if, before he left Sri Lanka, he
             had been mistreated by the Sri Lankan authorities  on  one  or
             more occasions during routine  round  ups  and  questioning  I
             still would not find there was any risk that what had happened
             to him in past will be repeated.  The background evidence  and
             the guidance in  GJ  show  the  situation  in  Sri  Lanka  has
             completed changed since the defeat of the LTTE.

         149. The appellant would be a young man returning  from  a  country
             where  there  is  anti-government  Tamil  diaspora   activity.
             However this does not itself put him at risk.  His parents and
             his sister live safely in Sri Lanka, so he  has  somewhere  to
             return to."

20. The judge then considered the appellant's claim with respect to Article
    8 and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The Grounds of Application

21. The grounds concentrate on the delay between the hearing of the  appeal
    and its promulgation.  The judge apologised for the five months'  delay
    at the outset, because  of  his  ill-health,  but  credibility  was  an
    important issue.  The oral evidence was summarised over  47  paragraphs
    in  the  determination.   No  account  was  taken  of  the  appellant's
    demeanour and the judge's recollection was likely to have  been  dulled
    over the many months taken to write the  determination  which  rendered
    his decision on credibility unsafe.

22. The grounds cite a number of reported decisions dealing with delay,  in
    particular Arusha & Demushi (deprivation of citizenship-delay)  Albania
    [2012] UKUT 80 which held that,  to  establish  that  a  delay  in  the
    promulgation of a decision has led to an error of law,  it  has  to  be
    shown that the decision was not safe  and  therefore  unlawful.   There
    must be a nexus between the delay  and  the  safety  of  the  decision.
    Excessive delay may require a  very  careful  perusal  of  the  judge's
    findings of fact and of his reasons for his  conclusions  in  order  to
    ensure that the delay has not caused injustice to the losing party.

23. The grounds also argue that the  judge  had  not  applied  the  correct
    standard of proof to his findings and had failed to exercise caution in
    rejecting as incredible an account  by  an  anxious  and  inexperienced
    asylum seeker.  He had failed to give adequate reasons for  finding  it
    not credible  that  the  EDPD  and  Sri  Lankan  army  knew  about  the
    appellant's LTTE activities but nevertheless  released  him  after  his
    alleged detention. He had also failed to reach a clear and  unambiguous
    finding in relation to the historic claim by stating that "it  may  be"
    that the appellant was detained and questioned in a routine round up.

24. Equally he had failed to reach clear findings regarding the appellant's
    political activities in the UK.  There was  insufficient  reference  to
    the background evidence relied on and  an  inadequate  account  of  the
    relevant guidance in GJ v SSHD (post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG
    [2013] UKUT 319.

25. Parts of the appellant's  claim,  such  as  his  association  with  the
    Thamilithal  website  were  accepted  but  there  was   an   inadequate
    assessment of the risk.  The judge had failed to  consider  whether  he
    would be perceived by the government of Sri Lanka to have commitment to
    the Tamil separatist cause.

26. Finally the judge had erred in his consideration of Article 8  and  the
    appellant's family life with his brother in the UK.  There had  been  a
    lengthy delay in failing to remove him since 2007 which  had  not  been
    properly considered in the assessment of proportionality of removal.

27. Permission to appeal was initially refused but granted on reapplication
    by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 10th July 2017.

Submissions

28. Ms Heybroek relied on her grounds.  The rule of thumb was that a  three
    month delay would render a decision unsafe and in this case  the  delay
    was some five months.  The judge had dismissed the appeal  entirely  on
    the basis of his credibility findings and his memory would have  faded.
    He could not possibly have remembered what  the  appellant's  demeanour
    was like when he was giving his evidence.

29. The judge had failed to properly exercise caution  when  rejecting  the
    appellant's evidence as not credible and had not properly anchored  his
    findings to the country guidance case of  GJ  and  the  risk  posed  on
    return to journalists and those involved in the media.  On the accepted
    facts of this case the  appellant  had  significant  involvement  in  a
    number of different enterprises.

30. Mr Melvin defended the determination and submitted that  there  was  no
    evidence at all that the delay had affected it.  All  relevant  matters
    were properly considered and the judge had reached  decisions  open  to
    him,  namely  that  the  appellant's  involvement  with   the   various
    organisations was peripheral and he would be  of  no  interest  to  the
    authorities on return.

Findings and Conclusions

31. The judge appears to have had a  period  of  ill-health  following  the
    hearing of the appeal, which resulted in a delay of  some  five  months
    before it was promulgated.

32. It is quite apparent however that the judge took a very careful note of
    the proceedings.  There is a typed transcript on the  file  which  sets
    out the questions and answers given  and  submissions  made.   Had  the
    judge based his findings on the  witness's  demeanor,  as  Ms  Heybrook
    suggested he should, that  would  have  itself  rendered  the  decision
    vulnerable to appeal. Moreover, the determination itself is a model  of
    clarity and a thorough analysis of all of the relevant issues.

33. First,  it  was  entirely  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  no
    representations were made following the  initial  refusal  because  the
    respondent had no record of any such application.

34. Second, the judge was plainly aware of the  caution  which  had  to  be
    exercised when dealing  with  the  SEF  and  the  screening  interview,
    because the appellant was  a  minor  at  that  time,  but  he  properly
    recorded that the appellant confirmed that the written  record  of  the
    interview and SEF was  accurate  with  his  representatives.   He  then
    undertook a detailed analysis of the evidence given at  that  time  and
    outlined  a  number  of  important  discrepancies,  relating   to   the
    detention, and whether, for example, the appellant had been present  at
    the murder of a teacher.

35. The judge was entitled to  find  the  appellant's  evidence  about  the
    trigger event which caused him to have to leave Sri Lanka confused  and
    contradictory, on the one hand because of fear of the LTTE wanting  him
    to join them and on the other because his family wanted him to complete
    his O levels.  The judge was not bound to make an  unambiguous  finding
    in relation to the round ups because whether he was detained in a round
    up or not is not determinative of whether he would be at real  risk  on
    return now.

36. The judge analysed the appellant's sur place activities in  the  UK  in
    meticulous  detail.   He  did  accept  that  the  appellant  had   some
    involvement in a number of different projects, and considered  each  in
    turn, and whether the level of his involvement would put him  at  risk.
    He was entitled to conclude that it would not.

37. The country guidance case of GJ sets out  a  number  of  categories  of
    persons at real risk of persecution or serious harm on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.  They include individuals who were or who where perceived to  be
    a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka because they were  or  perceived
    to be have a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil
    separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal of  hostilities  within
    Sri Lanka.

38. The judge referred to the guidance in GJ and it is quite apparent  that
    he had it in mind when considering risk on return.  At paragraph 147 he
    concluded in terms that  there would not be any risk that the appellant
    would be considered to be a journalist or a  threat  to  Sri  Lanka,  a
    clear reference to the headnote in paragraph 7 of GJ.

39. No submissions were made in relation to Article 8 and whilst the  judge
    found that the appellant was financially  dependent  upon  his  brother
    that financial dependency would not be disrupted if he was to return to
    Sri Lanka.  There was simply no basis upon which  the  appellant  could
    properly succeed on Article 8 grounds.

40. Clearly the main criticism of  this  determination  was  its  delay  in
    promulgation, albeit that it was no fault of the  judge.   However,  by
    producing such a clear and well reasoned decision the judge has ensured
    that his conclusions are safe and therefore there is no  nexus  between
    the delay and the sustainability of the decision.

Notice of Decision

The Immigration Judge did  not  err  in  law.   His  decision  stands.   The
appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed[pic]                             Date 12 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


