
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02841/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30th January 2018                 |On 6th April 2018                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    MR LS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Weatherall, Counsel, instructed by Legal
Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. Petersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. The appellant made a claim for protection with  his  wife  and  two
         children as dependants. The claim was he is from Kabul, Afghanistan
         and to return him there would  place  him  at  risk.  The  risk  of
         persecution relates to his Sikh religion.

      2. The appellant lived in Kabul and ran a clothing shop. He claimed  a
         stone with a message attached was thrown at his house  telling  him
         to change his religion. He was subsequently threatened  in  person.
         He reported this to the police but believed  they  were  taking  no
         action. Finally, he was kidnapped by men he believed were  Taliban.
         They said that if he did not convert to Islam he would  be  killed.
         He managed to escape. The respondent noted the  men  spoke  Punjabi
         which was not consistent with the country information. His  account
         of being able to escape was considered implausible.

      3. It was accepted he is an Afghan Sikh but his claim of past problems
         with the Taliban  was  not.  Reference  was  made  to  the  country
         guidance decision of TG  and  others  Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted  CG
         [2015] UKUT 595 with the conclusion that mistreatment of Sikhs  did
         not  reach  the  threshold  of  persecution.  The  current  country
         situation would not breach article  15  (c)  of  the  Qualification
         Directive. Taking his claim at  its  highest  the  respondent  felt
         there would be sufficiency of protection and he had the  option  of
         relocating, for instance, to Jalalabad.

    The First tier Tribunal

      4. His appeal was heard before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hands
         at North Shields on 21 April 2017. In a decision promulgated  on  8
         May 2017 it was dismissed.

      5. The judge did not find the appellant credible. The judge found  his
         account to be generally internally consistent but not plausible and
         referred to the fact that he had been able to continue a day-by-day
         existence for many years. The judge  referred  to  the  appellant's
         account of his life and that  of  his  family  in  Afghanistan  and
         concluded he had not  provided  sufficient  evidence  to  establish
         discrimination or harassment, never  mind  persecution.  The  judge
         concluded that he could return to Kabul  and  that  a  partner  had
         continued to run the business in his  absence  and  it  remained  a
         source of income for him. Given the claim he had  signed  his  home
         over to the agent the judge concluded that with the income from his
         business he could rent accommodation. In the alternative, if he had
         not truly signed over his home then it will be waiting for  him  on
         return. The judge found he only needed temporary support  from  the
         Gurdwara on return  and  his  children  would  be  able  to  access
         education. The judge did accept he could not relocate to Jalalabad.

    Permission to appeal

      6. The grounds contend that the decision does not reflect the  country
         guidance caselaw or the background information. Reference was  made
         to an early warning system he had described whereby if the  Taleban
         approached his business premises other shopkeepers  would  give  an
         indication and he would shut up shop. It also claimed his  children
         did not go to school and they only went to their place  of  worship
         infrequently because of the risk. It was argued  that  the  judge's
         findings were against the weight of the evidence.

      7. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  of  the  grounds
         advanced. In a rule 24 response the  respondent  submits  that  the
         judge was entitled to find the appellant was not credible  and  had
         given adequate reasons at paragraph 38 and 39  and  had  considered
         the country information in arriving  at  the  conclusion  that  the
         appellant and his family could return.

    The Upper Tribunal

      8. At hearing, Ms Weatherall relied upon the  leave  application.  She
         also argued that the judge did not  adequately  consider  the  best
         interests of the children. In response, Ms.  Petersen  relied  upon
         the rule 24 response. She pointed out  that  the  grounds  did  not
         indicate any real challenge to the  negative  credibility  findings
         made. The judge had referred to the availability of private schools
         for the children. She submitted the grounds amounted  to  simply  a
         disagreement with the outcome.

    Consideration

      9. The judge did not find the appellant credible and  the  grounds  do
         not specifically challenge this conclusion. However, a disagreement
         can be inferred as well as an argument based on past events that he
         would face persecution if returned. There is reference to the early
         warning system in place in the market and the claim that the family
         did not leave the house often or go to the Gurdwara out of fear.  A
         separate argument was that the judge did  not  adequately  consider
         the best interests of his children aged nearly 11 and 7.

     10. At para 27 the judge sets out a summary of the country  information
         presented. This refers to the declining Sikh population because  of
         how  they  were  treated.  Their  reduced  presence  leaves   those
         remaining even more vulnerable. There was mention of  institutional
         discrimination. Reference was also made  to  the  country  guidance
         decision of AK (Article 15 (c) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 and
         the 1.

     11. The judge then refers to the appellant's ability to  go  about  his
         work and daily living in the past. The judge then finds the account
         of his being kidnapped and escaping implausible. I find  the  judge
         placed undue weight on the fact the appellant had until then  lived
         his whole life in Kabul; was able to run a business there  and  had
         Muslim friends and was able to go about on a day-by-day  basis.  In
         particular, the judge questioned his ability to loosen  his  bonds;
         the guard leaving the door unlocked and then being able to obtain a
         lift in a car to get away.

     12. An assessment of credibility is difficult and fraught with  dangers
         for a judge. KB &  AH  (credibility-structured  approach)  Pakistan
         [2017] UKUT 00491 (IAC) set out some  of  the  problems  which  can
         arise. At para 28 of the decision the Upper Tribunal states:

             "... in HK v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]
             EWCA Civ 1037 case at [28]-[30] Neuberger LJ stated:

                  "28. Further, in many asylum cases, some,  even  most,  of
                  the appellant's story may  seem  inherently  unlikely  but
                  that does not mean that it is untrue. The  ingredients  of
                  the story, and the story as a whole, have to be considered
                  against the available country evidence and reliable expert
                  evidence, and other familiar factors, such as  consistency
                  with what the appellant has said before,  and  with  other
                  factual evidence (where there is any).

                  29. Inherent probability, which may  be  helpful  in  many
                  domestic  cases,  can  be  a  dangerous,  even  a   wholly
                  inappropriate, factor to rely on  in  some  asylum  cases.
                  Much of the evidence will be referable to  societies  with
                  customs and circumstances which are  very  different  from
                  those of which the members of  the  fact-finding  tribunal
                  have any (even  second-hand)  experience.  Indeed,  it  is
                  likely that the country which an  asylum-seeker  has  left
                  will  be  suffering  from  the  sort   of   problems   and
                  dislocations  with  which  the  overwhelming  majority  of
                  residents of this country will be wholly  unfamiliar.  The
                  point is well made in Hathaway on Law  of  Refugee  Status
                  (1991) at page 81:

                  'In  assessing  the  general  human  rights   information,
                  decision-makers must  constantly  be  on  guard  to  avoid
                  implicitly recharacterizing the nature of the  risk  based
                  on their own perceptions of reasonability."

                  30. Inherent improbability in the context of asylum  cases
                  was discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in  Awala  -v-
                  Secretary of State [2005] CSOH 73.  At  paragraph  22,  he
                  pointed  out  that  it  was  "not  proper  to  reject   an
                  applicant's account merely on the basis  that  it  is  not
                  credible or not plausible.  To  say  that  an  applicant's
                  account  is  not  credible  is  to  state  a   conclusion"
                  (emphasis added). At paragraph 24, he said that  rejection
                  of a story on grounds of implausibility must be  done  "on
                  reasonably drawn inferences and not simply  on  conjecture
                  or speculation". He went on to emphasise, as did  Pill  LJ
                  in Ghaisari, the entitlement of the  fact-finder  to  rely
                  "on his common sense and his ability, as a  practical  and
                  informed person, to identify what is or is not plausible".
                  However, he accepted  that  "there  will  be  cases  where
                  actions   which   may   appear   implausible   if   judged
                  by...Scottish   standards,   might   be   plausible   when
                  considered within the context of  the  applicant's  social
                  and cultural background"."

     13. The Upper Tribunal said plausibility is not a  concept  with  clear
         edges. Not  only  may  there  be  degrees  of  implausibility,  but
         sometimes an aspect of an account that may be  implausible  in  one
         respect may be plausible in  another.  The  country  evidence  does
         confirm the difficulties a Sikh in Kabul would face.

     14. At paragraph 31(f) the judge sets out why the account of kidnapping
         was considered implausible. The judge felt  it  was  improbable  he
         would not have been secured more carefully or that the guard  would
         be absent or the door unlocked. His claim of being able to then get
         a lift in a car was seen as a  further  implausibility.  The  judge
         also in the preceding paragraph placed weighed upon  the  appellant
         in oral evidence saying he was going to work when he was  kidnapped
         whereas in his statement and at interview he said it was whilst  he
         was out  shopping  before  going  to  work.  These  do  not  appear
         particularly strong points.

     15. Whilst acknowledging the difficult  task  faced  by  the  judge  in
         deciding the truth of the  claim  I  am  influenced  by  the  known
         difficult  situation  of  Sikhs  in  Kabul.   The   assessment   of
         credibility is specific to the case presented and no hard and  fast
         rules apply. One relevant consideration is the country information.
         It is clear that Sikhs have been targeted. Traditionally they  have
         been successful business people which can invoke envy in others. In
         Kabul they are particularly vulnerable. Intolerant bodies  such  as
         the Taleban would naturally target them. It does  not  follow  that
         the fact the appellant lived in  Kabul  all  his  life  and  had  a
         business that he was free from danger or that his failure to  leave
         earlier is inconsistent with his claim.

     16. The judge also refers to the  fact  the  appellant  did  not  claim
         protection in  Pakistan  or  in  other  countries  that  he  passed
         through. These are relevant factors in assessing credibility but in
         themselves are  not  determinative.  The  judge  has  accepted  the
         appellant was generally consistent in his account but rejected  his
         claim on plausibility grounds. The plausibility will be  inevitably
         tied up with what is known about events in the country.

     17. TG and others Afghan Sikhs persecuted CG [2015] UKUT  595  referred
         to relevant considerations in assessing the risk at section iii  of
         the head note. This  included  consideration  of  the  individual's
         financial circumstances and ability to obtain basic  accommodation.
         This was in the context that Muslims  were  generally  unlikely  to
         employ a Sikh. A Sikh  may  face  difficulties  including  threats,
         extortion,  and  acts  of  violence  in  pursuing  their  remaining
         traditional pursuit, that of a shopkeeper / trader. The traditional
         source of support for such individuals, the Gurdwara is  much  less
         able to provide adequate support. Regard was to be had to the level
         of religious devotion and the practical accessibility to places  of
         religious worship in light of declining numbers  and  the  evidence
         that some have been subjected to harm and threats whilst  accessing
         the  Gurdwara.  It  was  also  necessary  to  consider  access   to
         appropriate education  for  children  in  light  of  discrimination
         against Sikh and  Hindu  children  and  the  shortage  of  adequate
         education facilities for them.

     18. The judge has considered these factors at paragraph 34 onwards  but
         has not set them out in any great detail. The judge also appears to
         be assuming at paragraph  33  that  the  appellant's  partner  will
         continue with the business in his absence and provide the appellant
         with an income.

     19. I also find the judge has only given limited consideration  to  the
         situation of the appellant's children. At paragraph  35  the  judge
         refers to insufficient evidence to show  the  appellant  could  not
         send his children to school  in  Kabul.  However,  the  appellant's
         account was they stayed at  home  because  of  the  danger  in  the
         country and the family's wish to keep a low profile.

    Conclusion

     20.  Having  looked  at  the  decision  as  a  whole  and  the  country
         information about the treatment of Sikhs in Kabul I find the  judge
         materially erred for the reasons given in rejecting the appellant's
         claim  on  all  grounds.  In  particular,  I  have  concerns  about
         rejecting the claim on  the  grounds  of  plausibility.  The  judge
         appears to have placed too much weight upon the fact the  appellant
         was able to live in Kabul all his life until he left. I  also  find
         there has been insufficient consideration of the best interests  of
         his children. Finally, I am conscious that a new  country  guidance
         decision is pending which will clarify the risks  for  the  general
         populace in terms of the 15 (c) risk in Kabul and  the  feasibility
         of the appellant's return. The assessment of the various  risks  is
         very much dependent upon the  country  information  and  this  will
         provide up-to-date guidance.

    Decision.

    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands dismissing  the  appeal
    on all grounds materially errs in law and cannot  stand.  I  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing before any
    judge except First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands.


F J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge            19th March 2018

