
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02515/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 March 2019                     |On 29 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                    [N S]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms F Allen of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr S Jones Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant born on January 1958 citizen of Egypt appealed against  the
   decision of the Secretary of State dated 9  February  2018  refusing  her
   application for asylum and humanitarian protection United Kingdom.




2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall dismissed the appellant's appeal  in  a
   decision promulgated on 24 January 2019. However, Judge  Randall  allowed
   the appellant son's appeal and granted him asylum in the  United  Kingdom
   based on his claim that he is an  atheist  and  would  be  persecuted  in
   Egypt.



3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant
   Hutchinson in a decision dated 15  February  2019  finding  that  it  was
   arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law by finding  that
   the summons was unrelated to atheism without taking into account that the
   background country guidance evidence which shows a lack  of  independence
   of the judiciary in Egypt and that fact there was a charge  against  both
   appellants intended to target the first appellant also as a result of our
   atheism. By failing to consider adequately consider the appellant's claim
   fear of persecution when considering  all  the  facts  and  circumstances
   including the fact that the first appellant has defended her son  against
   also called him an infidel so that people  started  to  threaten  her  as
   well. The Judge accepted that the first appellant was an atheist and that
   she said that she would live openly as one without any  consideration  of
   the risk to the appellant in accordance with HJ Iran.




4. The Judge failed to  take  into  consideration  that  the  appellant  has
   renounced the Islamic faith by failing to take into account in  terms  of
   Article 8 that the first appellant would be returning as a lone female to
   a country, where she would also have to endure the  social  stigma  of  a
   broken marriage having accepted that she was in an abusive marriage.  The
   appellant has no home to return to in Egypt or family from whom she could
   seek support. The appellant also serves as a protective  factor  for  her
   son, the second appellant, who is suffering from PTSD gives physical  and
   emotional assistance to her sister, [S].




5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  and  said
   even though he accepts that she is an atheist she will not be at risk  of
   persecution in Egypt but that her son  who  is  in  atheist  and  who  is
   vulnerable will be  at  risk.   Therefore,  the  Judge  who  granted  the
   appellant's son asylum  based  on  his  atheism,  refused  to  grant  the
   appellant asylum on account of her  atheism.  Having  read  the  decision
   which  is  extremely  long  with  great  care  I  do  not  see  a  proper
   decipherable reason for the Judge to find that the appellant's son  would
   be at risk, but the  appellant  would  not  even  though  they  are  both
   atheists and known to be such in Egypt.




6. The Judge considered the background evidence in respect  of  atheist  and
   stated that the there is a risk to some atheist in  Egypt  and  that  the
   risks have been increased recently but the risk to an  individual  person
   will depend on his  or  her  individual  circumstances.  The  Judge  also
   accepted that some circumstances, in a country such as Egypt, the  simple
   withdrawing from religious activity is capable  of  being  identified  as
   atheistic and may stimulate enquiries especially as the men in Egypt tend
   to worship, more publicly. That does not mean that  women  would  not  be
   identifies as withdrawing from their  religion  and  not  complying  with
   Islamic religious practices. The appellant's evidence was  that  she  was
   identified as an atheist by fellow lawyers in Egypt.




7. The judge did  not  properly  consider  that  the  appellant  had  always
   protected her son from allegations of atheism in Egypt which also put her
   at risk and she also became a target. The  Judge  found  that  the  first
   attack on the appellant was linked to his beliefs in atheism but made  no
   finding that the appellant who lived, in the same house given that it was
   alleged to be an atheist home. The evidence was that both  the  appellant
   and her son had received threats and her son's atheism was known by  some
   in the locality of the family home and therefore there was  a  reasonable
   likelihood that the appellant would also be targeted. The  Judge  is  not
   adequately explained why the appellant's claim was not accepted given his
   findings in favour of the appellant.




8.  The  Judge  also  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  in   an   abusive
   relationship  that  she  would  be  returning  to  Egypt   without   male
   protection. The Judge also did not consider that the appellant  would  be
   returning to Egypt without her son who it was accepted was known to be an
   atheist and this could put her at risk.




9. In respect of paragraph 276 ADE to  Judge  found  that  even  though  the
   appellant's marriage broke down and her claim of  being  an  atheist  and
   that these factors  are  not  sufficient  to  establish  the  balance  of
   probabilities that there are such  very  significant  obstacles  for  her
   return to Egypt. I find that the Judge was not entitled to come  to  this
   conclusion on the evidence in the appeal there is  a  perversity  in  his
   findings.




10. I find that this is a material error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal and like the permission Judge I find that  the  judge
   has not taken into account all the evidence which was presented on behalf
   of the appellant against the background evidence about how  atheists  are
   treated in Egypt on the lower standard of proof.




11. The Judge did not consider that the appellant was  the  main  carer  for
   her son who the Judge found was a vulnerable person. The medical evidence
   was that the appellant's son his still vulnerable and requires support of
   his mother.  The Judge failed to consider that  the  appellant's  sisters
   are in the United Kingdom and the appellant will not have the support  of
   her family on return to Egypt. The Judge did not consider that her  son's
   vulnerability requires that mother and son remain together. The  evidence
   was that the appellant's aunt [S] needs carers herself and  will  not  be
   able to look after the appellant's son without the appellant.




12. Mother and son came to the United Kingdom together escaping  persecution
   in Egypt because they are atheist. I find that the Judge materially erred
   in law in granting protection to the  appellant's  son  and  not  to  the
   appellant given that essentially both of them relied on the same evidence
   to prove persecution.




13. Given my remarks above, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and remake the decision and  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  in
   respect of her asylum claim.


DECISON

The appellant's appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention.


Signed by

Ms S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                           Dated this 26th day of March 2019


