
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02596/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 November 2018                            |On 28 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                              MR SAIFULLAH [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McKenzie of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant whose date of birth is 8 August 1985 and  a  national  of
    Afghanistan appealed against a decision of the respondent refusing  his
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.


 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi dismissed the appeal in a decision dated
    9 August 2018. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Blundell in a decision dated 7 September 2018. He found  that  it
    is arguable that the Judge failed  to  consider  relevant  material  in
    concluding that in the final sentence of paragraph 58 that there is  no
    evidence to suggest that  interpreters  for  international  forces  are
    perceived by the Taliban to be spies. The CPI upon which  reliance  was
    placed  in the grounds arguably supported the contrary view, as did the
    report of Mr Foxley a British Army officer. Arguably, as  contended  in
    the grounds of appeal, interpreters are in  a  special  category  which
    falls outside the scope within the guidance AS  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 118 (IAC).


 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in an extensive decision found  that  the
    appellant did not have  a  high  profile  unlike  teachers  and  senior
    members of the government who would be likely to come to the  attention
    of the Taliban but having worked with  the  international  forces.  The
    Judge found that the Taliban  did  not  have  sufficient  resources  to
    target low-level individuals who  have  worked  for  the  international
    forces in Kabul, as the Taliban tended not  to  follow  those  who  had
    ceased working for the security services. The Judge found that  in  the
    case of HMV it was found that an interpreter who  had  worked  for  the
    international forces did not have a high profile and was unlikely to be
    at risk in Kabul. The Judge found the appellant was  like  a  low-level
    collaborator and the Taliban would not be interested in  devoting  part
    of its limited resources to track down the appellant in Kabul in  order
    to assassinate him. The Judge  stated  that  taking  into  account  the
    objective evidence, the decided case law and the  appellant's  evidence
    that he received a visit from the Taliban, that it  is  not  reasonably
    likely that the appellant would have attracted  the  attention  of  the
    Taliban or that they would view him as a spy as he  claims.  The  Judge
    found that the fact that the appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom
    for a period of time does not increase his risk. She said that there is
    no evidence that the appellant was a high level interpreter  and  there
    is no evidence that he has been perceived to be a spy  by  the  Taliban
    simply because he worked as an interpreter. The  Judge  concluded  that
    there is no evidence to suggest that interpreters are seen as such.


 4. The grounds of appeal state the issue in the  appeal  was  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk in his home area of Afghanistan  considering
    his work as an interpreter and/or based on the threats received by  the
    Taliban. The issue for the Judge to  determine  was  whether  he  could
    safely and  reasonably  relocate  to  Kabul  considering  the  evidence
    specially related to risk to  interpreters  and  the  guidance  in  AS.
    Afghanistan considering all the relevant factors including  his  mental
    health. The Judge accepted that the appellant was an  army  interpreter
    and she accepted his diagnosis of PTSD.  However,  the  Judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant had received  threats  from  the  Taliban  as
    claimed.  The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  relocate
    reasonably to his home area but found that he could relocate to Kabul.


 5. The Judge also did not make any findings on whether the appellant would
    face  very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  in  respect   of
    paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules. The case of AS  Afghanistan
    does not address the specific  position  of  interpreters  working  for
    foreign forces as it is not mentioned at all. It  also  does  not  make
    clear which of these categories of potential target interpreters  would
    generally fall into.


 6. The grounds of appeal refer to background evidence including  a  report
    from a former British officer in  Afghanistan  that  appellant's  claim
    that he would be at risk in Kabul as an interpreter for foreign  forces
    is well placed. The Judge found at paragraph 58 of  the  decision  that
    there was no evidence that the appellant was perceived to be a  spy  by
    the Taliban simply because he worked as an interpreter and further that
    there is no evidence that interpreters  are  considered  to  be  spies.
    These findings  of  the  Judge  are  unsustainable  because  there  was
    abundant evidence to demonstrate that interpreters  will  the  seen  as
    spies and were at real risk from the Taliban. The Judge the  failed  to
    take  relevant  background  evidence  into  account  in  reaching   his
    conclusion.


    Decision on whether there is an error of law


 7. I have considered the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  with
    great care to determine whether he fell into material  error.  I  agree
    with permission Judge Blundell that the Judge fell into material  error
    by making a bold statement that there was "no evidence" to suggest that
    interpreters for international forces are not perceived by the  Taliban
    to be spies. There was evidence before the Judge which  could  arguably
    point to the opposite view. The Judge  failed  to  appreciate  that  AS
    Afghanistan does not specifically  consider  the  category  into  which
    interpreters for international forces could fall and therefore all  the
    evidence should have been looked at in the round.  This  error  renders
    the decision unsafe.


 8. At the hearing it was agreed that if I was to find an error of law  the
    decision, the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so that all
    the evidence in the appeal  can  be  evaluated  within  the  background
    evidence as to whether the appellant can safely relocate to Kabul as  a
    former interpreter for the international forces.


 9. Therefore, I direct that the  appeal  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that the appeal be placed before any  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than Judge Obhi to be heard de Novo.

Notice of Decision

The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
No anonymity direction is made.


Signed  by                                              Dated  21st  day  of
    November 2018

A Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Ms S Chana

