
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02447/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Priory Courts, Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th April 2019                            |On 13th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     DJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi of Counsel, instructed by French & Company
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge S Aziz (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 3rd April 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Iraq born 13th January 1986.   She
    made an asylum and human rights claim in the UK which  was  refused  on
    5th February 2018.  The appeal was heard by the FtT on 20th March  2018
    and dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    It was contended, in summary,  that  the  judge  had  erred  by  making
    contradictory findings of fact in relation to AKD, who it  was  claimed
    was the  General  Director  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kurdistan.   At
    paragraph 50(iv) the judge accepted this, but at paragraph 59  did  not
    accept this.

 4. The Respondent's refusal decision had not  raised  an  issue  regarding
    evidence of the arrest of AKD which was an issue raised for  the  first
    time in cross-examination at the hearing.  The Appellant had  explained
    to the  judge  that  she  had  given  evidence  of  the  arrest  to  an
    interpreter who worked for her solicitors and  could  not  explain  why
    this evidence had not been provided at the hearing.  The judge did  not
    accept this.  Two days after the  hearing  the  Appellant's  solicitors
    faxed evidence of the arrest to the  FtT,  requesting  that  the  judge
    reconvene  the  hearing  to  consider  this  evidence  as  it  was   of
    significance, and the issue had been raised for the first time  at  the
    hearing.

 5. It was submitted that the judge had erred by  making  no  reference  to
    this evidence or the request to reconvene the hearing.

 6. It was further contended that the judge had erred  in  considering  the
    medical condition of  the  Appellant's  daughter,  and  had  failed  to
    adequately consider her best interests.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    judge had "carried out a peripheral assessment focusing on  Article  3,
    and not directing himself appropriately" to the welfare of the child.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  in  the
    following terms;

         1.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  S  Aziz)   dismissed   the
             Appellant's  appeal  against  a   decision   to   refuse   her
             international protection, humanitarian  protection  and  human
             rights claims.  The judge rejected her account to be  at  risk
             on return to the IKR (Iraq).

         2.   It is  arguable  that  the  judge  made  inconsistent  factual
             findings at paras 50(iv) and 59 as to the role of 'AKD' in the
             Kurdistan Central  Bank.   That,  together  with  the  judge's
             reliance upon the absence  of  documentation  which  was  only
             raised in cross-examination, lead me to conclude  that  it  is
             arguable that the decision may be legally flawed.

         3.   I see less merit in the other grounds, but I would not exclude
             consideration of them.  Permission is granted generally on the
             grounds.

 8. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.



My Consideration and Conclusions

 9. At the oral hearing Mr Mills conceded that  the  judge  had  materially
    erred in law by  making  an  inconsistent  factual  finding  which  was
    relevant to credibility, and failing to  consider  evidence  which  had
    been submitted after the hearing, but which related to an issue  raised
    for the first time at the hearing.  Mr  Mills  helpfully  submitted  SD
    (treatment of post-hearing evidence) Russia [2008] UKAIT 00037.

10. In view of the concession made on behalf of the Respondent Mr Azmi  did
    not seek to address me as to error  of  law,  but  submitted  that  the
    appropriate course of action would be to set aside the decision of  the
    FtT, and remit the appeal back to the FtT to be heard  afresh  with  no
    findings preserved.

11. I found the concession made by Mr Mills to be rightly made.  There  are
    inconsistent findings made as to the role of AKD when paragraph  50(iv)
    is compared with paragraph 59.  This is material as the role of AKD  is
    central to the Appellant's claim to be at risk if returned to Iraq.

12. It is common ground between the parties that the issue of the arrest of
    AKD was raised in cross-examination, and therefore the Appellant should
    have been given an opportunity to adduce evidence on that  issue  which
    had not been previously raised.

13. The Tribunal file confirms that the  Appellant's  solicitors  submitted
    documentary evidence on 22nd  March  2018,  with  a  request  that  the
    hearing be reconvened.  It is not clear that this request  was  brought
    to the attention of the judge.  The decision was not promulgated  until
    3rd April 2018, and therefore the further evidence and the  request  to
    reconvene should have  been  brought  to  the  judge's  attention,  and
    addressed in the FtT decision.  This was not done,  and  amounts  to  a
    material error of law.

14. Therefore the decision of the FtT is unsafe and must be set  aside.   I
    accept the submission that the appropriate course of action is to remit
    this appeal back to the FtT to  be  heard  afresh.   In  reaching  that
    conclusion  I  have  considered   the   Senior   President's   Practice
    Statements,  in  particular  paragraph  7.2,  and  find  that   it   is
    appropriate to remit the appeal back to the FtT because there  will  be
    extensive judicial fact-finding required.

15. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Aziz.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 30th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The issue of any fee award will need to be  considered
by the FtT.


Signed                              Date 30th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

