
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02772/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 October 2018                         |On 08 November 2018           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     DM
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Khan, instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devlin promulgated 4.5.18, dismissing on all grounds his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 9.2.18, to
    refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Farrell  refused  permission  on  31.5.18.
    However, when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission on 16.7.18.



Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below, I found such error of law in the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require  the  decision
    to be set aside and remade by allowing the appeal.

 4. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Finch found  it  arguable  that
    when considering  individual  challenges  to  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account the standard of proof applied was one in excess  of
    that appropriate in asylum appeals. It  was  also  considered  arguable
    that although the appellant was  aware  that  the  respondent  did  not
    accept that he was a national of Afghanistan, it was not clear that  it
    was put to the appellant that even if he was a national of  Afghanistan
    he had not been living there at the time at which he  claimed  to  have
    experienced persecution in the past. The suggestion that  he  had  been
    living elsewhere was largely based on his use of the Gregorian calendar
    and amounted to no more than speculation.

 5. It is not clear from the grant of permission whether Judge Finch  found
    the ground arguable but it is also suggested in the  grounds  that  the
    judge failed to adopt a holistic approach to the evidence and  consider
    the totality  of  the  evidence  before  reaching  a  decision  on  the
    appellant's credibility.

 6. The grounds succinctly argue that  the  judge  has  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof and should have  applied  the  civil  standard  of  a
    balance of probabilities when making a positive finding of fact against
    the appellant. It is also suggested that the judge failed  to  identify
    any positive evidence upon  which  to  base  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant had been absent from Jalalabad and probably  Afghanistan  for
    some time. It is also submitted that this finding is the central  point
    on which the judge relied to reject the appellant's core factual  claim
    of difficulties in Jalalabad and on which the risk of return  and  thus
    the  outcome  of  the  appeal  turns.  Finally,  it  is  submitted  the
    suggestion that the appellant had been  absent  from  Jalalabad  and/or
    Afghanistan for some time was never put to the appellant to enable  him
    to respond.

 7. Reliance is placed on K v SSHD (Afghanistan) [2002] UKAIT 04412,  where
    the Upper Tribunal held that an appellant must prove  his  case  to  be
    reasonably likely but a positive finding of fact against  him  must  be
    made on the balance of probabilities.

 8. The respondent's case was that the appellant  was  not  a  national  of
    Afghanistan. However, at [171] the judge  concluded  to  the  contrary,
    that he is a national of Afghanistan. Cogent reasoning is provided  for
    that conclusion, set out in detail between  [154]  and  [170].  It  was
    common ground that the appellant is of the Sikh  faith.  At  [174]  the
    judge noted that the respondent had conceded that if the appellant were
    found to be an Afghan national from  Jalalabad,  then  his  account  of
    events leading to his departure from Afghanistan must  be  regarded  as
    plausible. At [175] the judge accepted  that  the  appellant's  account
    cannot be said to be inherently plausible and on the contrary was "of a
    type that might well happen in that country."

 9. However, the judge went on to find at [179]  that  although  an  Afghan
    national, the appellant had been absent  form  Jalalabad  and  probably
    Afghanistan for some considerable time. Considering [176] to  [178]  it
    is clear that the primary reasoning for this  conclusion  lies  in  the
    appellant's preference at interview  for  Gregorian  calendar  and  his
    apparent difficulty in  recalling  the  Afghan  calendar.  However,  in
    reaching this conclusion the judge also provided further  reasoning  at
    [180] to [182] before concluding at[183], "Looking at everything in the
    round, I find that I cannot be satisfied, even to the lower standard of
    proof, that the appellant was present in Jalalabad  or  Afghanistan  at
    the time of the events which, he claims, led to his departure from that
    country."

10. It was on that basis that the judge went on from  [184]  to  reject  at
    [185] the entirety of the factual claim as to events in Afghanistan. It
    is obvious that the risk on  return  assessment  and  other  subsequent
    findings turned on this key finding.

11. Ms Khan also drew my attention to [203-204] of the decision  where  the
    judge stated that he may well have reached a different  conclusion  had
    the appellant produced one or other of the items of evidence the  judge
    found to be missing. Had that been addressed, the judge stated  "I  may
    well have been inclined to accept his account of  the  events  that  he
    claims, led to his departure from  Afghanistan.  Had  I  accepted  that
    account, I would have been obliged by the country guidance in  TG  that
    there would be an insufficiency of protection for him in Jalalabad, and
    I may well have concluded that it was unduly harsh to  expect  him  and
    his family to relocate elsewhere."

12. At no point does the judge indicate that the absent evidence  might  or
    would have resulted in a different account. No opportunity was  offered
    for the appellant's representatives to address the missing evidence  or
    apply for an adjournment to obtain it.

13. Summarising the position, the judge drew an "inference" at  [179]  that
    the appellant had been absent from Jalalabad and  probably  Afghanistan
    for some considerable time, and at [183] was "not  satisfied,  even  to
    the lower  standard  of  proof"  that  the  appellant  was  present  in
    Jalalabad or Afghanistan at the time of the events he  claims  to  have
    led to his departure from that country. I am satisfied that  the  judge
    was in error in applying the wrong standard of proof when  making  what
    amounts to a positive finding against the appellant.  It  is  debatable
    whether the reasoning,  relying  heavily  on  the  preference  for  the
    Gregorian calendar was adequate. However, even  if  the  reasoning  had
    been adequate, the error  on  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  is
    material to the outcome of the appeal as most of the remaining findings
    turned or followed on this conclusion.

14. I am also satisfied that it has been demonstrated that the judge was in
    error in reaching this finding of fact, regardless of the  standard  of
    proof. The appellant was fully aware that  the  respondent's  case  was
    that he was not a  national  of  Afghanistan  (50)  and  the  extensive
    reasons set out between [28] and [49] of the refusal decision for  that
    conclusion, including the  appellant's  inability  to  use  the  Afghan
    calendar and his reliance  on  the  Gregorian  calendar.  However,  the
    refusal decision did not  make  any  distinction  between  whether  the
    appellant is a national of Afghanistan  and  whether  he  might  be  of
    Afghan nationality but having left Afghanistan some  considerable  time
    ago. It was never put to the appellant that he was Afghan but had  left
    Afghanistan a considerable time earlier.

15. In effect, the judge made a finding not contended for by  either  party
    to the appeal, that the appellant was a national of Afghanistan but had
    not lived there for some  considerable  time,  perhaps  explaining  the
    unfamiliarity with the Afghan calendar. I am satisfied that this was  a
    proposition that  should  have  been  put  to  the  appellant  and  his
    representative but was not.

16. In the light of the foregoing I found that there was  clear  procedural
    unfairness to the appellant in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    so that the decision cannot stand. Mr  Tan  fairly  conceded  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was difficult to sustain  as  being
    fair to the appellant.

17. In submissions relating to  the  remaking  of  the  decision,  Ms  Khan
    invited me to allow the  appeal  on  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. As noted above, the judge accepted  at  [204]  that  had  the
    appellant left Afghanistan as a result of the  plausible  circumstances
    claimed, the judge would have allowed the appeal applying  the  country
    guidance of TG. My attention was also drawn to the  findings  that  the
    appellant is an Afghan national at [172], and a  Sikh  [173],  and  the
    concession of the respondent made at the hearing  and  noted  at  [174]
    that if the  appellant  were  found  to  be  an  Afghan  national  from
    Jalalabad, "then his account of the events that led  to  his  departure
    from Afghanistan must be regarded as  plausible."  The  judge  followed
    this at [175] by effectively finding that his account was plausible  as
    it was not implausible.

18. The only basis for not allowing  the  appeal  was  the  judge's  flawed
    conclusion that the appellant was of Afghan nationality  but  had  left
    Afghanistan some considerable time ago. As stated above, this was never
    the respondent's case. I also note that it  is  largely  based  on  the
    single issue of the appellant's preference for the  Gregorian  calendar
    and apparent unfamiliarity with the Afghan calendar. Once that unfairly
    made finding falls away, the positive finding  that  he  is  an  Afghan
    national together with the concession and finding that his  account  of
    reasons for leaving Jalalabad is  plausible,  there  remains  no  other
    basis to reject the protection claim. Had the judge confined himself to
    finding that the  appellant  was  a  national  of  Afghanistan  with  a
    plausible account for leaving Jalalabad, and had not gone on to rely on
    a  matter  never  put  to  the  appellant  and  which  was  never   the
    respondent's case there would be no reason not  to  apply  the  country
    guidance and find a risk  that  cannot  be  met  by  a  sufficiency  of
    protection or relocation within Afghanistan.

19. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  correct  course  is  to
    remake the decision in the appeal by allowing the appeal.





Decision

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.
     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. However, given the circumstances of this case, I  make
an anonymity order.





Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  each  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify that  appellant  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
