
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02557/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 October  2017                 |On 23 October 2017                |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                    F M R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Mohzam of Burton and Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs Obomi Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on [ ] 2001 and is a national of Iran  of  Kurdish
   ethnicity.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Asjad promulgated on  10  May  2017  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  28
   February 2017 to refuse his protection claim.
5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons which were in essence that :
   a) The Appellants claim that he  had  worked  as  smuggler  in  Iran  was
      undermined by a number of inconsistencies  as  between  his  Screening
      Interview (SI), his Asylum Interview (AI) and  his  witness  statement
      (WS) and therefore this was not accepted.
   b) The Appellants credibility was undermined by his claim  to  have  only
      been fingerprinted on one previous occasion when Eurodac showed he had
      been fingerprinted twice.
   c) The chronology of the Appellants account was undermined by  the  dates
      on which he was fingerprinted.
   d) The Appellant was not at risk on return as a Kurd.
   e) If it were accepted that the Appellant was a smuggler he was  at  risk
      of prosecution not persecution.
   f) If the Appellant smuggled guns and ammunition this is a serious  crime
      and falls for exclusion for refugee protection.
   g) Taking into account the Appellants age it was in his best interests to
      return to his family.
   h) The Respondent had carried out their family tracing obligations.

The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Asjad ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
   decision.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge  was  in  error  in
   that :
   a) The Judge refused to consider whether the decision was unlawful as the
      Respondent failed to take into account that the Appellant was a minor.
   b) The Judge failed to  take  into  account  the  best  interest  of  the
      Appellant as a minor.
   c) The Judge failed to make a finding as to whether the Appellant  was  a
      smuggler.
   d)  The  Judge  heard   no   arguments   from   either   the   Appellants
      representatives or the Respondent as to whether  the  Appellant  would
      fall under the exclusion clauses of the Refugee Convention.
8.  On 5 September 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro gave  permission  to
   appeal.

Submissions

9. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Mohzam  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

10. He relied on his skeleton argument.

11. The Judges adverse credibility findings were  central  to  her  decision
   and she failed to take into account the age of the  appellant  in  making
   that assessment  and  failed  to  properly  engage  with  the  background
   material.

12. He accepted that in relation to the exclusion argument this  was  raised
   in the refusal letter and that had  been  relied  on  by  the  presenting
   officer.

13. On behalf of the Respondent Mrs Obomi submitted that :

14. There was a Rule 24 notice and she relied on that.

15. The Judge made findings that were open to her.

16. The Judge took into account the appellant's age and it was  referred  to
   at paragraph 8 so was clearly at the forefront of  her  mind.  She  found
   there were numerous inconsistencies.

17. Mrs Obomi conceded that a younger appellant  may  be  unable  to  recall
   detail but his account did not match the record of encounters with him.

18. The Judge went on to consider the alternative scenario where  his  claim
   to have been a smuggler was true and found that his risk  on  return  was
   prosecution not persecution and that he was not at risk from that.

Finding on Material Error

19. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

20. The  Respondent  conceded  that  the  appellant  in  this  case  was  an
   uneducated 15 year old Iranian Kurd at the time of the events  relied  on
   and 16 years old when the Judge heard his appeal. The sole issue in  this
   case was one of credibility as it could not be argued that the claim that
   Iranian Kurds work as smugglers is inconsistent with background material.



21. The Judge records the Appellants age at the time of the events in  issue
   but nowhere in the decision is there any reference to  the  relevance  of
   his age in relation to the issue of credibility or indeed  its  relevance
   to the assessment if the Judge accepted  that  he  faced  prosecution  on
   return.  Recording  the  Appellants  age  is  not   engaging   with   its
   significance. There is guidance in the Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note
   No 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and  sensitive  appellant  guidance
   and caselaw which the Judge should have demonstrated that she had engaged
   with given the focus on issues of  credibility,  but  such  awareness  is
   wholly absent from the decision.

22. In relation to the Judges consideration  of  the  alternative  scenario,
   that the Appellant was indeed a smuggler wanted by the  authorities,  the
   assessment by the Judge of the background material  at  paragraph  13  is
   wholly inadequate as it fails to take into account again the  Appellant's
   age but also  in suggesting that the system is not 'unduly  harsh'  given
   the punishment for  smuggling  alcohol  as  recorded  in  the  2016  COIS
   Smugglers at 5.3.2 is up to 74 lashes.

23. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal  to  address  and  determine  the
   significance of the appellants to the issues of credibility and  risk  on
   return age constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider to  be
   material since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could
   have been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

24. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be redetermined afresh.

25. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

26. In this case I have determined that the case should  be  remitted  as  I
   have found there was an error of law because the Appellant did not have a
   fair hearing due to the failure of  the  Judge  to  have  regard  to  the
   appellants age in her assessment of the evidence. In this  case  none  of
   the findings of fact are to stand and the matter will be  a  complete  re
   hearing.

27. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
   heard on a date to be fixed to be heard by me.

28. I made the following directions for the resumed hearing:

       . List for 3 hours

       . Kurdish Sorani interpreter

CONCLUSION

29. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination should be set aside and the case  remitted  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal.

30. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.

Signed                                                              Date
20.10.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
