Appeal Number: PA/02319/2017

 





	Upper Tribunal 

	(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)	Appeal Number: PA/02319/2017





THE IMMIGRATION ACTS





Heard at Field House 

Decision & Reasons Promulgated

On 27th October 2017 

On 13th June 2018





Before



DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI





Between



si

(ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

Appellant

and



THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

Respondent





Representation:

	For the Appellant:	Ms E Fitzsimons, Counsel

	For the Respondent:	Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer 

	



	DETERMINATION BY CONSENT AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and by the consent of the parties the following order is made:

Upon the parties’ agreement that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 3rd May 2017 discloses a material error of law such that it should be set aside, it is hereby ordered by consent as follows:

The judge made material errors of law in relation to the errors identified in the Grounds of Appeal, in particular the judge failed to engage with the background evidence delineated by the appellant’s Counsel in the objective evidence bundle amounting to 133 pages (which included a specific document of key passages from pages 118 to 133 which the appellant’s Counsel had apparently referred to the judge during the hearing), whereas the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge only makes mention or consideration of a policy document from the Secretary of State dated December 2016 in the conclusive paragraph of the determination when considering the objective or background evidence for Bangladesh. The omission is thus material. 

	The determination is thus set aside in its entirety with no findings preserved.

	The matter is remitted to be heard by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge M R Oliver.  

Directions 

The appellant’s appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for material legal error.

Anonymity

Direction Regarding Anonymity – Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008



Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed								Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini







2

© CROWN COPYRIGHT 2018