
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02014/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 August 2016                        |On 31 August 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     AGW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph instructed by Virgo Consultancy Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on [  ]  1973.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 April 2015 as  a  visitor.   On  30
    July 2015 the appellant claimed asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim was that  he  was  a  prominent  Roman  Catholic
    Christian in Pakistan who had been involved  in  demonstrations  dating
    back to 2011.  He claimed that on 25 January 2015 a  First  Information
    Report ("FIR") had been issued against him accusing  him  of  blasphemy
    and, as a result, he was at risk of  persecution  under  the  blasphemy
    laws in Pakistan.  Further, he claimed that a  fatwa  had  been  issued
    against him and posted on his house door on 29 March 2015  calling  for
    his death for dishonouring Islam.   Subsequently,  the  appellant  also
    relied upon a fatwa posted through his letterbox on 13 November 2015 to
    like effect.  The appellant claimed that, as a consequence, he  was  at
    risk of persecution for a Convention reason on return.

 3. On 12 October 2012, the Secretary of  State  rejected  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection and under  Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 27 April 2016, Judge Richards-Clarke dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  First, the judge found that  the  FIR  was  not
    genuine.  Secondly, the  judge  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding
    relying upon the appellant's production of a false FIR and his delay in
    claiming asylum for over three months after  his  arrival  in  the  UK.
    Thirdly, applying the Country Guidance case of AK and  SK  (Christians:
    Risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569 (IAC), the judge concluded that the
    appellant had failed to establish that he would be at risk  on  return.
    In addition, the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds including that the judge had erred in law  in  taking
    into account the appellant's delay in claiming asylum in  reaching  her
    adverse credibility finding; that she had erred in law in relying  upon
    a Document Verification Report ("DVR") to conclude that the FIR was not
    genuine; that the judge had failed properly to consider the risk to the
    appellant including, in applying AK and SK, confusing  the  appellant's
    claim based upon a risk of being prosecuted under Pakistan's  blasphemy
    laws with a risk from non-state actors as a result of the fatwas.

 6. On 26 May 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Nightingale) granted the
    appellant permission on limited grounds.  The judge refused  permission
    in respect of the challenge to the judge's adverse credibility  finding
    based upon her taking into account the appellant's  delay  in  claiming
    asylum after arriving in the UK.  However, the judge granted permission
    on the remaining grounds.

 7. On 9 June 2016, the Secretary of State filed a Rule 24  notice  seeking
    to uphold the judge's decision, in particular her finding  in  relation
    to the FIR  and  her  consequential  adverse  credibility  findings  in
    general.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

 9. Mr Joseph, on behalf of the  appellant  challenged  first  the  judge's
    reasoning in para 24 in reaching her conclusion that the  FIR  was  not
    genuine and, secondly he challenged her reasoning, primarily in para 25
    of her determination, that led her  to  reject  the  appellant's  claim
    based upon a risk from non-state actors.

10. I deal first, therefore, with the judge's reasoning in relation to  the
    FIR.  That is set out in para 24 of her determination as follows.

         "Second, I am unable to rely on the First Information Report  (FIR)
         dated 25 January 2015 relied on by the Appellant.   The  conclusion
         of the Respondent in the Document Verification Report [at Y1 of the
         Respondent's bundle] is that the Verifier is 'satisfied to  a  very
         high degree that  the  document  checked  is  not  genuine.'   This
         finding was put to the Appellant in the Reasons for Refusal  Letter
         12 October 2015 at paragraph 38 and on the evidence before me  this
         finding had not been challenged by the Appellant beyond  suggesting
         that the document could not be found at the Police Station  due  to
         the lack of computer records.  I therefore rely on the Respondent's
         Document Verification Report and find that the FIR is likely to not
         to be genuine.  Given this  finding  I  am  also  unable  to  place
         reliance  on  the  arrest  warrants  14  March  2015  [L1  of   the
         Respondent's bundle], 26 May 2015 [N1 of the  Respondent's  bundle]
         and 12 August 2016 [01 of the Appellant's bundle] as all  refer  to
         the FIR dated 2 January 2015.  As I have found this FIR likely  not
         to be genuine I also find these  are  likely  not  to  be  genuine.
         These findings do undermine the Appellant's credibility."

11. Mr Joseph submitted, relying upon paras 12 and 13 of the grounds,  that
    the judge had not been entitled to rely on the DVR given  the  DVR  was
    based upon a telephone conversation with an unknown individual and  the
    appellant gave evidence challenging the  DVR  in  that  there  were  no
    computer records (he claimed) held at the police  station.   The  judge
    should have considered the FIR as part of all the evidence applying the
    principles  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439  and  should  have
    determined its reliability rather than whether it was genuine.

12. I do not agree.  There was nothing wrong, in principle,  in  the  judge
    finding that the FIR was not genuine rather than, as is the usual case,
    applying  Tanveer  Ahmed  principles  and  assessing  the   documentary
    evidence in the round and determining its  reliability.   If  there  is
    sufficient evidence to establish - the burden being on the respondent -
    that a document is false or not genuine then a  judge  is  entitled  to
    make such a finding.  Consequently, the issue in this appeal is whether
    the evidence was adequate to entitle the judge  to  reach  the  finding
    that the FIR was not genuine.   As  I  pointed  out  to  Mr  Joseph  in
    submissions, the essence of his challenge was that the  evidence  could
    not rationally lead a judge to make the positive finding that  the  FIR
    was not genuine.

13. The DVR is helpfully set out in para 38 of the respondent's decision as
    follows:

         "Further, you have submitted a copy  and  translation  of  FIR  no.
         17/15 which you allege was filed at the Nishter Town Police Station
         in Lahore on 25 January 2015.  However, information  received  from
         the British High Commission, Islamabad has provided the following:

         I called the Lahore  Police  Control  and  asked  the  operator  to
         provide me the telephone number of Nishter Town Police  Station  in
         Lahore and he told me no such police station named as Nishter  Town
         police station exists in Lahore.  He told me it is  Nishter  Colony
         Police Station and not Nishter Town as written in the copy  of  FIR
         provided by the applicant.

         Anyhow, I contacted the report  writer  of  Nishtar  Colony  police
         station Lahore and provided him  the  FIR  number  and  date.   The
         report writer after checking all the record confirmed that the date
         and details of this FIR do  not  match  the  records  held  by  the
         Nishter Colony Police Station Lahore and confirmed that FIR  number
         17/15 dated  25/01/2015  of  Nishtar  Town  police  station  Lahore
         provided by the applicant is non-genuine (DVR)."

14. In my judgment, the judge was perfectly entitled to rely upon  the  DVR
    despite the appellant's evidence (not independently supported) that the
    police station lacked "computer records."  What the DVR states is  that
    a relevant person was contacted at the appropriate police  station  and
    "after checking all the records" confirmed that there was no  match  on
    the "records" of an FIR with the number and date on the  FIR  submitted
    by the appellant.  Even though the person contacted was not  named  the
    judge was, in my judgment, entitled  to  rely  upon  this  evidence  to
    establish that the claimed FIR was, in fact, not genuine.  Records were
    checked - even if not computer records - and there was no  evidence  to
    contradict the evidence contained within the DVR that the  relied  upon
    document was genuine.

15. For these reasons, I reject the appellant's challenge  to  the  judge's
    finding in para 24 that the FIR was not genuine.

16. That, in effect, inevitably led to the  rejection  of  the  appellant's
    claim based upon the risk to him of being subjected  to  the  blasphemy
    laws in Pakistan.

17. Turning now to the risk to the appellant  from  non-state  actors,  the
    judge dealt with this primarily in para 25 as follows:

         "25. Third, with respect to the Fatwa dated 29 March 2015  and  the
             Fatwa dated 13 November 2015 the evidence before me  does  not
             suggest that this is being actively pursued and in  accordance
             with AK and SK (Christians:  risk)  Pakistan  CG  [2014]  UKUT
             00569 (IAC) 'A blasphemy allegation, without  more,  will  not
             generally be enough to make out  a  claim  under  the  Refugee
             Convention.  It has to be  actively  followed  either  by  the
             authorities in the form of charges being brought or  by  those
             making the complaint.'   The  Appellant's  wife  and  children
             remain in Pakistan and although it is  claimed  that  two  men
             came to the Appellant's home on 15 November 2015  looking  for
             the Appellant these men fled when the door was opened and  the
             Appellant's wife has now filed a First Information Report with
             the Police about this incident.  Further given the findings in
             relation to the Appellant's credibility I have attached little
             weight to two produced Fatwas or  the  claimed  events  of  15
             November 2015.  In any event I find  that  the  evidence  here
             does not suggest and I do not find that these Fatwas relied on
             by the Appellant are being actively pursued and therefore that
             these Fatwas, even if genuine, are not enough to  make  out  a
             claim under the Refugee Convention."

18. Mr Joseph challenged the judge's reasoning in para  25.   He  submitted
    that the judge had wrongly confused the risk to the appellant from  the
    state (under the blasphemy laws) with that from non-state actors (based
    upon the two fatwas).  He submitted that the question  of  whether  the
    fatwas were being "actively pursued" was to confuse  the  approach  set
    out in AK and SK when considering  whether  there  was  a  risk  to  an
    individual as a result of a blasphemy allegation.

19. Mr Richards acknowledged that this latter point  had  some  merit  but,
    nevertheless, submitted that it was immaterial to the judge's  decision
    if she were, in fact, entitled to find that the fatwas were unreliable.
     That, Mr Richards submitted, was precisely what the judge had done  in
    para 25 and that finding was legally sustainable.

20. It is clear from AK and SK that the Upper  Tribunal,  when  considering
    allegations of blasphemy made against  Christians,  considered  that  a
    risk  of  persecution  and,  therefore,  a  claim  under  the   Refugee
    Convention required that such an allegation:

         "... has to be actively followed either by the authorities  in  the
         form of charges being brought or by those making the complaint.  If
         it is, or will be, actively pursued then an applicant may  be  able
         to establish  a  real  risk  of  harm  in  the  home  area  and  an
         insufficiency of state protection."  (See para 6 of the head note).



21. To that extent, therefore, it  would  appear  that  the  judge  wrongly
    conflated the distinct issues of whether a prosecution under the  state
    blasphemy laws was being pursued with the risk to  the  appellant  from
    non-state actors evidenced by (so it was claimed) the two fatwas.

22. However, as Mr Richards submitted, any error would be immaterial if the
    judge was entitled to find that the fatwas were, in effect,  unreliable
    and therefore provided no support for the appellant's claim  to  be  at
    risk from non-state actors.

23. In respect of that, Mr Joseph made a number of submissions.  First, the
    judge's reasoning was undermined by his unsustainable finding that  the
    appellant had submitted  a  false  FIR.   That  submission  cannot,  of
    course, succeed since (as I concluded above) the judge was entitled  to
    find that the FIR was not genuine.  That, as the judge pointed  out  in
    the final sentence of para  24,  was  a  matter  which  undermined  the
    appellant's credibility.

24. Secondly, Mr Joseph submitted that the judge had failed  to  take  into
    account a newspaper report (in translation at page 32  of  the  bundle)
    from  the  "Daily  'Ausaf'  Lahore"  which  supported  the  appellant's
    evidence that an incident had occurred at the appellant's  home  on  15
    November 2015 when two unknown persons had knocked on the door  of  the
    family home asking to see the  appellant  and  issuing  threats  before
    fleeing.  Mr Joseph submitted that the judge had failed  to  take  that
    evidence into account.

25. It was clearly relevant in assessing the appellant's  credibility  that
    the judge had found (sustainably in my judgment) that the FIR submitted
    in support of his claim was not genuine.  Equally, it was  relevant  to
    take into account, as the judge did at para 23  of  her  determination,
    that the appellant had delayed for  no  acceptable  reason  over  three
    months after arriving in the UK  or  claiming  asylum.   Although  that
    reasoning was challenged in the grounds,  permission  was  not  granted
    upon that aspect of the grounds of appeal and so the judge's  reasoning
    stands. There were, therefore, significant  reasons  for  doubting  the
    appellant's credibility.

26. It is clear to me that in para 25, although the judge made  no  mention
    of Tanveer Ahmed, she was engaged in considering the reliability of the
    documents (in particular the fatwas) on the basis of all  the  evidence
    in the round.  As regards the claimed incident on 15 November 2015, the
    judge does refer to it in para 25.  I accept that  the  judge  made  no
    specific reference to the news report dated 7 January 2016 which refers
    to the claimed incident on 15 November 2015 at  the  appellant's  home.
    However, given the weight of the judge's reasoning,  in  particular  in
    respect of the false FIR but  also  the  issue  of  delay  in  claiming
    asylum, I am unable to conclude that that document  would,  in  itself,
    have affected the judge's conclusion in para 25 of her determination in
    particular. The report lacks any real independent source as it  is,  in
    fact, largely a report in the first person from the appellant's wife.

27. In my judgment, the judge's adverse finding in relation to  the  fatwas
    and the evidence concerning the appellant's risk from non-state  actors
    was one rationally open to her on the evidence.

28. In any event, given that the judge sustainably found that the appellant
    was not being pursued under the blasphemy laws, her conclusion in  para
    26 that the appellant could internally relocate was entirely consistent
    with the country guidance case of AK and SK  where,  as  summarised  at
    para 8 of the head note, it is stated:

         "Relocation is normally a viable option  unless  an  individual  is
         accused of blasphemy which is  being  seriously  pursued;  in  that
         situation there is, in general no internal relocation alternative."



29. There was nothing of substance in the evidence before the  judge  which
    would, given the  appellant's  financial  and  other  circumstances  in
    Pakistan  (and  including  the  fact  that  he  is  a  Roman   Catholic
    Christian), undermine that finding in any event.

30. Mr Joseph did not pursue any argument that the appellant  would  be  at
    risk on return as a Roman Catholic Christian  if  the  judge's  adverse
    findings in relation to the risk to the appellant from  the  state  (on
    the basis of the blasphemy laws) or non-state actors (on the  basis  of
    the fatwas) were legally  sustainable.   In  those  circumstances,  the
    appellant falls clearly within the situation set out in AK  and  SK  at
    para 1 of the head note that:

         "Christians in Pakistan are a religious minority who,  in  general,
         suffer discrimination but this is not sufficient  to  amount  to  a
         real risk of persecution."

31. The appellant does  not  fall  within  any  of  the  contemplated  risk
    matrixes in AK and SK.

Decision

32. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds did not involve the making  of
    an error of law such that its decision should be set aside.

33. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    all grounds stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                       Date 31st August 2016

