
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02775/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 17 March 2020                     |On 28 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                             KELVIN SAMMY TUNDE
                         (aka JOHNSON TAIWO GBENRO)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr  C  Timson,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Manchester
Associate


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. The respondent, whom I
    shall call 'the claimant', has previously been found following judicial
    assessment to be a national of Nigeria. He asserts that he is also a
    national of Zimbabwe.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Knowles ('the Judge'), issued on 8 August 2019, by
    which the claimant's appeal against a decision of the respondent to
    deport him was allowed on article 8 grounds, outside of the Immigration
    Rules ('the Rules').

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission to appeal on all grounds.



Anonymity

 4. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction and neither party
    requested such direction before me.

Background

 5. The claimant is presently aged 44. He is known to the United Kingdom
    authorities under two different identities possessing two different
    nationalities. He claims to have entered the United Kingdom in February
    2003, using a passport to which he was not entitled.

 6. On 22 October 2007 at Manchester City Crown Court the claimant was
    convicted in the identity of 'Kelvin Tunde', a citizen of Zimbabwe, on
    one ground of possessing a false identity document, namely a false
    Dutch passport, which he sought to use to open a bank account. He was
    sentenced to a 12-month custodial sentence. He was subsequently served
    with a notice of decision to deport, accompanied by a reason for
    deportation letter on 4 February 2008. The claimant appealed against
    this decision asserting, inter alia, that he would be at real risk of
    persecution upon being returned to Zimbabwe. His appeal was dismissed
    by the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal ('AIT') on 7 April 2008. Before
    the AIT the claimant asserted that he was a citizen of Zimbabwe,
    detailing that he was born in Harare to an ethnic Shona mother and a
    Nigerian father. He stated that the family relocated to Nigeria when he
    was aged 3, after the death of his mother. The Tribunal accepted that
    the claimant was a Zimbabwean national, a fact that was not challenged
    by the Secretary of State, and noted at [17] of its decision:

         'The appellant informed us that he had never claimed to be a
         citizen of Nigeria and he had not instructed his former legal
         representatives to that effect.'

 7. The claimant pursued an appeal to the Upper Tribunal and then sought a
    review from the High Court. His challenge to the Tribunal decision
    concluded in March 2009, some eleven months later after the
    promulgation of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 8. On 2 September 2009, the Secretary of State withdrew the decision to
    deport dated 4 February 2008 having become aware that the claimant was
    using two identities. Several checks were undertaken by the Secretary
    of State's Immigration Fingerprint Bureau which revealed that in
    addition to the claimant's purported Zimbabwean identity of 'Kelvin
    Sammy Tunde', he was also known to the authorities as a Nigerian
    national called 'Johnson Taiwo Gbenro'. Various correspondence was
    exchanged between the claimant and the Secretary of State before the
    latter served a notice of a decision to make a deportation order on 29
    September 2010. The claimant appealed and the Secretary of State
    withdrew this decision on 22 November 2010. A new decision was served
    on 29 November 2010, in which the Secretary of State noted, inter alia:

         '... we believe your client's true identity to be Johnson Taiwo
         Gbenro as the Home Office has a copy of what is believed to be your
         client's Nigerian passport.'

 9. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the claimant's appeal by means of a
    decision dated 8 February 2011, finding that the claimant was a
    Nigerian national called Johnson Taiwo Gberno, and permission to appeal
    was refused by the Upper Tribunal on 3 June 2011. In refusing
    permission to appeal, Senior Immigration Judge Grubb observed, inter
    alia:

         'At paras 27-31, the FtT gave detailed reasons for its findings.
         The FtT referred to the appellant's conviction for using a false
         Dutch passport in his claimed name. At para 23 the FtT refers to
         the trial judge's sentencing remarks in which the judge pointed out
         that the appellant had knowingly used a Dutch passport in his
         claimed name. Further, at paras 28 and 30, the FtT referred to a
         witness statement from a fingerprint expert who confirmed that the
         fingerprints of the appellant were the same as Gbenro. The FtT also
         referred, whilst noting that it was not an expert in photographic
         recognition, that the photographs of Gbenro produced by the
         respondent were, in fact, photographs of the appellant. The expert
         evidence, in the form of fingerprint evidence, was highly
         persuasive that the appellant was in fact Gbenro. The appellant's
         previous conviction for using a false passport in his claimed name
         was also relevant.'

10. The Secretary of State signed the claimant's deportation order on 1
    August 2011. The claimant submitted further representations on 12
    February 2013, in the name of 'Kelvin Sammy Tunde'. I observe that the
    claimant's present representatives drafted these representations.
    Throughout the representations there is no engagement with the FtT's
    decision as to the claimant's true identity. The representations are in
    the name of 'Kelvin Sammy Tunde' and the witness statement is also in
    the same name. No true engagement is made with the accepted fingerprint
    evidence or other evidential issues that led to the judicial finding of
    fact, save a bald assertion that the appellant is not Johnson Taiwo
    Gbenro. The representations assert that the claimant was fearful of an
    'occult group' that had threatened him after he had refused to join.
    They further detail that his brother had been killed by the group in
    1995 because he also had refused to join it. The application was
    treated by the Secretary of State as an application to revoke a
    deportation order and was refused by a decision dated 13 August 2013.
    The claim was certified as clearly unfounded under section 94 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'). The
    claimant did not challenge this decision.

11. The claimant was detained by the Secretary of State in September 2017
    and required to take part in the 'face-to-face scheme' with the
    Nigerian High Commission on 6 October 2017. The purpose of this process
    was to secure an emergency travel document in order to facilitate the
    claimant's deportation to Nigeria. The claimant refused to leave the
    detention centre to attend the meeting with officials from the High
    Commission and generally demonstrated non-compliance. He asserted that
    he is not Johnson Taiwo Gberno as a means of frustrating the process of
    securing an emergency travel document.

12. The claimant submitted further representations on 15 December 2017 and
    30 May 2018, relying upon article 8. The further representations of 15
    December 2017 were again authored by the claimant's present solicitors,
    and again positively assert that the claimant is a Zimbabwean national
    called Kelvin Sammy Tunde. The representations again contend that the
    judicial finding of fact that the claimant is a Nigerian national
    called Johnson Taiwo Gberno is mistaken. A misleading positive
    assertion is made as to the respondent's records confirming:

         '... that our client was born of mixed ethnicity. His late father
         was a Nigerian citizen and his late mother was a Zimbabwean.
         Although Kelvin himself is a Zimbabwean national, he left Zimbabwe
         as a child aged 3 years and lived in Nigeria having moved there
         with his father and brother.'

13. I have grave concerns as to whether the approach adopted by the
    claimant's solicitors, which can be said to be misleading for the
    reason detailed in the paragraph above, meets the professional
    standards expected by experienced immigration lawyers. Though advancing
    their instructions, there is a clear failure to be candid as to the
    relevant judicial finding of identity and nationality accompanied by a
    failure to advance a positive case as to the FtT having materially
    erred in law in its approach. The judicial finding of fact, and the
    significant adverse evidence it relied upon, is simply ignored. I
    proceed on the basis that the appellant's solicitors were acting on
    express instructions from the appellant, though this is not necessarily
    sufficient to permit a solicitor to act contrary to his or her
    professional duty as the failure to produce any new evidence on the
    issue of identity in this matter could not be considered by a
    competent, professional lawyer as satisfying the requirements of
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules ('the Rules'), namely that when
    taken with previously considered material, there was a realistic
    prospect of a reasonably directed judge finding that the claimant is a
    Zimbabwean national called Kelvin Tunde.

14. The further representations of December 2017 and May 2018 place
    reliance upon the claimant's relationship with his partner, Ms. [IA].

15. The respondent refused the claimant's further representations by a
    letter dated 7 March 2019 but accepted that they constituted a fresh
    claim for the purpose of paragraph 353 of the Rules and the claimant
    enjoyed an in-country appeal right. It is against this decision that
    the claimant presently appeals.

Hearing before the FtT

16. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Manchester on 21 June 2019.
    The claimant continued to assert that he is 'Kelvin Sammy Tunde' and
    had been mistakenly detained by the Secretary of State some years
    previously under the name 'Johnson Taiwo Gbenro'. This has led to his
    present problems as to establishing his identity. He detailed that he
    had known Mr. Gbenro, but that was many years ago. The Judge considered
    the claimant's evidence on this issue at [44]-[45]:

         'In answer to questions in cross-examination concerning  Mr  Gbenro
         the appellant stated he had never used his name, that Mr Gbenro  is
         a friend, and that on 6 December 2009 there was a stop  and  search
         at Victoria Station and he was taken to  Dallas  Court  along  with
         others. He stated that  was  his  only  mistake,  and  they  worked
         together. He accepted his fingerprints were taken but  stated  that
         they cannot be the same as Mr Gbenro's and there must have  been  a
         mix-up ...'

         '... I did not understand his evidence concerning  Mr.  Gbenro.  He
         stated that at the stop and search he told the police that  he  was
         Mr. Gbenro.'

17. The Judge determined as to this issue, at [86]-[87]:

         '[The appellant's] evidence cannot be reconciled with his witness
         statement and grounds of appeal which both assert he has not used
         Mr Gbenro as his name. His evidence is that he had done so twice,
         once in August 2007 for which he was convicted in October 2007 and
         again in 2008 when he was fingerprinted. He states that his
         fingerprints match Mr Gbenro's due to a mix-up. Whether or not they
         matched was considered with a fingerprint expert's evidence in the
         2011 hearing. There were other factors indicating that the
         appellant was Mr Gbenro at the hearing in 2011. The findings were
         made with no doubt in 2011.

         The evidence which has been presented to me in this appeal is
         contradictory. The appellant refers to 'one mistake' but he has
         given evidence of using another's identity more than once. Upon
         conviction it was clear he used the false passport more than once.
         His attitude towards his conduct in misleading others in relation
         to his identity and proof of identity appeared to me to be
         flippant.'

18. The claimant asserted that his marriage to his ex-wife had broken down,
    and that he is now in a settled relationship with Ms. [A], a Nigerian
    national and a failed asylum seeker who was granted discretionary leave
    to remain consequent to her daughter registering as a British citizen
    under section 1(4) of the British Nationality Act 1981. Her daughter,
    'E', is aged 14. The Judge recorded the claimant's evidence as to the
    present state of the relationship, at [27]

         '... At the time of those submissions in September/October 2017
         Miss [A] was 5 weeks pregnant with his child. An update was
         provided in May 2018 stating that his partner gave birth to a baby
         boy on 26 April 2018 and that the appellant spends most of his time
         with his partner, son and step-daughter only returning to Pastor
         Joseph's house at night where he sleeps in accordance with his bail
         conditions.'

19. The Judge further determined that the claimant possessed no well-
    founded fear of persecution in Nigeria, at [95]:

         'Considering in the round the limited evidence added by the
         appellant concerning his identity, his nationality and his account
         of his core situation, I do not consider that the appellant has
         established credibility in any of those matters or that his account
         of being Mr. Tunde, a national of Zimbabwe, who has a genuine fear
         of the criminal occult gang in Nigeria, to be reasonably likely to
         be true. I find that he is Mr. Johnson Taiwo Gbenro a national of
         Nigeria and that he has not established that he is at risk of
         persecution or serious harm if returned to Nigeria.'

20. The claimant was unable to rely upon his relationship with Ms. [A] to
    outweigh the public interest in his deportation:

         'The appellant cannot meet the exception to deportation based upon
         his relationship with his partner because she is not a British
         citizen and is not settled in the UK. She has leave to remain until
         9 October 2020. That is article 8 discretionary leave and does not
         amount to settlement. Their relationship was formed when the
         appellant's immigration status was precarious. The appellant cannot
         meet paragraph 399(b) on the basis of his relationship with the
         appellant alone. However, if it would be unduly harsh for [E] to
         follow the appellant to Nigeria, it appears impossible that the
         appellant's relationship with his partner could continue.'

21. The Judge accepted that the claimant was in a genuine relationship with
    Ms. [A] and had parental responsibilities for her daughter, 'E', who is
    a qualifying child for the purpose of the Rules:

         'I accept on the balance of probabilities that the appellant has
         parental responsibilities for [E]. In my conclusion on the
         evidence, the appellant has played a part in her life for more than
         3 years as her step-father, and she regards him as her dad. Her
         regards her as his daughter. He spends each day together with the
         family and takes [E] to school and picks her up and helps her with
         her homework. He is registered as her parent with [her] school and
         her contact with their general practitioners. Taking the
         appellant's evidence, his partner's, [E's] and Pastor Joseph's
         evidence into account I accept that on the balance of probabilities
         the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with [E]. I do not consider the respondent's conclusion that the
         appellant had not established that he has a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with [E] to be well founded. It flies in the
         face of their later acceptance ... that she would experience
         significant emotional upheaval and a sense of loss following the
         appellant's deportation.'

22. I observe at this juncture that the claimant and Ms. [A] are not
    married and the term 'step-father' is defined at paragraph 6 of the
    Immigration Rules so as to not include the role of a male adult in a
    family unit outside of marriage or a civil partnership. The claimant is
    therefore not the stepfather of Ms. [A]'s daughter for the purpose of
    the Rules. However, he has been accepted by the Judge to enjoy a
    parental role.

23. At [103] of the decision the Judge found that it would be unduly harsh
    for Ms. [A]'s daughter to relocate to Nigeria. However, he concluded
    that it would not be unduly harsh for her to remain in this country and
    for the claimant to be deported to Nigeria, at [105]-[106]:

         'It would be harsh upon [E] were the appellant not to be granted
         leave to remain and were the appellant to be deported. However, in
         the light of [KO (Nigeria) v. Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53; [2018] 1 W.L.R. 5273, MK (Section 55;
         Tribunal Options: Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC); [2015]
         I.N.L.R. 563 and MAB (para 399; 'unduly harsh') USA [2015] UKUT
         00435 (IAC)] in my conclusion the circumstances do not support in
         [E's] case a finding that refusal of leave to remain and
         deportation would be unduly harsh. She could be looked after by her
         mother who is her primary carer and would continue to live with her
         as she did for 10 years before the appellant entered her life. The
         appellant does not contribute to her upbringing financially.

         In my conclusion it would however be in the best interests of [E]
         for the appellant to remain in the UK and not be deported. It would
         be in her best interests for the family unit to remain together and
         a refusal of leave to remain and deportation would mean that the
         family would be separated given that it would be unduly harsh for
         [E] to follow the appellant if he were deported to Nigeria. That
         must however be balanced with the public interest in deportation
         and is not conclusive in itself. Viewed in isolation, I do not
         consider that the appellant's relationship meets paragraph 399 of
         the Immigration Rules because I find that the respondent has
         established on the balance of probabilities that it would not be
         unduly harsh for her to remain in the UK if the appellant is
         deported.'

24. With regard to the claimant's young son, the Judge found that he is not
    a qualifying child under paragraph 399 of the Rules because he is a
    Nigerian national and not a citizen of the United Kingdom. The Judge
    further observed, at [108]:

         'The appellant's second biological child, who would be one month
         old now if she arrived on the due date, would similarly not meet
         the paragraph 399 requirements as a qualifying child.'

25. The Judge determined that very compelling circumstances arose, such as
    to outweigh the public interest in the claimant's deportation, at [113]-
    [115]:

         'I take into account the public interest in foreign criminals being
         deported. The sentencing remarks describe the appellant's offence
         as serious. The appellant was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment
         and meets the definition of a foreign criminal. The deportation
         order was made in the interests of preventing further reoffending
         and there is a strong public interest in deterring others from
         committing similar offences through deportation.

         I note however that it has been more than 11 years since the
         appellant's conviction, and he has no subsequent convictions. His
         claim to have reported to the respondent for the last 12 years has
         not been disputed. The deportation order was made 8 years ago. I
         consider the delay significant in light of the guidance in [KD
         (Jamaica) v.Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
         Civ 418 and MN-T (Columbia) v, Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2016] EWCA Civ 893]. The respondent has ascribed the
         delays to identity difficulties, however the findings in relation
         to the appellant's identity, adopted by the respondent in their
         reasons for refusal, were all made in 2011 prior to the deportation
         order being made. I do not find that delays since the deportation
         order have been explained in the appeal. I note that the public
         interest in deportation decreases where the process takes many
         years. The appellant has formed a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with his partner since the deportation order was made,
         with her daughter [E], and they by now (sic) he is likely to have
         two biological children with his partner.

         Considering all of these issues in the round, in my conclusion
         whilst the exceptions in paragraph 399 are not met there are
         exceptional circumstances which are the strength (sic) significance
         of the appellant's family life which outweigh the public interest
         in deportation in the light of the delay since conviction and since
         the deportation order was made. The decision not to grant leave to
         remain and the refusal to revoke the deportation order has not, in
         the particular circumstances of the appellant's case, been shown to
         be proportionately justified.'

Grounds of Appeal

26. The Secretary of State relies upon two grounds of appeal. The first
    ground asserts that the Judge failed to provide adequate reasoning as
    to why very compelling circumstances arose in this matter to outweigh
    the public interest in deportation, particularly as to the impact of
    delay. The second ground is related to the first, detailing that the
    Judge materially misdirected himself in law by placing weight on the
    delay that had flowed from the appellant's conviction in 2007 to the
    hearing in 2019.

27. The claimant did not file a rule 24 response nor did he cross-appeal
    the Judge's decision on his article 8 appeal under the Immigration
    Rules.

Decision on Error of Law

28. The claimant is subject to a deportation order issued on conducive to
    the public good grounds under section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act
    1971 ('the 1971 Act').

29. Section 117A(1) of the 2002 Act is applicable when a court or tribunal
    is required to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
    Acts including a refusal to revoke a deportation order made under the
    1971 Act which is a person's right to respect for private and family
    life under article 8 and as a result would be unlawful under section 6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998. Section 117A(2) confirms that in
    considering the public interest question a court or tribunal must in
    particular have regard in all cases to the considerations listed in
    section 117B and in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
    criminals to the considerations listed in section 117C of the 2002 Act.
    Section 117C(1) confirms that the deportation of foreign criminals is
    in the public interest.

30. Paragraph 398 of the Rules provides that if a foreign criminal liable
    to deportation is unable to meet the exceptions to the public interest
    in deportation established by paragraphs 399 and 399A which mirror the
    statutory provisions at section 117C(3) to (5) then the public interest
    in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where there are
    very compelling circumstances over and above those described in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A. By means of paragraph A362, Part 13 of the
    Rules is applicable to the consideration of article 8 to deportation
    matters regardless as to when the notice of intention to deport or the
    deportation order as appropriate was served.

31. The claimant contends, and the Judge found, that his personal
    circumstances concerning his article 8 private and family life rights
    are such that very compelling circumstances arise outweighing the
    public interest in his deportation. The Court of Appeal confirmed in NA
    (Pakistan) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
    Civ 663; [2017] 1 WLR 207 that the very compelling circumstances
    exception established by paragraph 398 of the Rules is also to be read
    into section 117C(3) of the 2002 Act.

32. Lord Reed observed in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799, at [38], that only a very
    small minority of persons, particularly non-settled cases, established
    circumstances in which the public interest in deportation is
    outweighed. Such cases need not necessarily involve any circumstance
    which is exceptional in the sense of being extraordinary but they can
    be said to involve exceptional circumstances in the sense that they
    involve a departure from the general rule:

         'The countervailing considerations must be very compelling in order
         to outweigh the general public interest in the deportation of such
         offenders as assessed by Parliament and the Secretary of State.'

33. The impact of delay in the article 8 proportionality balancing exercise
    has been subject to consideration by several courts. In RLP (BAH
    revisited - expeditious justice) Jamaica [2017] UKUT 00330 (IAC) it was
    held that in cases where the public interest favouring deportation was
    potent and pressing, even egregious and unjustified delay on the part
    of the Secretary of State in making the underlying decision is unlikely
    to tip the balance in an individual's favour in the article 8
    proportionality balancing exercise.

34. However, it is not the case that delay can never be a potentially
    relevant factor in the proportionality exercise. In EB (Kosovo) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41; [2009] I AC
    1159 the House of Lords held that delay may reduce the weight otherwise
    to be accorded to firm and fair immigration control if the delay is a
    result of a dysfunctional system which creates unpredictable,
    inconsistent and unfair outcomes.  It may well be that during the
    period of such delay a foreign national criminal may develop closer
    personal and social ties thereby strengthening a family and private
    life claim to remain in the United Kingdom. However, the consideration
    of delay in the proportionality assessment remains a fact sensitive
    exercise.

35. At the outset of the hearing I informed the representatives that I
    considered a further 'obvious' ground of appeal arose upon
    consideration of the Judge's decision, with regard to the Judge
    considering two judgments from the Court of Appeal as enjoying the
    elevated status of guidance, at [114] of the decision. I observe that
    it is reasonable to expect professional representatives to set out
    appeal grounds with an appropriate degree of particularity and
    legibility and the Tribunal should be hesitant in forensically
    examining the decision to identify grounds beyond those advanced by a
    professional representative. However, there remains a duty upon the
    Tribunal to consider points that are obvious: R v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department, ex parte Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162. The
    Tribunal enjoys a power to consider any other point arising from a
    decision if the interests of justice so require.

36. The two judgments referred to by the Judge at [114] are KD (Jamaica)
    where the Secretary of State had delayed in taking effective steps to
    deport a foreign criminal and in such time the foreign criminal had
    undertaken and was found to have achieved rehabilitation and also the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in MN-T (Colombia) where the Secretary
    of State had informed the appellant upon a release in 2003 that he
    would be deported and took no further steps until the appellant applied
    for further leave to remain in 2012. The Court of Appeal judgments do
    not present elevated guidance as to the weight that delay is to enjoy
    in the proportionality exercise. They simply exemplify the fact
    sensitive nature of any consideration of delay and the weight that it
    carries in the public interest assessment.

37. However, such error of law does not mean it is material per se and I
    therefore heard submissions from both representatives. Mr Timson
    accepted that there was no weighing in the balance of the claimant's
    actions contributing to delay in [114] and [115] but submitted that the
    Tribunal could find that they had been addressed elsewhere in the
    decision and the Judge had them firmly in mind when considering whether
    very compelling circumstances arose. The problem with this submission,
    though eloquently presented, is that the consideration of very
    compelling circumstances within [114] and [115] only expressly
    addresses the Secretary of State's behaviour. Whilst it is not
    compulsory for a balance sheet approach advocated by Lord Thomas of
    Cwmgiedd in Hesham Ali to be applied, simply 'desirable', a failure to
    adopt such approach can lead, as occured here, in only one side of the
    argument being considered. Such failure in this matter resulted in the
    Judge failing to identify comprehensively the factors that should go
    into the balance for article 8 purposes in this matter. It is not
    sufficient to seek to read over into the proportionality assessment
    earlier reciting of events in summary form that may, briefly, address
    points favourable to the Secretary of State.

38. The Judge has found as being of positive weight to the claimant the
    fact that he has formed a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
    partner and their combined children, including E. I note that a foreign
    national criminal can rely upon being able to satisfy either or both
    paragraph 399 and 399A when seeking to establish very compelling
    circumstances, but to outweigh the public interest in deportation such
    very compelling circumstances must be over and above those identified
    within the exceptions and so a holistic approach is adopted to the
    assessment: NA (Pakistan). In this matter, the claimant was unable to
    satisfy either paragraph 399(a) or 399(b) and whilst the genuine and
    subsisting relationships could be considered in the round, on their own
    they cannot be determinative as to very compelling circumstances.

39. The very compelling circumstances existing over and above the genuine
    and subsisting relationships was identified by the Judge as the
    Secretary of State's failure to deport the claimant over a lengthy
    period of time. The Judge placed weight upon the claimant having
    continued to report to the Secretary of State for a period of at least
    12 years, with the implicit finding that the claimant had not absconded
    and gone underground. However, the Judge was required to consider the
    relevant circumstances in the round, the key events being:

      a. The claimant was convicted in October 2007 of a serious crime and
         sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.

      b. The Secretary of State served notice of decision to deport and
         accompanying reasons in February 2008.

      c. The claimant appealed to the AIT on the wholly false basis that he
         is a Zimbabwean national and could not be deported to Zimbabwe. By
         adopting the false identity, the claimant sought to rely upon the
         political situation in Zimbabwe to evade deportation. The appeal
         was dismissed by the AIT in April 2008.

      d. Despite knowing that his claim to be a Zimbabwean national was
         entirely false, the claimant pursued an appeal to the Upper
         Tribunal and a High Court review until he was appeal rights
         exhausted in March 2009.

      e. The decision to deport, which had been considered by the AIT on the
         basis that the claimant was a Zimbabwean national, was withdrawn in
         September 2009 upon the Secretary of State becoming aware that the
         claimant held two identities.

      f. A new notice of deportation, with attendant reasons, was issued in
         2010.

      g. Upon considering fingerprint evidence as well as evidence relating
         to the claimant's Nigerian passport, the FtT refused the claimant's
         appeal in February 2011. The claimant was identified by the FtT as
         Mr. Johnson Taiwo Gbenro, a national of Nigeria

      h. The claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused in June
         2011 and he became appeal rights exhausted.

      i. The deportation order was signed on 1 August 2011. The claimant's
         argument as to delay runs from this date.

      j. There is a delay by the Secretary of State in effecting deportation
         between 1 August 2011 and the receipt of further representations on
         or around 12 February 2013, a period of 17 months.

      k. The further representations, by which the claimant continued to
         assert that he is a Zimbabwean national, were refused and certified
         as clearly unfounded on 13 August 2013.

      l. The claimant's relationship with his wife, Ms. Iyamu, broke down in
         late 2015 and ended in March 2016.

      m. The claimant's relationship with Ms. [A] commenced either in 2015
         (as per evidence before the FtT, and Ms [A]'s letter dated 26
         September 2017 detailing that she was 5 weeks pregnant with the
         claimant's child in September 2015) or in 2016 (as per further
         representations, and undated letter of the claimant accompanying
         further representations).

      n. E naturalised as a British citizen in August 2016.

      o. There is a delay between the certification of further
         representations in 2013 and the claimant's detention in September
         2017, a period amounting to 4 years and 1 months. As a meeting with
         the Nigerian High Commission had been arranged for 6 October 2017 I
         find to the requisite standard that the Secretary of State had been
         seeking to secure an emergency travel document from the High
         Commission for at least some period of time during the 4 year
         hiatus.

      p. The claimant frustrated the securing of an emergency travel
         document by non-compliance. He refused to leave the detention
         centre and continued to deny that he is Mr. Johnson Taiwo Gbenro, a
         national of Nigeria. Such behaviour meant that as the Secretary of
         State was unable to secure the claimant's deportation, the claimant
         was released back into the community. From this time onwards, the
         claimant enjoyed the benefit of his non-compliance and his
         frustration of the emergency travel document process.

      q. During the course of his detention, the claimant submitted further
         representations on 29 September 2017, again asserting that he is a
         Zimbabwean national, which were followed by further representations
         dated 15 December 2017 and 30 May 2018. These representations
         again, in part, asserted that the claimant is a Zimbabwean national
         called Kelvin Tunde.

      r. Ms. [A] secured discretionary leave to remain on article 8 grounds,
         outside of the Rules, on 9 April 2018.

      s. Upon the further representations being considered by the Secretary
         of State to constitute a fresh claim, the claimant enjoyed appeal
         rights consequent to the refusal of his application to revoke the
         deportation order.

      t. The period of time from the signing of the deportation order during
         which the claimant did not enjoy the protection from removal under
         paragraph 353A of the Rules secured by further representations and
         the exercise of appeal rights amounts to 5 years and 8 months over
         a period of 8 years before the FtT hearing.

      u. The claimant enjoyed 2 years and 11 months residing in this country
         consequent to his having frustrated the Secretary of State's
         attempt to secure an emergency travel document.

      v. The claimant's relationship with Ms. [A] amounted to between 1 and
         1� years as at the date of his detention pending deportation in
         September 2017.

40. A significant factor in this timeline is that save for the claimant's
    significant non-compliance in 2017, there is a very strong likelihood
    that an emergency travel document would have been secured and the
    claimant deported some three years ago. The Secretary of State has a
    copy of his passport, now over 10 years old, which I find, on balance,
    would have positively aided the Nigerian High Commission's
    consideration as to whether or not to issue an emergency travel
    document. I further observe that at this time the claimant's
    relationship with Ms. [A] was relatively young. It is clear that the
    claimant has benefitted from his adverse, non-compliant behaviour by
    securing further time in this country and in doing so he frustrated the
    public interest in his deportation. Throughout such time, the claimant
    continued - and continues - to seek to further frustrate his
    deportation, as he did during his detention in 2017, by asserting that
    he is a Zimbabwean national called Kelvin Tunde despite the significant
    evidence that has established his true identity to the contrary.

41. Mr Timson was given time during the hearing to identify where the Judge
    had made any finding in the article 8 assessment as to the claimant's
    significant non-compliance. Mr. Timson accepted that save for a
    reference at [17] that the claimant refused to leave the detention
    centre and demonstrated non-compliance no further findings were made as
    to the significance of the claimant refusing to engage in the process
    that led to his release back into the community. I find that the
    reference at [17] is simply a summary of the claimant's history:

         'The appellant was detained on 25 September 2017 to take part in
         the Nigerian face-to-face scheme on 6 October 2017. The appellant
         refused to leave the detention centre and demonstrated non-
         compliance. The respondent notes a further dispute concerning his
         name and further checks taking place.'

42. The failure of the Judge to place such non-compliance into the article
    8 proportionality assessment is a material error of law. Such adverse
    behaviour is a significant factor relied upon by the Secretary of State
    and is to be properly weighed in the proportionality assessment.

43. The Judge did not take into account several other relevant factors in
    the proportionality assessment. No weight was given to the claimant
    relying upon his false identity from 2011 onwards, not only when
    frustrating efforts to secure an emergency travel document but also
    when making further representations that denied the Secretary of State
    the ability to deport him until their consideration under paragraph
    353A of the Rules. The claimant continued to assert his false identity
    up to and including the hearing before the FtT, where he gave evidence
    on the issue, though I observe that Mr. Timson who represented at that
    hearing made no submissions on this point before the Judge. No
    consideration was given to the development of the claimant's
    relationships with his partner and children having developed consequent
    to his non-compliance, nor as to the public interest in proposed
    deportees not benefiting from their adverse behaviour in frustrating
    deportation.

44. I further note as to the time taken by the Secretary of State to
    consider the various further representations, there is no specified
    period within which an immigration decision must be made: EB (Kosovo),
    at [13]. Though not determinative, or necessarily of great weight where
    there has been excessive delay, it is a relevant factor when assessing
    whether delay occurred.

45. It is clear on the face of the evidence that significant parts of delay
    were caused by the claimant. The Secretary of State's behaviour is not
    blameless, and there has been to date no explanation for the delay in
    deporting the claimant between 2013 and 2017 when efforts were made to
    secure an emergency travel document with the Nigerian High Commission.
    However, the significant concern as to the Judge's proportionality
    assessment is that no consideration is given at [114] and [115] as to
    the claimant's own actions, in circumstances where the Judge was to be
    mindful of the confirmation by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali that
    only a small minority of persons will be able to establish
    circumstances in which the public interest in deportation is
    outweighed. A fact specific assessment requires the actions of both
    parties to be considered.

46. I find that the Judge failed to undertake the fact-specific assessment
    required and when assessing proportionality concentrated solely on the
    failings of the Secretary of State. The Judge failed to comprehensively
    identify the factors that were to be placed into the balance for
    article 8 purposes in this matter. Such failure constitutes a material
    error of law.

47. In the circumstances I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    solely as to the finding that 'very compelling circumstances' arise so
    as to outweigh the public interest in the claimant's deportation:
    section 117C(3) of the 2002 Act and paragraph 398 of the Rules.

Remaking the Decision

48. The parties were in agreement that they had addressed the issues that
    they wanted me to consider and confirmed that if I were to set aside
    the decision, I could proceed to remake the decision without the need
    for a further hearing.

49. I observe the judgment of the Court of Appeal in OH (Algeria) v.
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1763, at
    [63] that as a matter of language and logic, very compelling
    circumstances is a very high bar indeed. A tribunal or court concerned
    cannot properly get to that stage unless and until it has found that
    the consequences of deportation will be so harsh as to outweigh the
    public interest in deportation, that public interest being the general
    one. In this matter, the claimant solely relies upon delay, having
    decided not to cross-appeal, and is therefore deemed to have accepted
    the Judge's adverse conclusions on all other aspects of his appeal.

50. The Judge's findings as to the appellant's article 8 appeal under
    section 117C(5) and paragraph 399(a) and (b) stand.

51. For the reasons detailed above no reasonable Judge could find on the
    facts arising in this matter that the delay of the Secretary of State
    in enforcing the deportation order is of such compelling nature to
    outweigh the public interest in the claimant's deportation in
    circumstances where significant reasons for the delay lie at the feet
    of the claimant: firstly, by his false representations as to his true
    identity; and secondly by the significant efforts he undertook to
    frustrate his deportation in 2017. The claimant has openly exhibited
    that he will undertake various means of frustrating his deportation, up
    to and including non-compliance, and it is not in the public interest
    that he benefit from such actions which contributed to the delay in his
    deportation up to the present time, as evidenced by his continuing
    assertion that he is a Zimbabwean national called Kelvin Sammy Tunde.

52. I find that the claimant has produced no reliable evidence to undermine
    the judicial finding of fact that he is Johnson Taiwo Gbenro, a
    national of Nigeria. I further find that to date the claimant has
    produced no credible evidence that he is a Zimbabwean national called
    Kelvin Sammy Tunde. His reliance upon this identity was initially a
    means of hiding his true identity and is now solely a means by which he
    engages in his continued efforts to frustrate his deportation from this
    country.

Notice of Decision

53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 8
    August 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal's, Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

54. I remake the decision. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 3 April 2020



TO THE REPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and so there is no fee award.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 3 April 2020

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing  on  the  covering
letter or covering email
