
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC/KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02197/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 April 2016                               |On 4 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)

                                   Between

                                     N G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel,
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge S Lal) who  allowed  an  appeal  by  the
    applicant on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights  grounds
    against the decision made on 16 October 2015 refusing to  grant  asylum
    and humanitarian protection.  In this decision  I  will  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, the  applicant  as
    the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Kosovo, born on  15  July  1989.   On  19
    March 2015 she applied for a multi-entry visit visa, which was  granted
    and remained valid until 28 September  2015.   On  24  April  2015  she
    entered the UK.  On 15 May 2015, the day she was due to leave, she gave
    birth to her daughter.  She claimed asylum on 14 August  2015  claiming
    that if she were to be returned to Kosovo, she would face  mistreatment
    from her brother and from the father of her child due to the fact  that
    she was born out of wedlock.

3.   The background to her claim can briefly be summarised as follows.   The
    appellant is a Muslim who lived in a rural area in the south of  Kosovo
    where she spent all her life.  Her problems began after her marriage in
    2012.  She was the victim of domestic violence from her husband and her
    parents-in-law.  They had a son but her husband left her. They divorced
    and she lost custody of her son and no longer  has  contact  with  him.
    After the divorce she returned to live with  her  brother.   She  began
    work in a shop, met a man (B) and began a relationship with him in July
    2014.  She  became  pregnant  in  September  2014,  realising  this  in
    November 2014.  When she told B, at first he seemed happy with the news
    but in January 2015 she was taken by B and two  of  his  friends  to  a
    house where she was drugged and when she woke up she found that she had
    been beaten and raped, she believed by more than one person.  She  told
    no-one what had happened and stayed at home for two weeks before  going
    back to work.

4.   She then started to receive threats from  B  over  the  phone  that  he
    would kill her  if  she  did  not  have  an  abortion.   These  threats
    continued until the end of February 2015 and she has not heard from him
    since.  In March 2015 she applied for a visit visa so  that  she  could
    visit her paternal uncle in the UK.  She said that it was her intention
    to say goodbye to her uncle, return to  Kosovo,  give  birth  and  then
    commit suicide.

5.   However, on the day the appellant was due to return, she gave birth  to
    her daughter in her uncle's  bathroom  and  then  attempted  to  commit
    suicide but her uncle stopped her.  She and her daughter were taken  to
    hospital.  Her daughter is now in the care of Social Services and being
    looked after by the uncle and aunt the appellant  was  (and  is  still)
    staying with.  She said that she would be at risk on return  to  Kosovo
    as her daughter's father had threatened to kill her if she did not have
    an abortion and her brother would kill her.

6.   The respondent accepted the appellant's identity  and  nationality  and
    also that of her daughter.  However, she did not accept either that her
    daughter's father had threatened to kill her if she  did  not  have  an
    abortion or that her brother wished  to  kill  her.   The  respondent's
    reasons are set out in paras 42  -  51  of  the  detailed  reasons  for
    refusal accompanying the notice of decision.  In any event it  was  the
    respondent's view that there would be a sufficiency  of  protection  on
    return to Kosovo or, in the alternative, the appellant  could  relocate
    internally.  The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant  could
    meet the requirements of the  rules  or  that  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances justifying a grant of  discretionary  leave  outside  the
    rules.

The Hearing Before the First Tribunal

7.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the judge heard  evidence
    from the appellant and her uncle.  The judge accepted the  evidence  of
    both.  The appellant's account of her marriage  was  supported  by  the
    production of  documents  which  gave  details  of  number  of  violent
    incidents and her uncle had given credible evidence as to  how  he  had
    travelled to Kosovo the previous year to obtain these  documents.   The
    judge commented that the account was also supported  by  the  objective
    evidence on the prevalence of  domestic  violence  in  the  appellant's
    culture.

8.   The judge was also satisfied with the appellant's evidence about  being
    raped by B.  He found that the fact that the threats stopped after  the
    rape were not material as he was satisfied that B had got  his  message
    across, as the judge put it, by the fact of the rape.   He  noted  that
    there had been a delay in claiming asylum but found that this  was  not
    material as he was satisfied the appellant was due to return to  Kosovo
    as evidenced by the plane ticket in the bundle, but it was on this  day
    that she gave birth in the UK and this could not have  been  predicted.
    He found that the overall account  was  supported  by  other  evidence,
    including records from the appellant's GP describing her as  presenting
    with severe depression and PTSD, the psychiatric report from the Sussex
    Partnership Trust of 3 February 2016 which gave a similar diagnosis and
    the material from the Crisis Resolution  and  Home  Treatment  Team  to
    confirm the overall picture.

9.   The judge said that he could not exclude  the  fact  that  B,  who  had
    arranged a violent gang rape in an attempt  to  get  the  appellant  to
    abort the child, would be equally  gravely  offended  if  she  were  to
    return with their daughter and would constitute a real risk to her.  So
    far as the brother was concerned he was satisfied from the evidence  of
    the appellant and her uncle that he would also be greatly  offended  by
    the appellant having a child out of wedlock, regarding it as an affront
    to his honour and that of his  family.   He  accepted  that  the  wider
    family did not know that the appellant had given birth in  the  UK  and
    that it was kept a secret because they were scared of  the  affront  to
    family honour.

10.  The judge then said:

         "29.     The Tribunal finds that on the particular  facts  of  this
             case that for this particular appellant being returned with  a
             child will entail a real risk  of  persecution  and  would  be
             consistent with the acknowledged heightened risk factors  such
             as the appellant's state of health,  particularly  her  mental
             health and the presence of her illegitimate child as  well  as
             the ability of this  appellant  to  access  wider  social  and
             community support in Kosovo.  The Tribunal notes that  in  her
             evidence she did not tell her brother of her  relationship  to
             [B] even before the gang rape which would suggest a real  fear
             of her brother's reaction to even knowing of the  relationship
             let alone what has happened since.   The  uncle  confirmed  in
             oral evidence that the wider family still do not know.


         30.  The Tribunal notes the expert report of Dr Joanna Hanson which
             notes that were the appellant to be returned, because  of  the
             particular factors in her case, she would not have  access  to
             effective state protection."

11.  The judge was accordingly  satisfied  the  appellant  had  demonstrated
    that she was at real risk of persecution on the basis of her membership
    of a particular social group, namely single  unmarried  women  with  an
    illegitimate child and the appeal was allowed on both asylum and  human
    rights grounds.

Grounds and Submissions

12.  In the grounds it is argued that the judge erred in law by  failing  to
    take into account or resolve conflicts of fact or opinion  on  material
    matters, namely failing to take into account the objective evidence  at
    paras 61-83 of the Reasons for Refusal  Letter  when  determining  that
    there was insufficient protection available to the appellant on return,
    failing to weigh the expert report of Dr Hanson against the evidence in
    the refusal decision, so failing to determine the issue of  sufficiency
    of protection on all the available evidence instead focusing solely  on
    the view of the expert and failing to take into account and resolve the
    conflict of opinion in relation to the appellant's ability to  relocate
    internally.  There was no consideration of internal relocation  by  the
    judge and the failure to make any findings on that issue amount  to  an
    error of law.

13.  It is then argued that the judge failed to give  any  adequate  reasons
    for his findings and in particular he failed to provide reasons why the
    expert report provided by  Dr  Hanson  is  indicative  of  insufficient
    protection available to the appellant. No reasons were provided why  Dr
    Hanson's evidence was preferred  and  no  reference  was  made  to  the
    content of the report or the objective evidence relied on by her and in
    consequence it was not known why the judge had preferred  her  evidence
    to that of the respondent.  Reliance was placed on Budhathoki  (reasons
    for decisions) [2014] UKUT 341 and in particular  para  14  which  says
    that it is necessary for a First-tier Tribunal judge  to  identify  and
    resolve the key conflicts in the evidence  and  explain  in  clear  and
    brief terms their reasons for preferring one case to the other so  that
    the parties can understand why they won or lost.


14.  Finally, it is argued that the judge made a  material  misdirection  of
    law on a material matter by     failing to consider the availability of
    internal relocation for  the  appellant  and  by  allowing  the  appeal
    without a full consideration of  whether  the  appellant  has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in her country of origin.

15.  Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    respondent's objective evidence as detailed in paras 61 to  83  of  the
    decision letter whilst accepting the expert report of Dr Joanna Hanson,
    to provide any reasons for accepting the expert report or  to  consider
    the viability of internal relocation.

16.  In his submissions Mr Avery  adopted  the  grounds,  arguing  that  the
    judge had failed to resolve adequately the difference in  view  between
    the respondent and Dr Hanson on the sufficiency of protection.  He  had
    failed to deal with internal relocation or to give a reasoned  decision
    enabling  the  respondent  to  understand  why  the  appeal  had   been
    successful.

17.  Mr Collins relied on the response of 23 March 2016 arguing  that  there
    had not been a failure to consider the respondent's objective evidence.
     No background material had been provided in  the  respondent's  bundle
    for the  hearing  and  the  decision  letter  simply  made  generalised
    reference to material much of  which  was  irrelevant  to  the  present
    appeal.  The most recent  background  evidence  had  been  referred  to
    extensively in the report of Dr Hanson.  The judge had  made  it  clear
    that the appeal was allowed on the particular facts  of  the  case  and
    although the judge had not specifically referred to the possibility  of
    internal relocation, that was not material in  the  present  case  when
    considered through the prism of the background material and the  expert
    report.  It was clear that  the  appellant  would  not  have  a  viable
    internal relocation option open to her in Kosovo.  Mr Collins submitted
    that, although the judge could arguably have  spelt  matters  out  more
    fully, the fact remained that he  had  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and her uncle and when those facts  were  looked  at  in  the
    light of the expert report and  the  country  guidance  in  AM  and  BM
    (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80,  it  was  clear  why  the
    appeal had been allowed.

Assessment of Whether There is an Error of Law

18.  I must consider whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside.  In substance the grounds  of  appeal
    challenge the judge's findings on whether there would be sufficiency of
    protection on return to Kosovo, arguing that the judge failed  to  take
    into account the evidence relied on by the respondent in  the  decision
    letter or, in the alternative, failed to give adequate reasons for  his
    decision.  As to internal relocation, it is argued that the judge erred
    in law by failing to deal with this issue  at  all.  On  the  issue  of
    sufficiency of protection although the judge could  have  set  out  his
    reasons more fully, I am not satisfied that he erred in law in any  way
    affecting the outcome of the  appeal.   The  judge  should  have  dealt
    specifically with internal relocation as that was in issue between  the
    parties and to that extent he erred in law, I am not satisfied  in  the
    light of his findings of fact and the evidence before him that there is
    any possibility that he would have found that relocation was  a  viable
    option.

19.  The respondent has set out in paras 61-85 of the  decision  letter  why
    she took the view that there would be a sufficiency  of  protection  in
    Kosovo.  She accepted that there were a number of problems  with  abuse
    and corruption in the law enforcement agencies there and  although  the
    government was investigating such matters, the mechanisms for doing  so
    were not equally effective throughout the country.  However, it was her
    view that the appellant had failed to demonstrate that the  authorities
    would be unable or unwilling to offer protection if she sought it.  The
    appellant's fear on return was based on threats of persecution from non-
    state agents and she had not demonstrated  that  they  would  have  any
    influence over the state authorities.

20.  In contrast in her report Dr Hanson concluded that on the basis of  her
    own knowledge, including over twenty years' experience  of  working  on
    Kosovo and consulting objective expert reports  on  that  country,  the
    appellant  would  not  have  sufficiency  of  recourse  to  timely  and
    effective state protection from possible attacks by her own family  and
    her daughter's father.  She believed that the traditional and continued
    social acceptance of gender-based violence in  Kosovo  meant  that  the
    appellant remained vulnerable to attack by her family.

21.  She said that two issues would arise  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of
    protection.  The first was the likelihood that her family or B would be
    aware of her return.  It was her view that Kosovo was  a  small  nation
    and this reflected on the appellant's ability to remain untraced if she
    returned.  The family social  structure  was  a  wide  one  with  large
    numbers of children, cousins and relatives in every family due to  high
    birth  rates  and  so  people  had  wider  circles   of   friends   and
    acquaintances.  Taking this with the fact that social media and  access
    to  IT  had  totally  changed  the  manner  in  which  information  was
    transmitted and exchanged in Kosovo, if  someone  for  whatever  reason
    wanted to find the appellant, these factors  with  social  media  would
    greatly enable the search.

22.  The second issue was the ability of the police and  other  institutions
    to protect the appellant.  Whilst the respondent's decision referred to
    "some corruption in Kosovo", Dr Hanson would argue that it was systemic
    and far more serious. She cited from  the  European  Commission  Kosovo
    2015 Report describing Kosovo  as  "a  country  of  endemic  levels  of
    corruption" and referred to the European Commission's third  report  on
    progress  by  Kosovo  in  fulfilling  the  requirements  of  the   visa
    liberalisation roadmap published in December  2015  which  specifically
    stated that Kosovo's track record  in  adjudicating  serious  organised
    crime and corruption cases remained weak.  Dr Hanson said that  if  the
    appellant were to relocate, this would mean  deregistering  from  where
    she was presently registered and there was no guarantee that this would
    remain a secret in small communities and there was no guarantee of data
    protection.  Further, a  recent  report  published  by  Kosovo  Women's
    Network in  October  2015  strongly  stated  a  recurring  theme  among
    respondents that "the state did not offer enough protection  for  women
    who report violence".  One of the social workers interviewed said  that
    some stages  were  missing  in  the  process  of  services  offered  by
    institutions, meaning that it was  not  possible  to  advise  women  to
    report their cases as it could not be assured that  institutions  would
    support them to the end of the process.

23.  In her conclusions Dr Hanson said that whilst there was no  doubt  that
    the Kosovo government had made legislative steps, created institutions,
    strategies and action plans to better address the problems of combating
    domestic violence, much of these remained largely  only  on  paper  and
    there was a serious and unacceptable problem  of  implementation.   The
    fact that domestic violence was on the increase substantiated her view.
     It was her opinion that the appellant was  justified  in  lacking  the
    trust to turn to the authorities if she had to.  In  this  context  she
    noted that the appellant had said that she had not received sufficiency
    of protection when she had suffered from domestic violence in the past.
     She had contacted the police but was not given protection: see para 12
    of her statement dated 27 January 2016.

24.  The judge accepted the opinion set out in Dr Hanson's report and  there
    is no reason to believe that he did so without properly considering the
    evidence as a whole.  He found that there were  particular  factors  in
    the appellant's case, which supported the view that she would not  have
    access to effective state protection.  In  the  light  of  the  judge's
    findings of  primary  fact,  which  were  properly  open  to  him,  his
    acceptance of the expert report  taken  with  the  background  evidence
    filed on behalf of the appellant, including the US Department of  State
    Report for 2014 and 2015, the  Amnesty  International  Report  and  the
    Kosovo 2014 Progress Report, it was open to  him  to  find  that  there
    would not be a sufficiency of protection in the appellant's  particular
    circumstances.

25.  So far as the issue  of  internal  relocation  is  concerned  this  was
    covered in Dr Hanson's report.  It was  her  view  that  the  appellant
    would not be able to keep a low profile and that she would have to  re-
    establish her life virtually singlehandedly  and  without  any  support
    from  her  family.   Finding  accommodation  and  employment  would  be
    extremely difficult, not only because of her  mental  health  situation
    but also because she has no qualifications and there  are  high  female
    employment rates in Kosovo.  She referred to a report from the  Refugee
    Board of Canada which gave clear examples of how difficult it would  be
    for a single woman relocating to Pristina,  describing  it  as  "almost
    impossible" for a single woman to be able to access social housing.

26.  In addition to this it is clear from the evidence  that  the  appellant
    is vulnerable as a result of her mental health conditions.   These  are
    set out in the psychiatric report prepared by  Dr  Naliyawala  dated  3
    February 2016.  He refers to the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
    admitted to the local District General Hospital between 27 January 2016
    and 3 February 2016 when she  was  discharged.   He  described  her  as
    remaining severely depressed and continuing to show signs and  symptoms
    of post-traumatic stress disorder.  She continued to  express  suicidal
    ideas but was not delusional and  showed  no  formal  thought  disorder
    although she did maintain that she could hear voices inside  her  head.
    She  was  currently  on   fluoxetine   and   mirtazapine,   which   are
    antidepressants and at night on quetiapine.

27.  The problems with the appellant's mental health are  confirmed  by  the
    evidence from the Family Support Team and in particular in  the  letter
    of 18 January 2016.  The view of the local authority from the documents
    submitted for the hearing is that without the support of the great aunt
    and uncle it may not have been possible for the appellant's daughter to
    have returned to her mother's care in the light  of  her  very  fragile
    mental health assessed as stemming from her experiences in  Kosovo  and
    that whilst the appellant's treatment continues, it is  important  that
    her aunt and uncle continue to provide support.  It  is  currently  the
    local authority's view is that it is in her daughter's  best  interests
    to remain in the UK with the appellant.

28.  When all these factors are taken  into  account,  there  is  compelling
    evidence that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate in
    Kosovo, even assuming that there is an area where it would be safe  for
    her to do so.

29.  In summary, whilst I accept that the judge could have set  his  reasons
    more fully for his decision  on  sufficiency  of  protection  the  fact
    remains that having accepted the evidence of the appellant,  her  uncle
    and Dr Hanson, it is clear why he reached his decision on  this  issue.
    When the evidence is looked at as a whole, including in particular  the
    medical and psychiatric evidence  and  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    present best interests of the appellant's child, this is a  case  where
    there is clear and compelling evidence to support a finding  that  that
    relocation could not be achieved in safety and in any  event  would  be
    unduly harsh.  For these reasons I am not satisfied that this is a case
    where the decision should be set aside or that such errors as the judge
    made had any bearing on the outcome of the appeal.

Decision

30.  Although the First-tier Tribunal erred in law, I am not satisfied  that
    the errors were such that the decision should  be  set  aside  save  in
    respect of the humanitarian protection  appeal  in  the  light  of  the
    appeal being allowed on  asylum  grounds  .   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on asylum and human rights grounds therefore stands.

31.  The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.   No  application  has
    been made to vary or discharge it and it remains in force until further
    order.



Signed   H J E Latter                            Dated: 27 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter




