
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/02039/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17th December 2019                |On 13th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     UV
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan, of Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
                    Peirce and & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpretation:
Mr K Kangalingam, in the Tamil language.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1972. She came  to  the
    UK with a visit visa to attend her mother's funeral in  February  2013,
    and returned to Sri Lanka in March 2013. She re-entered the UK on  31st
    July 2013. On 10th December 2013 the applicant claimed asylum based  on
    a fear of political persecution. Her application was refused in January
    2015, and her appeal was dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  May
    2016, however this decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and  it
    was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard. The  appeal  was
    reheard and  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  in  a
    decision dated 20th July 2017, which was upheld on appeal.

 2. The appellant made further submissions on 10th January 2019, which were
    accepted as a fresh claim but refused by the respondent in  a  decision
    dated 4th February 2019.      Her  appeal  against  this  decision  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davidson  in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 29th May 2019.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted,  and  I  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons set out  in  my  decision  of
    15th October 2019 which is appended to this decision at Annex A.

 4. The matter came before me to remake the appeal. I was  aware  that  the
    appellant was a vulnerable witness,  and  checks  were  made  that  she
    understood and felt, in so far as that was possible,  comfortable  with
    the proceedings. Mr Nathan said  that  two  witnesses  were  unable  to
    attend: the appellant's father, Mr PM, who had problems with a  painful
    hip, for whom there was a medical report, and Mr SRU,  founder  of  the
    London Tamil Literacy Association, who had flown to America to go on  a
    cruise, the evidence of which was in the bundle. It was also clear that
    the appellant's sister was not present, and  that  the  appellant  said
    that this was due to reasons of  ill  health,  although  there  was  no
    medical evidence to support this.  Mr  Nathan  said  that  he  was  not
    instructed to apply for an adjournment despite  the  absence  of  these
    witnesses. He asked however that it be noted that Mr PM and Mr SRU  had
    both attended before the First-tier Tribunal, and whilst  the  findings
    of that Tribunal had been set aside he argued that what they  said  and
    the fact of their previous attendance was relevant to this decision.

    Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

 5. The appellant's evidence as set out in her statement, her account to Mr
    Martin, who provides the medical scars report,  and  in  oral  evidence
    given through the Tribunal interpreter is, in summary, as follows.

 6. She says that she worked as a maths and science  teacher  in  her  home
    town of Vavuniya from 1996 when she qualified as a teacher until  2013,
    when she was promoted to deputy  director  of  education  for  Vavuniya
    North. She has provided a copy of her  appointment  letter  dated  18th
    April 2013 for this post.  In 2003 she got married, and  has  had  four
    children with her husband.

 7. She says that she comes from a patriotic Tamil family  who  believe  in
    the independence struggle, and many relatives joined and fought for the
    LTTE. She says that she underwent two and a half months  training  with
    the LTTE in 1991, and then 4 months media training with them. She  says
    that she worked as a reporter with their media section under  2000.  At
    that point she was arrested by the Sri Lankan authorities and  held  on
    house arrest for a month, after  this  time  she  reduced  her  writing
    somewhat.  She says that she has been writing  poems  about  the  Tamil
    nationalist struggle under 4 different pseudonyms. Amongst other things
    she wrote a poem about the deceased leader of the LTTE which appears at
    page 261- 265 of the bundle, entitled Voice of Hero's Stone.

 8. She says she travelled to  the  UK  in  February  2013  to  attend  her
    mother's funeral, and went back to Sri Lanka on 18th  March  2013.  She
    has provided a copy of her passport which shows that she left Sri Lanka
    on 19th February 2013 and returned on 18th  March  2013.  Her  passport
    also shows stamps for her leaving Sri Lanka on 30th July 2013  and  re-
    entering the UK on 31st July 2013.  She has also provided  a  coroner's
    interim certificate of the fact of death dated 29th  January  2013  for
    her mother.

 9. She says that after re-entering Sri Lanka, on 21st March 2013, she  was
    detained by the authorities and taken to a CID camp where she was  kept
    in a small room and given only a little food and water. There  she  was
    interrogated and tortured by being kicked,  beaten  with  a  stick  and
    electric wire, punched, slapped and raped. She says she was released on
    26th March 2013 on payment of a bribe with a condition that she  report
    twice a week. She has provided a report from Abisha Hospital  regarding
    her being seen by them on 26th March 2013 for the sequelae of  her  ill
    treatment. The report is dated 26th  June  2013,  and  appears  in  the
    bundle.  She says that she reported to the police until the  25th  July
    2013 following her release from detention.  On  this  date  an  officer
    tried to abuse her, and so she attacked him with a bottle and ran  way.
    She then went into hiding and left Sri Lanka, arriving  in  the  UK  on
    31st July 2013. She lodged a complaint with the Human Rights Commission
    of Sri Lanka in Vavuniya regarding her  abuse  by  the  authorities  on
    reporting on 26th July 2013, and has  provided  the  receipt  for  that
    complaint.

10. The appellant says that her husband was detained by CID  and  taken  to
    Vavuniya police station on 18th December 2017 after the launch  of  one
    of her books in December 2017. He was released after  the  intervention
    of Mr Anton Punethanayagam, an attorney, (who  has  provided  a  letter
    regarding this). She has contact with her husband in Sri  Lanka  as  he
    makes secret calls to her between once a week and once a month. She  is
    therefore aware that the  CID  continue  to  make  enquiries  with  her
    husband about her being involved with the TGTE; the  CID  say  that  he
    should not support her and she should surrender to the authorities. She
    says the visits to the house by the CID have  caused  her  children  to
    panic. She denied that she had ever said her family were in hiding: she
    says  she  has  always  said  simply  that  they  were  afraid  of  the
    authorities.

11. She believes that her publisher has distributed her books widely in Sri
    Lanka, and she hopes that they are still being sold, and believes  that
    it is possible to buy them in Sri Lanka as a friend had  told  her  she
    was able to buy one. She knows that the publisher has faced threats and
    enquiries from the CID.

12.  She  says  that  she  has  attended   anti   Sri   Lankan   government
    demonstrations in the UK, and that this will additionally place her  at
    risk. She has been heavily involved with the TGTE since  January  2017,
    and has provided a TGTE membership card. She says that she  joined  the
    organisation at this point as she had previously lived far away, and it
    was only at this point she had the practical  opportunity  to  join  it
    actively. She was in contact with some TGTE people before this, but has
    no documentary evidence to support this.

13. With respect to her TGTE activities she  has  organised  protests:  for
    instance one against the northern province governor outside the  Oxford
    Union in October 2018, and two outside the Sri Lankan  High  Commission
    in February 2018. She was also involved in a protest  outside  the  Sri
    Lankan High Commission which was filmed  by  an  official  in  February
    2019.

14. She was involved in a protest outside Westminster Magistrates Court  of
    a trial of Sri Lankan Brigadier Prianka Fernando, which was also filmed
    by the same person from the  High  Commission  in  February  2019.  She
    prepared and wrote placards and arranged the transport for them  to  be
    delivered to the venue and then returned at the end of the protest; she
    informed people of the importance of attending via text message -  they
    have a "group" but others (about 24/25) are informed by  text  message;
    she guided those at the protest to ensure that the traffic and  general
    public were not obstructed; once at the protest she shouted and  yelled
    slogans. She said that between 50 and 100 people attended the protest.

15. The appellant was also involved with helping to  organise  the  protest
    against the Sri Lankan disappeared on 30th August 2019 which took place
    in Downing Street, which was a large  demonstration  jointly  organised
    with other groups. She was involved with similar organisational matters
    as with the Brigadier Prianka  Fernando  trial  protest:  sending  text
    messages, arranging placards and transport.

16. Aside from attending protests she has written about the Tamil struggle,
    published poems, collected signatures on petitions, organised  a  blood
    donation campaign, taken part in  human  rights  day,  sports  day  and
    heroes day celebrations and remembrance days, been involved  with  TGTE
    election campaigns, done lobbying at the Labour Party  conference,  and
    protested about disappearances, and helped organising a  conference  on
    Tamil genocide. She has submitted a  large  number  of  photographs  as
    supporting evidence of this sur place activity.

17. The appellant continues to take 3 anti-depressant medications  for  her
    mental health problems: propranolol, mirtazapine  and  citalopram,  and
    produced the boxes of her current medication to the Upper Tribunal.

18. Mr KP, brother of the appellant attended the Upper  Tribunal  and  gave
    evidence through the interpreter  in  support  of  the  appellant.  His
    written and oral evidence was, in summary as follows; He came to the UK
    in November 2007 with Tier 1 work permission with his wife. He is now a
    naturalised British citizen. The appellant is one of his older sisters.
    She has written poems since she was young. She was  involved  with  the
    LTTE when he was  at  primary  school  and  used  to  write  for  their
    publications. He knows the pseudonyms she has used. He was aware of her
    arrest and detention in 2000, and that this led  to  her  reducing  her
    writing which was supportive of the LTTE. He believes the appellant was
    happy with her life as a married woman with four  children  and  a  job
    first as a teacher and then assistant director of education in Vavuniya
    until her arrest in 2013.

19. He was aware that she was arrested by the authorities in 2013 after she
    returned to Sri Lanka having attended her mother's funeral in  the  UK.
    Her husband had called his father about her  arrest  by  the  CID,  and
    after she was released the appellant had called one of his other  older
    sisters.

20. He met the appellant at Manchester airport when  she  managed  to  come
    back to the UK in July 2013 and that at that time she  was  crying  and
    saying her life was ruined, and that she would have  died  if  she  had
    stayed in Sri Lanka. She stayed with him and his family  in  Liverpool.
    They were going to take the appellant to claim asylum on  28th  October
    2013 when they were  involved  in  a  bad  traffic  accident,  and  the
    appellant was injured and had to go to hospital. (There is  a  document
    from East Midlands Ambulance Services dated  28th  October  2013  which
    corroborates the appellant being injured, and  a  picture  of  a  badly
    damaged car in the bundle) As a result of the car  crash  he  says  the
    appellant delayed claiming asylum until 10th December 2013.

21. He fell out with the appellant as his wife did not like the  fact  that
    the appellant was claiming asylum and living with them. As a result the
    appellant moved into NASS accommodation. He has now reconciled with the
    appellant, and feels sorry for her and so is providing a statement.

22. He says that he speaks to the appellant's children on the phone once or
    twice a month when their father calls him  on  his  mobile  phone.  The
    children are very concerned about their mother.  He  was  unsure  about
    whether they went to school regularly. He assumes that their father  is
    in employment in Sri Lanka. He did not  know  whether  the  appellant's
    husband continued to have problems with the authorities  as  he  rarely
    speaks to him. He is aware that the appellant is involved with the TGTE
    in the UK, but knows only that she helps  organise  events  and  is  an
    active volunteer with them. The last time he went to Sri Lanka  was  in
    approximately  2015  to  attend  another  sister's  daughter's  puberty
    ceremony.

23. Mr Sockalingam Yogalingam attended the Upper Tribunal and gave evidence
    in English. His evidence in his letter of 22nd October  2018  and  oral
    evidence is in summary as follows. He is a TGTE MP. The TGTE fights for
    the right to form a free Tamil Eelam, a separate  Tamil  state  in  the
    north and east provinces of Sri Lanka. The TGTE has  no  employees  and
    relies  entirely  on  volunteers,  he  himself  is  a  volunteer.   All
    volunteers are therefore members. There is no subscription but there is
    a charge of �15 for an identity card which is  valid  for  five  years.
    There are 20 MPs in the UK, but at the  last  weekly  meeting  only  10
    attended as not all MPs can make all meetings. There are 94 MPs  around
    the world, and they meet via a Skype like video conferencing technology
    called Zoom once a month. He said that the website, which is updated by
    an MP in Switzerland who is  their  UN  representative,  has  not  been
    updated since the elections in April  2019  and  so  is  not  currently
    accurate. The TGTE do not openly support charities in Sri Lanka as they
    are a proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka,  and  this  would  lead  to
    trouble for those charities, but they do send money to  some  charities
    privately.

24. The appellant has been a volunteer with the TGTE  since  January  2017,
    and despite her  own  traumatic  history  has  a  responsible  role  in
    organising events and public demonstrations for them, for instance  the
    TGTE National Sports Day (an event with a  TGTE  political  message  as
    well as sporting competitions) and Heroes Day in  2018.  The  appellant
    has continued her activism with them in 2019 and was involved with  the
    international human rights' day event in December 2019 at SOAS; and  in
    the protests relating  to  the  trial  of  Brigadier  Prianka  Fernando
    outside Westminster Magistrates Court in  February  2018  and  December
    2019. Mr Yogalingam said that  he  gave  evidence  in  that  trial.  He
    explained that the appellant was involved with  creating  placards  and
    banners and returning them at the end of the protest; making sure  that
    the protest went well, with no problems with the public;  and  shouting
    slogans at the protests. He explained  that  the  TGTE  volunteers,  of
    which there are about 2000 in the UK, are alerted  to  protests  via  a
    Whatsapp Group, the website and text messages. They  also  use  TV  and
    newspapers to communicate, and he noted the appellant had herself  been
    on television (a Tamil channel called IBC) promoting  the  TGTE  sports
    day in 2017. He did not know if the appellant had ever appeared on  the
    TGTE website, but said it was possible.

25. Mr Yogalingam is aware that the appellant is also  a  poet  who  writes
    about the Tamil liberation struggle, and released a book of  poetry  on
    27th May 2017 about the war in Sri Lanka and the suffering as a  result
    of that war. He spoke at the book launch for this book. He thought that
    the Sri Lankan authorities would ban the appellant's book if they  knew
    about it, but that it would  be  possible  to  find  it  in  Sri  Lanka
    nonetheless.

26. Mr Yogalingam believes that the appellant is likely to be  of  interest
    to the Sri Lankan authorities, given her public  political  campaigning
    for an independent investigation into the government's war  crimes  and
    her ardent support for independence for Tamils in Sri  Lanka.  He  also
    believed that her activism would also have put her family in Sri  Lanka
    at risk.

27. The written evidence of the appellant's father,  Mr  PM,  who  provided
    evidence of ill-health and it was submitted  was  thus  was  unable  to
    attend the Upper Tribunal is, in summary, as follows. He and  his  wife
    supported the LTTE from the 1980s, and after the armed  struggle  ended
    in 2009 he supported the Tamil diaspora groups such as the TGTE. He  is
    aware of the appellant's activism for the Tamil cause and  her  writing
    and pseudonyms. He came to the UK in  2007.  When  his  wife  died  the
    appellant came to the UK to  attend  her  mother's  funeral,  and  left
    again. The appellant told him that she had been questioned  at  Colombo
    airport on her return. He heard that she had been arrested after  entry
    from her husband; the appellant spoke to her sister in the UK when  she
    was released and told  her  she  had  to  continue  to  report  to  the
    authorities. In July 2013 she came back to the UK. Once she was in  the
    UK the appellant told him that she had been ill-treated and  would  not
    be able to return to Sri Lanka. The appellant had a time when  she  had
    fallen out with her brother and sister in the UK. He provides her  with
    emotional support and encourages her to write poems. In 2017 he went to
    Sri Lanka. Whilst he was there the appellant's husband was arrested  by
    CID because of the appellant's  book  launch.  He  looked  after  their
    children whilst the appellant's husband was detained.

28. The written evidence of Ms VK, who  the  appellant  gave  evidence  was
    unwell and could not attend the  Upper  Tribunal  is,  in  summary,  as
    follows. She came to the UK in October 2001 as a spouse. She is married
    with two children. The appellant is her younger sister. Her sister  has
    written poems since the 1980s. She  was  involved  with  the  LTTE  and
    writing for their publications. She knows the pseudonyms she has  used.
    She was aware of her arrest and detention in  2000.  She  believes  the
    appellant was happy with her life until 2013. She was  aware  that  she
    was arrested by the authorities in 2013 after she returned to Sri Lanka
    having attended her mother's funeral in the  UK.  There  were  problems
    between the appellant and her  and  her  husband  after  the  appellant
    decided that she had to claim  asylum  in  the  UK.  She  believes  the
    appellant would be arrested and tortured if returned to Sri Lanka,  and
    therefore has decided to give a statement.

29. Mr SRU, a Sri Lankan writer, accountant, and founder and  head  of  the
    London Tamil Literacy  Association  (LTLA),  also  provided  a  written
    statement but did not attend to give evidence as he was on holiday on a
    cruise. In short summary his evidence is as follows. He came to the  UK
    in 1987, and has been writing since 1979. He has  known  the  appellant
    since 2000, as she knew his mother. He knew she was a writer  and  poet
    before he met her, and knows of two of her pseudonyms.  She  is  highly
    regarded in Tamil literary circles. After he came  to  the  UK  he  had
    contact through phone and email, and met her on visits to Sri Lanka. He
    met her at her mother's funeral, and then in August 2013 they spoke  on
    the phone and met after she had had to flee Sri Lanka because of  being
    detained and tortured. He encouraged her to continue to write  to  help
    deal with her emotional difficulties. The LTLA released her poems in  a
    book, with a book release at Ealing Amman  Temple  on  27th  May  2017.
    Afterwards this book was also released through  the  linked  Sri  Lanka
    Tamil Literacy Association (SLTLA) in Sri Lanka, with a launch on  17th
    December 2017 in Vavuniya. Following the event he was  stopped  in  Sri
    Lanka by CID in a white van, and questioned in the van about  the  book
    launch and the appellant. The CID said that the poems were against  Sri
    Lanka and the government. He  was  not  detained  as  the  other  SLTLA
    members were there and demanded that they should go with him if he  was
    arrested, but he was warned not to work with the appellant. After  this
    he changed hotel in Vavuniya, then went back to Colombo and returned to
    the UK.

30. There is also a statement from  the  appellant's  husband,  Mr  PV.  He
    confirms that he was arrested the day after attending  the  appellant's
    book launch arranged by  the  SLTLA  on  18th  December  2017.  He  was
    interrogated by the CID who thought he had  a  part  in  arranging  the
    launch, which was not the case, and they threaten to beat him and  kill
    him saying that the  appellant  was  working  against  the  Sri  Lankan
    government from the UK and working with the LTTE to  restart  the  war.
    They showed him pictures of his wife engaging in political activity  in
    London. They said that they did not believe that he did not know  about
    the  appellant's  activities   in   London.   He   was   seen   by   Mr
    Punethanayagam's junior lawyer on 19th December 2017, and  released  in
    the afternoon of that day. Since that time CID officers regularly  come
    to his house to question him with pictures of his wife taking  part  in
    political activities, asking for information and demanding that he  get
    her to stop, and upsetting their children.

31. The medical evidence in this case consists of  two  reports  of  Mr  AI
    Martin, consultant  in  emergency  medicine  who  provides  reports  on
    scarring. He confirms his duty to the Court, and I find has appropriate
    expertise to provide these reports. He examined the appellant in  March
    2015 and recorded that she suffered from psychological problems and had
    a number of scars on her back and lower limbs.  He  was  also  provided
    with photos of her scaring taken in August 2013 which showed  the  same
    scars but at any earlier point of healing. Mr  Martin  found  that  the
    scars on the back were most likely to have been caused by a third party
    as a result of the appellant being beaten with sticks or wires in 2013.
    Consideration was given to the appearance of the scars and the  process
    of healing, to the possibility that they  were  self-inflicted  or  had
    been caused in another way, but this was found  to  be  very  unlikely.
    Self-infliction  by  proxy  was  also  considered  but  there  was   no
    presenting fact making it more than a  remote  possibility.  Mr  Martin
    found that the scars on the lower limbs were likewise  consistent  with
    being caused by being beaten as described by the appellant. Mr Martin's
    opinion is  that  the  scars  are  "typical",  following  the  Istanbul
    Protocol, and overall he has "no doubt that the injuries were caused by
    being intentionally injured and that  they  are  likely  to  have  been
    caused by a third party in detention as described by the claimant."

32. There is also a letter from Mr AI Martin dated 12th November 2019,  and
    this concerns the appellant's left wrist facture. He has considered the
    Abisha Hospital Letter dated 26th June  2013  regarding  the  appellant
    which states that she had a left radius  facture,  and  on  examination
    finds that she has physical manifestations which are consistent with  a
    previous facture. He maintains his previous  opinion  with  respect  to
    torture.

33. The psychiatric evidence in this case consists of two reports from Dr S
    Dhumad, consultant psychiatrist. The first is  dated  10th  April  2015
    where it was found she suffered from moderate depressive episode,  PTSD
    and an adjustment disorder. At that time she was on two  antidepressant
    medications. The second is dated 1st November  2018,  which  maintained
    the same diagnosis as the first report but adds that she  was  also  at
    moderate risk of suicide. A number of prescriptions for antidepressants
    are included in the bundle. There is also a GP letter from Dr  P  Kumar
    of Townsend  Medical  Centre  dated  21st  August  2014  regarding  the
    appellant's depressive symptoms and reports of flash backs to  episodes
    of torture.

34. The  lawyer's  evidence  consists  of  two  letters  from  Mr  P  Anton
    Punethanayagam, attorney at law in Vavuniya. The  first  is  dated  9th
    June 2015 and confirms that he  represented  the  appellant  after  her
    arrest at the request of her husband who came to  his  office  on  22nd
    March 2013, the appellant having been arrested by  CID  on  21st  March
    2013. His junior was told by the police that she had been  detained  by
    CID as it was alleged she was involved with the LTTE, and that  as  the
    investigation was being handled by CID they could not  do  anything  at
    that point. Later the appellant's husband told him he had obtained  the
    release of the appellant through informal means and  that  she  was  on
    reporting conditions. Later her husband came to him again  and  explain
    that the appellant had been harassed sexually on reporting and had  hit
    the officer and escaped, and as a result had gone into hiding.  He  was
    being harassed by the authorities as a result, and came to report  this
    to the lawyer on a number  of  occasions  as  he  was  afraid  for  the
    appellant's safety.  The second letter from Mr Punethanayagam is  dated
    9th January 2019 and is regarding the fact he sent a junior to the  CID
    unit of the Vavuniya police station on 19th December 2017  to  get  the
    release of the  appellant's  husband  at  the  behest  of  his  younger
    brother. It was clear from the  discussion  with  CID  that  there  was
    concern that he sent the appellant information,  and  her  husband  was
    warned that if he had contact with the appellant he would  be  arrested
    immediately. Mr Punethanayagam was unable to  confirm  whether  he  had
    assisted the release of the appellant's husband in an informal way  for
    safety reasons, although he noted that this is common.

35. Mr Melvin submitted that the appeal  should  be  dismissed  and  placed
    reliance on his oral submissions; the reasons for refusal letter  dated
    4th February 2019; the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Traynor promulgated on 3rd August 2017; and his skeleton  argument.  Mr
    Nathan argued that the appeal should be allowed  and  relied  upon  his
    oral submissions; the skeleton  argument  of  Ms  U  Miszkiel  and  her
    schedule of evidence from March 2019. I do not set their arguments  out
    in this decision but deal with what was said in my conclusions. I  have
    considered the consolidated bundle of evidence from the appellant,  the
    respondent's bundle and the Home Office Country Policy and  Information
    Note: Sri Lanka: Tamil separatism.

    Conclusions - Error of Law

36. In my decision-making I must start  from  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Traynor. Judge Traynor considered the case based on  the
    appellant's profile as a writer and LTTE supporter in Sri Lanka and her
    contended arrest, detention and torture in March 2013.

37.  Judge Traynor concluded, in summary as follows in his decision:

       . That she was not a credible witness and that this was "at the fore"
         in his determination of the appeal [58] and [91].

       .  He noted that there was no passport evidence  that  the  appellant
         had returned to Sri Lanka from the UK in March 2013 and  then  come
         back to the UK in July 2013 [60] and [65].

       . He noted that Mr Martin (in the  scarring  report)  found  she  had
         injuries which were not self-inflicted and which  were  typical  of
         beatings and accepts that she has those injuries [77] and [85], and
         that they would have left her traumatised as set out by Dr  Dhumad,
         but as Mr Martin not dealt with the left wrist  fracture  mentioned
         in the Abisha hospital report, and the Abisha hospital  report  was
         very brief and obtained 3 months after the alleged  event  with  no
         adequate explanation as to  why  this  was  not  done  earlier,  he
         concludes that therefore the medical evidence was not reliable  and
         the injuries had not been sustained at the hands of the Sri  Lankan
         authorities.

       .  He held against the appellant that there  were  visa  applications
         made by the appellant's husband and children in April and June 2013
         and her delay in claiming asylum until December 2013 [ 63-64].

       .  He held against the appellant the lack of any supporting  evidence
         from her  sister  and  other  family  members,  this  was  seen  as
         particularly important [65], [67], [87] and [90] in finding against
         the credibility of her claim, although the letters from her husband
         were deemed to be self-serving.

       . It was found that there was a  lack of evidence of  the  impact  of
         the contended detention on her ability to work and live [66];  that
         her past activism history was found inconsistent with her holding a
         senior position in the education ministry in Vavuniya [66]  and  it
         is found that she had "failed to notify  the  authorities  in  that
         country of the events which she has described  and  where  she  was
         best placed to do so" and that she had failed to  provide  evidence
         "that the Sri Lankan authorities, had they been informed  of  these
         alleged events, would not have acted to protect her."[93].

       . It was found that the lawyer's letter from Mr Punethanayagam  dated
         9th June 2015 was to be given no  weight,  even  though  there  was
         evidence from the respondent that the lawyer had told  the  British
         High Commission he had truly written the letter, as  the  appellant
         had inconsistently said she was  released  from  detention  through
         intervention of the lawyer instructed by her  husband  whereas  the
         lawyer says although he sent an assistant  to  try  to  investigate
         what had happened to her but he was not involved in  obtaining  her
         release [70].

       . He finds that the appellant has written the "emotional  literature"
         placed before the Tribunal but that "none of it could  remotely  be
         considered to imply that it is critical of the  government  of  Sri
         Lanka in its current or any previous activities involving the  LTTE
         or anyone of  Tamil  ethnicity."[79]  and  that  as  she  had  been
         interviewed about it on Tamil TV this was clearly evidence that  it
         would not put her at risk, and there was no evidence her literature
         had been published in Sri Lanka [81].

       .  He also notes that there was a letter form  the  TGTE  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal dated 7th June 2017  saying  she  supports  the
         organisation, but finds that this  document  was  vague  and  self-
         serving, and there  was  no  evidence  she  was  active  with  this
         organisation [83].

       . The letter to the Sri Lankan Human Rights Commission was not to  be
         given weight as it was a self-serving unreliable  document  as  the
         appellant had not followed up the complaint [86].

       . He finds that it against the credibility of the  history  that  she
         was able to exit the airport from Sri Lanka [91].

38. It is clear that a number of the factual  issues  identified  by  Judge
    Traynor as against the appellant in establishing a credible claim  have
    now moved on, and that there is evidence which Judge Traynor identified
    as missing. There is now evidence, in the form of  her  passport,  that
    the appellant did indeed return to Sri Lanka in  March  2013  and  come
    back to the UK in July 2013. Mr Martin has also provided an  additional
    report  which  confirms  that  there  is  physical  evidence  that  the
    appellant had broken her wrist in 2013, and thus that  his  opinion  is
    entirely consistent with that of the  contemporaneous  Abisha  Hospital
    report. There is clear  and  accepted  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    literature has been published  in  Sri  Lanka,  and  I  find  that  her
    literary work is clearly reflective of her views being critical of  the
    Sri Lankan government and sympathetic to the Tamil  nationalist  course
    (see for example translation of the poem at page 264 of the appellant's
    bundle entitled voice of Hero's Stone which references a separate state
    and  Tamils  uniting  to  fight  and  save  Tamils;  and  the   English
    translation of her volume of poems Bleeding  Blossoms  on  Bodhi  Trees
    (Witnesses of the Voiceless of the Eezham War) which gives not only her
    pseudonym but her full real name and clearly relates the poems  to  the
    civil war in Sri  Lanka  and  says  that  they  are  "stirring  up  the
    political consciousness of her fellow fighters"). There  are  also  now
    statements by key members of her family in the UK both  supporting  the
    appellant's history and explaining that they had fallen  out  with  the
    appellant and that was why they did not previously come forward.

39. It is also clearly the case  that  Judge  Traynor  erred  in  law  when
    finding that leaving Sri Lanka through the airport  with  her  passport
    was a factor against her credibility, see the evidence to the  contrary
    found be reliable in GJ and Others  (Post  Civil  War;  Returnees)  Sri
    Lanka [2013] UKUT 319, of Mr Punethanayagam at paragraph 148  and  that
    set out at paragraph 12.1.2 of the CPIN Report of  June  2017.  Further
    there is nothing in GJ which would support the idea that  if  a  person
    were tortured by the CID for political reasons  that  they  could  seek
    protection from the Sri Lankan authorities, contrary to the findings of
    Judge Traynor.

40. I find that the above material evidence filling in gaps found by  Judge
    Traynor and his  misunderstandings of  the  relevant  country  guidance
    also combines with other new and significant  evidence:  primarily  the
    further letter from the lawyer Mr  Punethanayagam;  the  more  detailed
    written and oral evidence of Mr Yogalingam; the oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant's brother; and the written evidence of Mr SRU, a  Sri  Lankan
    writer, accountant, and founder and head of the London  Tamil  Literacy
    Association (LTLA). I find that this new  evidence  means  that  it  is
    appropriate to completely reconsider the credibility of the appellant's
    history, and not to start from a position that her evidence,  or  other
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal are not  to  be  given
    weight, although the concerns of Judge Traynor will be borne in mind on
    undertaking this reconsideration.

41. I find that the appellant, her brother Mr KP and Mr Yogalingam were all
    credible witnesses before the Upper Tribunal.  This  is  because  their
    evidence was entirely consistent with each other;  with  their  written
    statements and with the other documentary evidence before me. There was
    nothing implausible in any of  the  evidence  that  I  heard,  and  the
    appellant was able to provide  detailed  evidence,  for  instance  with
    respect to her work with organising demonstrations  for  the  TGTE.  Mr
    Melvin  suggested  that  the  appellant  had  acted  disingenuously  in
    becoming an activist with the TGTE only after her claim  was  dismissed
    in 2017, and so was not a reliable witness, however it is clear from  a
    reading of the decision of Judge Traynor that  she  had  been  involved
    with them at least from before her asylum appeal. I find  in  any  case
    that her involvement with this organisation is entirely consistent with
    her own history and that of her family of being committed to a separate
    Tamil state through support for the LTTE, and with the content  of  her
    literature, and that it was significant that Mr Yogalingam, a TGTE  MP,
    had no doubt about her being truly committed as she  was  described  by
    him as a particularly dedicated  and  committed  person  who  had  been
    consistent in her work for this cause, and it was also clear  from  the
    evidence that she works with him closely and on  a  regular  basis.  Mr
    Melvin suggested that the appellant was not a credible witness  because
    she had said previously that her husband and children were  in  hiding,
    and it was clear from her evidence today that they were not in  hiding.
    I cannot see any evidence that this  was  the  case:  the  evidence  at
    paragraph 42 of the decision of Judge Traynor was that the  appellant's
    husband talks to her secretly on the telephone. The evidence before  me
    was entirely consistent with this. Mr Melvin also suggested that Mr  KP
    was unreliable in his evidence because he did not know much about  some
    aspects of the appellant's life or that of her  husband:  I  find  that
    this does not make his evidence unreliable but simply limited in scope.
    Mr Melvin also suggested it was not plausible that the TGTE  would  use
    text messages to alert  members  to  demonstrations  when  they  had  a
    website and WhatsApp group, as was the evidence of the  appellant,  but
    Mr Yogalingam was consistent in his evidence that they did this because
    some members like this way better, and I find that there is  no  reason
    why this should not be believed to be the case.

42. I accept that the appellant delayed  in  making  her  asylum  claim  by
    several months, and even if there were good reasons why it was not made
    in October 2013 due to the car crash, there was still some three months
    delay after her entry to the UK in July 2013, but whilst this  must  be
    weighed against her credibility I find that when all  the  evidence  is
    balanced in the round there are overwhelming reasons for  finding  that
    she has shown that she  has  put  forward  a  credible  claim,  and  is
    entitled to refugee status, as I am more than satisfied  to  the  lower
    civil standard of proof that the appellant was detained and tortured by
    the Sri Lankan authorities in March 2013.   My reasons  for  coming  to
    this conclusion are as follows.

43. Like Judge Traynor I am satisfied that the scarring medical reports  of
    Mr Martin are very strong evidence that the appellant had been tortured
    in the way she claims, particularly as he  finds  that  the  scars  are
    "typical" following the Istanbul Protocol and overall he has "no  doubt
    that the injuries were caused by being intentionally injured  and  that
    they are likely to have been caused by a third party  as  described  by
    the claimant." Mr  Martin  was  able  to  compare  photographs  of  the
    appellant's scars after her arrival in the UK in  July  2013  with  the
    presentation at the time of writing his report in 2015 in coming to his
    conclusion. The appellant has also provided a report issued whilst  she
    was still in Sri Lanka, and just 3 months  after  the  events,  stating
    that she was admitted to Abisha PVT Hospital on 26th March 2013 with  a
    history of being assaulted with: "multiple contusions found on the back
    and severe swelling of left wrist (facture left radius)  observed.  She
    also made complaint of sexual torture. Then she was discharged  on  the
    same day following treatment." I find that this to be strong supporting
    evidence that she was tortured in March 2013 in Sri Lanka. In  addition
    there are the psychological reports of Dr Dhumad  which  conclude  that
    she suffers from post-traumatic  stress  disorder  with  nightmares  of
    torture and rape, avoidance of reminders of traumatic experience  being
    unable to watch violent television and being afraid of  the  dark,  and
    flashbacks of torture and rape. The respondent accepts that  Dr  Dhumad
    is an expert and that the appellant  is  suffering  from  psychological
    trauma, see the refusal letter at paragraph 18. I  find  this  evidence
    strongly supportive of the conclusion that the appellant  was  tortured
    in the way she describes.

44. I give particular weight to the letter from Mr  Punethanayagam  because
    he is a lawyer and expert found to be reliable by the Upper Tribunal in
    GJ. As set  out  at  paragraph  143:  "Mr  Anton  Punethanayagam  is  a
    barrister who has practised at the Sri Lankan Bar in both  Colombo  and
    Vavuniya and has represented about 3000 persons detained under the  PTA
    over the last two decades.  His standing in the legal community in  Sri
    Lanka is high." His evidence of the criminal processes was found to  be
    "useful and reliable" at paragraph 275  of  GJ.  As  was  the  accepted
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal the letter of 9th June 2015 was
    verified by the  British  High  Commission  as  truly  coming  from  Mr
    Punethanayagam. Mr Punethanayagam states in this letter that he sent  a
    junior attorney to the police station in Vavuniya on  22nd  March  2013
    and he was informed by them that the appellant had been detained by CID
    for questioning about her LTTE activities, and later he was informed by
    her husband that she had been released through "informal  ways".  I  do
    not find that it is of any relevance if the appellant thought that  the
    lawyer  had  been  instrumental  in  her  release  through  bribery,  I
    therefore take a different view on this issue to Judge Traynor for  the
    following reasons. The appellant was clearly detained at the time,  and
    both the lawyer and her husband  were  attempting  to  investigate  and
    obtain her release, so it is plausible she would  not  have  known  who
    precisely had done what. I find the  letter  of  Mr  Punethanayagam  is
    clear reliable evidence that the appellant was detained on suspicion of
    Tamil separatism in March 2013 by the CID, and when combined  with  the
    medical evidence that it has been shown that during this detention  she
    was tortured.

45. This evidence is also consistent with the credible testimony before  me
    of the appellant and that  of  her  brother  who  was  told  about  the
    detention by relatives whilst she was in Sri Lanka, but  then  directly
    from the appellant on her entry to the UK in July 2013 when he met  her
    at the airport. It is also consistent with the written evidence of  the
    appellant's husband, father and sister.

46. As I find that the appellant was arrested, detained and tortured by the
    Sri Lankan government for reasons related to Tamil separatism in  March
    2013 it follows that I find that she has already  been  the  victim  of
    persecution for reason of her imputed political opinions, and that this
    is a serious indicator that she will be subject to  future  persecution
    unless there are good reasons to consider that it will not be repeated,
    applying paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules. As this detention and
    torture took place after the end of the war in 2009 the guidance in  GJ
    applies, and it  follows  that  the  appellant  would  only  have  been
    detained and tortured for political reasons if she was seen as a threat
    to the integrity of the Sri Lanka state and to have a significant  role
    in post-conflict separatism, see GJ particularly at point 7(a)  of  the
    guidance.

47. I find that there is nothing in the evidence about  what  has  happened
    with the appellant personally since March 2013  that  would  constitute
    good reasons why she would not be at real risk of further serious harm.
    Indeed, in this case I find that  there  is  evidence  that  shows  the
    appellant's risk of serious harm has if anything become higher  due  to
    the following factors.

48. The evidence before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  that  she  is  a  highly
    politicised Tamil poet, whose profile has increased particularly  since
    2017/2018 when she had 5 books of poems published and some of her  work
    translated into English. I also find that her husband was  detained  in
    December  2017  as  a  result  of  her  profile  and   literary   work,
    particularly as  once  again  I  have  a  letter  from  the  lawyer  Mr
    Punethanayagam,  whom  I  have  found  to  be  a  reliable  source   of
    information.  Mr Punethanayagam states that a junior  from  his  office
    went to Vavuniya police station  and  was  told  that  the  appellant's
    husband was in the CID custody unit because he had been involved with a
    book release for the appellant, and because the authorities  wanted  to
    arrest the appellant for activities against the Sri Lankan  government.
    Mr Punethanayagam's junior was  able  to  obtain  the  release  of  the
    appellant's husband on the basis he argued that her husband was not  in
    contact with the appellant and had just attended the book launch at the
    request of the organiser.  In addition, there is the  written  evidence
    of Mr SRU, the head  of  the  London  Tamil  Literacy  Association  who
    provides evidence that he was also harassed by  the  authorities  as  a
    result of his involvement with the Sri Lankan launch of the appellant's
    book. I do not find the lack of evidence  on  whether  the  appellant's
    books have been  formally  banned  by  the  Sri  Lankan  government  is
    relevant to the issue I have to decide: the question that  is  relevant
    for me to consider is whether her writing increases her  risk  of  ill-
    treatment on the basis of imputed/ actual political opinions and I find
    that the  credible  evidence  of  the  detention  of  her  husband  and
    harassment  of  Mr  SRU  is  supportive  of  her  literacy   activities
    increasing her risk of ill-treatment if  she  were  to  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.

49. The appellant has also clearly become active with  TGTE,  a  proscribed
    organisation, since January 2017. Mr Nathan drew my  attention  to  the
    CPIN Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism June 2017 at paragraph 6.2.2 under the
    heading De-proscription of Tamil groups" it states that: "Membership or
    affiliation to the [de-proscribed] groups is no longer regarded by  the
    government of Sri Lanka  as  terrorism  or    terrorist  activity."  He
    argues that the strong implication of the CPIN is that membership of an
    organisation like the TGTE that continues to be proscribed is  seen  as
    terrorism by Sri Lankan government. I find to the lower civil  standard
    of proof that there is a real risk that this is the case, and find that
    this is supported by the stance of Mr Yogalingam of  the  TGTE  of  not
    giving funds openly to charities in Sri Lanka because of  the  problems
    this would cause the organisations. I find that whilst the appellant is
    not a leader of the TGTE she is strongly and  visibly  affiliated  with
    it. I am satisfied that it is likely that the Sri Lankan government are
    aware of the appellant's activities with the TGTE due to  their  having
    sophisticated intelligence in the diaspora, as found in  GJ.  There  is
    evidence before me which I find credible that she has been on platforms
    at public events with Mr Yogalingam including her own book  launch,  as
    well as having been visible at high profile protest such as trials  and
    protests at the Sri Lankan High Commission and  in  Downing  Street.  I
    find that this increases the likelihood that she would be at real  risk
    of serious harm as  a  result  of  her  actual  and  imputed  political
    opinions if returned to Sri Lanka.

50. Further I note, in addition to all of the  above,  that  in  accordance
    with RS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1796  applying  the  correct
    standard of proof of a reasonable degree of likelihood as I have  found
    that the appellant escaped from detention through unlawful  means,  and
    indeed breached reporting conditions, then it is likely that an  arrest
    warrant has been issued against her and that she is therefore on a stop
    list for this reason, and would additionally fall  within  risk  factor
    7(d) of GJ.

51. I conclude therefore that the appellant has shown that she has  a  well
    founded fear of persecution based on her actual and  imputed  political
    opinions, as I find that she is at real risk of being detained  by  the
    security forces on return to  Sri  Lanka  and  interrogated  about  her
    political beliefs and activities,  which  include  her  literature  and
    membership of the TGTE,  and  that  in  accordance  with  GJ  any  such
    interrogation brings with it a real risk of the use of serious harm and
    torture.

52. It follows that to return the  appellant  would  also  therefore  be  a
    breach of Article 3 ECHR and a disproportionate interference  with  her
    Article 8 ECHR private life rights.




    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no
         findings preserved.

      3. I remake the appeal  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Refugee
         Convention and for the same reasons on human rights grounds.




    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  her
    protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 6th January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A: Error of Law Decision


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1972. She came  to  the
    UK on a visit visa to attend her mother's funeral in 2013, and returned
    to Sri Lanka. She applied to come to the UK on two further visits  with
    her husband and children but both applications were  refused.  On  10th
    December 2013 the applicant came to the UK and claimed asylum based  on
    her fear of political  persecution.  Her  application  was  refused  in
    January 2015, and her appeal was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in May 2016, however this decision was set aside by the Upper  Tribunal
    and it was remitted to be reheard. The appeal was reheard and dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor in  a  decision  dated  20th  July
    2017, which was upheld on  appeal,  and  the  appellant  became  appeal
    rights exhausted in September 2018.

 2. The appellant made further submissions on 10th January 2019, which were
    accepted as a fresh claim but refused by the respondent in  a  decision
    dated 4th February 2019.      Her  appeal  against  this  decision  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davidson  in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 29th May 2019.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the First-tier judge had erred in law in failing to refer to the expert
    medical report of Dr Dhumad, and in failing to consider the evidence of
    the appellant in the context of her mental health problems.

 4. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

    Submissions - Error of Law

 5. In the appellant's grounds it is argued in summary as follows.

 6. The appellant's asylum claim is based, in short summary, on a  fear  of
    persecution if returned to Sri Lankan because she is a published author
    in Sri Lanka who has documented the sufferings of the Tamil  people  in
    the civil war and at the hands of the Sri Lankan government.  She  says
    that she was detained and  ill-treated  in  Sri  Lanka  in  2013  after
    visiting London, and that her husband was detained after the launch  of
    one of her books in December 2017. She also says that she has  attended
    anti-government  demonstrations  in  the  UK,  and   that   this   will
    additionally place her at risk

 7. Firstly, it is said that there was an error by the First-tier  Tribunal
    in failing to consider the  evidence  of  Dr  Dhumad  in  the  findings
    section of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal at all, and  further
    there was a failure to consider the medical evidence (the scars  report
    of Dr Martin, taken with the evidence of Dr Dhumad  that  she  suffered
    from PTSD as a result of her experience of torture) in the  round  when
    determining the credibility of the appellant.

 8. Secondly, it is argued  that  there  was  a  failure  to  consider  the
    evidence of Dr Dhumad when  considering  whether  the  quality  of  the
    appellant's evidence might have been affected  by  her  mental  health,
    particularly as she was found to suffer from  poor  concentration,  and
    given the First-tier Tribunal found that  she  was  vague  and  had  to
    correct herself and that this was reason not to  find  her  a  credible
    witness, see paragraphs 48 to 49 of the  decision.  There  was  also  a
    failure to consider whether the appellant was a vulnerable witness, and
    if so to conduct the hearing accordingly.

 9. Thirdly, it is argued that there was a failure  to  take  into  account
    evidence from the country guidance case of GJ about the extent  of  the
    Sri Lankan authorities penetration of events in the UK when  concluding
    that reading and speaking at Heroes Day in the UK  would  not  put  the
    appellant at risk.

10. Fourthly, it is argued that a number of pieces of key evidence were not
    taken properly into account by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  namely:  the
    evidence of the appellant's father who was found to  be  credible,  and
    who gave evidence about the appellant's husband's arrest in  2017;  the
    evidence of Mr U another writer whose evidence was not assessed by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and who  said  he  had  been  interrogated  by  the
    security forces about the appellant in 2017; two letters from a lawyer,
    Mr Anton Punethanayagam, who was a witness found reliable in GJ,  about
    the appellant's detention in 2013 and her husband's detention in 2017.

11. Fifthly, it is argued that there was a failure to  deal  in  sufficient
    detail with the risk of suicide if the appellant  was  removed  to  Sri
    Lanka, this being raised in the evidence of Dr Dhumad.

12. Mr Walker accepted that there were errors of law in the  decision  that
    meant that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  could  not  stand,
    particularly in relation to the failure to consider  material  evidence
    in the form of the report of Dr Dhumad and the witnesses.

13. It was agreed by Mr Walker and Mr  Nathan  that  the  matter  could  be
    retained in the Upper Tribunal for remaking but that it would  need  to
    be adjourned to another day due to the likely length  of  the  hearing;
    because the previous firm of solicitor's bundles put before the  First-
    tier Tribunal were not all with Mr Walker; and  because  there  was  no
    Tamil interpreter present and not all the witnesses were present.

    Conclusions - Error of Law

14. I find, as agreed by both parties, that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    in law for the reasons set out in the first, second and fourth  grounds
    above. In these circumstances, as the faulty findings go (amongst other
    things) to the credibility of the appellant's evidence, which  in  turn
    is fundamental to the determination of the appeal, the decision and all
    of the findings must be set aside.  In these  circumstances  I  do  not
    need to consider the other grounds.




    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no
         findings preserved.

      3. I adjourn the re-make of the decision to the 17th December 2019.




    Directions:

      1. The appellant's solicitors must  file  and  served  a  consolidated
         bundle containing only relevant documents on the Upper Tribunal and
         respondent by 4pm on 6th December 2019.




    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  her
    protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 15th October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

