
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/02030/2018
                                                               HU/10405/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 March 2019                   |On 1 April 2019                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD [I]
                                  RABIA [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Alam (counsel) instructed by Alexander James
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellants against  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Chana promulgated on 2  October  2018,  which  dismissed
the Appellants' appeals.

Background

3.    The second Appellant is the wife of the  first  appellant.  The  first
appellant was born on 23 March 1981. The second  appellant  was  born  on  6
June 1985. They are both nationals of  Pakistan.  On  28  January  2018  the
Secretary of State refused the first  Appellant's  protection  claim.  On  5
September 2017  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  second  appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Chana  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decisions. Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  27  December
2018 Judge SPJ Buchanan granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "It is arguable by reference to the grounds of appeal that  there  may
      have been material error of law in the decision. I grant permission to
      appeal. As may be plain from the operative part of this  decision,  in
      granting permission, I do not limit the scope of argument which may be
      advanced at appeal."

Error of Law

5.    In a decision promulgated on 7 February 2019 the Upper Tribunal  found
that there was no error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in
relation to the Refugee Convention and Humanitarian Protection;  that  there
was no error of law in relation to the decision on articles  2  and  3  ECHR
grounds, but that the decision in relation to  article  8  ECHR  grounds  of
appeal contains a material error of law.  The  decision  is  so  far  as  it
relates to article 8 ECHR was set aside. The appellant's appeal against  the
First-tier Tribunal's  decision  in  relation  to  the  Refugee  Convention,
Humanitarian Protection, and articles 2 and 3 ECHR was dismissed.

6.    This case calls before me today  so  that  I  can  substitute  my  own
decision in relation to the appellants' article 8 ECHR claim.

Findings of fact

7.    The appellants are both citizens of Pakistan.  They  are  husband-and-
wife. The first appellant was born on 23 March 1981.  The  second  appellant
was born of 6 June 1985. They have one child, who is approximately  2  years
old. The first appellant entered the UK on 11 March 2011 as a  student  with
leave until 31 July 2014. On  14  July  2016  the  first  appellant  claimed
asylum. His asylum claim was refused by the respondent on 28 January 2018.

8.    The second appellant was granted entry clearance as a tier 4  student.
Leave was extended until 14 July 2015, but on  24  April  2015  her  student
leave was curtailed  so  that  it  expired  on  28  June  2015.  The  second
appellant made applications for leave to remain as a tier 2 skilled  worker,
and then as a tier 4  general  student,  and  was  granted  leave  until  30
October 2016. On 28 October 2016 the second appellant  made  an  application
for leave to remain on article 8 ECHR grounds.

9.    In 2010 the second appellant was  awarded  a  diploma  in  hospitality
management. In 2012 the second appellant graduated with an MA  in  marketing
and innovation.

10.   The second  appellant's  brother  is  a  British  citizen.  He  has  a
daughter who was born on 12 July 2017. The daughter's mother  is  a  British
citizen. His relationship with his daughter's mother ended at all about  the
time the child was born. His former partner rejected the  child.  The  child
has been in his care since he brought her home from hospital in  July  2017.
The local authority, after enquiry, conferred  parental  responsibility  for
the appellant's brother's daughter in favour of the appellant's brother.

11.   The two appellants, with their  young  child,  live  with  the  second
appellant's British citizen brother and his British  citizen  daughter.  The
second appellant plays a significant role  in  the  care  of  her  brother's
daughter. That child refers to the second appellant as  "Mama".  The  second
appellant is involved in the daily routine of care for the  British  citizen
child.

12.   The second appellant's brother works. When he is at  work  the  second
appellant takes care of his daughter. The second appellant's  older  brother
lives in the UK with his EEA national wife and  their  three  children.  The
second appellant's uncle is a British citizen who lives in the UK  with  his
wife and three children.

13.   Between the birth of the second appellant's brother's daughter and  12
February 2019 the local authority watched over the second  appellant's  care
of his daughter.  Documents 18 to 28 of  the  appellant's  bundle  (prepared
for this hearing) is a closure summary from the local authority  summarising
the outcome of the local authority's  involvement.  The  second  appellant's
contribution to the care  for  the  young  child  is  acknowledged  in  that
report. The report also says that the second appellant's brother

      "Wants to have his own place so him and (the child) can have their own
      home. [B] (the second appellant's brother) needs  minimal  support  in
      this area and has been very proactive to make the changes necessary to
      move forward in this area."

14.   Documents 29 to 48 of the appellant's bundle for this hearing  is  the
local authority's final statement in relation to the care  arrangements  for
the second appellant's  brother's  child.  That  document  acknowledges  the
contribution that  the  second  appellant  has  made  to  the  care  of  her
brother's child.

15.   The two  appellant's  love  their  niece.  The  second  appellant  has
enjoyed her role in helping with the care arrangements  for  her  niece  and
earnestly hopes to continue to contribute to her niece's care.

16.   Neither of the appellants suggest that they can meet the  requirements
of the immigration rules.



The Immigration Rules

17.   It is not argued that either of the appellants meet  the  requirements
of the immigration rules. There is no reliable evidence placed before me  to
suggest that either of the appellants meet the requirements of  appendix  FM
of the immigration rules. Because neither of the  appellants  is  a  British
citizen, and as their own child is not a British citizen, they  cannot  meet
the eligibility requirements of appendix FM. Neither of the appellants is  a
parent of a British citizen child.

18.   Because of their ages and the length of time they have been in the  UK
the appellants cannot meet the requirements of paragraph  276  ADE(1)(i)  to
(v)  of  the  immigration  rules.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  in
relation to the first appellant's protection claim stands so  there  are  no
significant obstacles to integration in Pakistan. Neither of the  appellants
meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.

19.   On the evidence placed before me, neither of the appellants  meet  the
requirements of the immigration rules.

Article 8 ECHR.

20.   In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60  it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

21.   In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, Lord Reed (when explaining how a  court  or
tribunal  should  consider  whether  a  refusal  of  leave  to  remain   was
compatible with Article 8) made clear that the critical issue was  generally
whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in
removal, the article 8 claim was sufficiently strong to outweigh it.   There
is no suggestion of any threshold to be overcome before proportionality  can
be fully considered.

22.   I have to determine the following separate questions:

    (i) Does family life, private life, home or correspondence exist within
    the meaning of Article 8

    (ii) If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with

    (iii) If so, was the interference in accordance with the law

    (iv) If so, was the interference in pursuit of one  of  the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and

    (v) If so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

23.   Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that immigration control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

24.   This case is plead before me on the basis that  the  second  appellant
has a de facto parental relationship with a  British  citizen  child.  I  am
mindful of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009,
and the case of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4. . I  remind  myself  of
the cases of Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting  children;  onward
appeals), [2013] UKUT 00197 and PW [2015] CSIH 36.

25.   In Kaur  (children's  best  interests  /  public  interest  interface)
[2017] UKUT 14 (IAC) it was held that  the  "little  weight"  provisions  in
Part 5A of the 2002 Act do not entail  an  absolute,  rigid  measurement  or
concept; "little  weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,  within  its  self-
contained boundaries, will result in  the  measurement  of  the  quantum  of
weight considered appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.

26.   The evidence of the appellants and the second appellant's  brother  is
that the second appellant stepped into the shoes of her niece's mother.  The
young child thinks the second appellant is  her  mother  and  the  child  of
these two appellants is her twin. Social work department records are  placed
before me. Those social work department records demonstrate that the  second
appellant's brother has parental rights  and  responsibilities  and  is  the
primary carer for his daughter. There is no relationship between the  second
appellant's brother and the mother of his child. There  is  no  relationship
between the British citizen child and her own natural mother.

27.   What is beyond dispute is that the two appellants and their own  young
child live with the second appellant's brother and his daughter. The  weight
of reliable evidence indicates that the second appellant has provided  daily
care to her  British  citizen  niece.  Both  appellants  have  showered  the
British citizen niece with  love  and  affection,  and  do  not  want  their
relationship with the little girl to come to an end.

28.   Both appellants and the second appellant's brother told  me  that  the
cannot  foresee  the  current  arrangements  ending,  and  that  the  second
appellant is crucial  to  the  care  of  the  second  appellant's  brother's
daughter.

29.   The problem with that evidence is that it is directly contradicted  by
the local authority's records. On 18 February 2019 (just one month ago)  the
local authority recorded that the second appellant's brother is seeking  his
own accommodation for the child and that the clear  plan  now  is  that  the
second appellant's brother and his daughter will  live  separately  to  both
appellants.

30.   That evidence draws me to the conclusion  that  the  second  appellant
has helped her brother look after the  appellant's  British  citizen  niece,
but that is a temporary arrangement and plans are already afoot to end  that
arrangement. Were it not for that evidence I would wrangle with  whether  or
not there is a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  British
citizen child. There is not a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship.
There is the ordinary relationship of caring affection between an uncle  and
aunt and their niece. The second appellant stepped into  a  role  which  was
invaluable to the British citizen niece and greatly helped her brother,  but
the plans, as the appellants and the second appellant's brother  made  known
to the local authority, are that the end of that arrangement is planned.  As
soon as the second appellant's brother find  suitable  accommodation  he  is
moving out and taking the second  appellant's  British  citizen  niece  with
him.

31.   The family life which exists  in  this  case  within  the  meaning  of
article 8 is family life between both appellants and their  own  child.  All
three are Pakistani nationals. The respondent intends to  remove  all  three
together so that there will be no interference with that  family  life.  The
respondent's decision is not a breach of article 8 family life.

32.   The appellants argue that private life is created  solely  because  of
the length of time that they have lived in the UK. Passage of  time  in  the
UK is not, on his own, sufficient to create article 8 private life.  When  I
consider each strand of evidence I  still  do  not  know  enough  about  the
appellant's  home,  their  habits  and  activities  of  daily  living,   any
significant  friendships,  any  integration  into   UK   society,   or   any
contribution to the UK local community. There is  no  reliable  evidence  of
the component parts of private life within the meaning of article 8  of  the
1950 convention before me. The appellants fail to establish that  they  have
created article 8 private life within the UK.

33.   When I weigh all of these matters, I can only come to  the  conclusion
that the respondent's decision is not a disproportionate breach  of  article
8 family life. On the evidence placed before me  the  respondent's  decision
does not breach any article 8 private life that the  appellants  might  have
established in the UK.

34.   The First-tier Tribunal's decision  in  relation  to  article  8  ECHR
grounds of appeal was set aside the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  promulgated
on 7 February 2019. I now substitute my own decision.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision in relation to the refugee  convention  &
humanitarian protection stands.

The appellants appeals are dismissed on article 8 ECHR grounds.





Signed      Date 28 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

