
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/02086/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 October 2017                        |On 25 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                                     FA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr J Holt, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McAll promulgated 16.6.17, dismissing on all grounds his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 9.2.17, to
    refuse his protection claim.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 2.6.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    12.7.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 23.10.17 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Error of Law

 5. In the first instance, I have to determine whether or not there was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge McAll should be set aside.

 6. The relevant background can be summarised as follows:

 7. The appellant's case  is  that  she  met  her  husband  at  college  in
    Bangladesh in 2007. They  developed  a  relationship  which  they  kept
    secret, knowing that  their  respective  families  would  not  approve.
    Despite that opposition, on  14.2.08  she  accepted  MA's  proposal  of
    marriage.  MA came to the UK to study in 2009.  In 2010, the  appellant
    was informed by her family that they planned an arranged  marriage  for
    her. MA, who was at the time still in the UK, had  his  family  propose
    their marriage  to  her  family,  but  the  suggestion  was  repeatedly
    rejected. When her family discovered the relationship, she  was  abused
    and assaulted by family members on a number of occasions. The appellant
    left her family home and in secret married  MA  in  December  2010.  MA
    returned to the UK in January 2011 and the appellant joined him here in
    February 2012, on the basis of being a dependant on his student  leave.



 8. Her leave was subsequently extended to 2014. However, a further in-time
    application was refused in July 2015, so that she had  no  valid  leave
    after December 2014. In August 2016 she sought asylum, the  refusal  of
    which on 9.2.17 was the subject of the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 2.6.17.

 9. The  asylum  claim  was  framed  on  the  basis  that  if  returned  to
    Bangladesh, she and her family would be murdered by her family and that
    as her father is a person of influence and connect  there  is  no  safe
    place to which she could relocate.

10. Immediately prior to  the  commencement  of  the  appeal  hearing,  the
    respondent served  on  the  appellant  a  bundle  containing  documents
    relating to a 2011 visa application and the subsequent  appeal  against
    refusal. This evidence comprised  material  that  had  previously  been
    served on the Tribunal for the 2011 appeal and thus, it was  argued  by
    the respondent, the appellant would or should have been  familiar  with
    the contents.

11. The material served included the decision of Judge Blum,  dealing  with
    the 2011 appeal. That judge found that the appellant and MA had entered
    into an arranged marriage, agreed by  their  respective  families.  The
    evidence relied on by Judge Blum included a letter from  the  appellant
    which explained that their marriage was arranged and that she  and  her
    husband had not communicated prior  to  his  return  to  Bangladesh  on
    24.12.10 and their marriage on the same day. The judge also heard  from
    MA, adopting his signed witness statement, in which  he  asserted  that
    their marriage was arranged by their families and  took  place  on  the
    same day he returned to Bangladesh from the UK, and the family arranged
    everything for the ceremony.

12. MA's statement for the 2017 appeal was consistent with the asylum claim
    summary set out above, but in oral evidence before Judge McAll the 2011
    statement was put to him. In response, he suggested there was a mistake
    in the statement. He was given a warning about  self-incrimination  but
    elected to answer the questions, and suggested that the mistake was the
    assertion in the 2011 statement that it was an  arranged  marriage.  He
    went to assert that  the  assertion  was  false  had  been  fabricated.
    Ultimately, Judge McAll made adverse credibility findings and concluded
    that the marriage had been arranged as asserted in 2011 and that  there
    was no hostility between the families  as  had  been  alleged  for  the
    purpose of the asylum claim.

13. In essence, the primary ground of appeal is that the appellant was  the
    victim of procedural  unfairness  in  the  refusal  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to grant the adjournment requested on the  date  of  the
    appeal hearing.

14. What happened at the hearing in relation to the adjournment request  is
    set out in detail between [5] and [19] of the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and is not factually challenged by the  appellant.  Judge
    McAll set out the submissions made, the law considered, and the reasons
    for refusing the adjournment request.

15. Mr Holt's argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  before  me  is
    first that the production and admission of  the  new  evidence  was  in
    breach of Rule 24 of the 2014 Tribunal Procedural Rules, which requires
    the respondent to notify the Tribunal and appellant if it  is  intended
    to change or add to the grounds or reasons relied on  in  the  RFR.  Mr
    Holt pointed out that at [27] of the RFR the Secretary of  State  found
    the appellant's  asylum  factual  account  internally  consistent,  but
    little weight was  attached  to  documents  purporting  to  demonstrate
    animus between herself and her parents.

16. As it had not been possible to verify her family's claimed view of  the
    marriage, this part of the claim was addressed under the benefit of the
    doubt provisions under paragraph 339L of the Rules, dealt with at  [32]
    of the RFR, where section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
    Claimants, etc) Act 2004 was also considered.

17. Judge McAll considered the argument and the procedural rules in detail,
    but concluded that whilst the respondent  cannot  refuse  a  protection
    claim based solely on s8 issues, that was not  what  the  Secretary  of
    State did in this case, but rather considered credibility in the  round
    including having regard to s8 issues.

18. In relation to a change or addition to the grounds for refusal set  out
    in the RFR, Judge McAll concluded  that  ultimately  the  Secretary  of
    State found the appellant's claim not credible and as the 2011 material
    related to credibility, it did not fall foul  of  Rule  24(2).  In  the
    alternative, the judge relied on Rule 6(2)(a) to waive the  requirement
    to serve written notice, because the material served  was  evidence  of
    which he was satisfied that the appellant and  her  witness  must  have
    been fully aware. That was a finding open to the judge  and  for  which
    cogent reasons have been provided. Thus, the material was admitted  and
    the judge went on to make  findings  and  conclusions  including  those
    summarised above, leading to the dismissal of the appeal.

19. In granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge  Gillespie  considered  the
    refusal an arguable error of law when "new and unforeseen evidence" was
    produced by the Secretary of State at the outset of the hearing,  which
    "unfairly prejudiced" the appellant  and  embarrassed  counsel  in  the
    presentation of the case  for  the  appellant,  so  that  it  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

20. Mr Holt, who acted for the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal  appeal
    hearing, told me that although he took advice from the Bar Council,  he
    had concluded that he was not embarrassed and was able to  continue  to
    represent the appellant, and continued to do so before me. The  witness
    was, at Mr Holt's request, warned about self-incrimination,  but  chose
    nevertheless to  answer  the  questions  put  to  him  about  the  2011
    statement. Neither of these points add anything to  the  error  of  law
    assertion.

21. I found little merit in the submission of Mr  Holt  that  the  evidence
    should not have been admitted.  It  was  clearly  highly  material  and
    relevant to the determination of the asylum claim. If "a statement" was
    required under Rule 24(2), there is nothing to suggest  that  it  could
    not have been given there and then, on the day. It may be that the Rule
    is intended to 'crystalise' the respondent's case, preventing what  has
    sometimes been referred to as 'mission creep.' The only valid complaint
    here could be in relation to the late service of the 2011  material  on
    the basis that it unfairly prejudiced the appellant's case. There is no
    doubt that this material would ultimately have to see the light of  day
    in the appeal hearing. It does not assist Mr Holt's argument  to  stand
    on ceremony and demand as a point of principle that  unless  there  was
    some form of written  statement  the  evidence  should  not  have  been
    admitted.

22. What Judge McAll did was to give  the  appellant  ample  time  to  give
    instructions to Mr Holt, putting the case back for 3 hours. Given  that
    the essential facts contained in the late-served information must  have
    been known to the appellant  and  MA,  this  was  more  than  generous.
    Ultimately, the appellant and MA would have to grapple with  the  stark
    inconsistency between the asylum claim version of  their  marriage  and
    that presented during the appeal in 2011. It was open to them  to  say,
    as MA did, that the 2011 assertion of an arranged marriage was not true
    and that it  was  done  to  protect  the  appellant,  because  a  'love
    marriage' is not accepted in Bangladesh. And it was open to her to say,
    as she did, that she was unaware of the contents of the 2011 statements
    and assertions about the nature of the marriage.

23. Having heard and carefully considered Mr Holt's submissions, I fail  to
    see what real prejudice befell  the  appellant  that  was  not  already
    inevitably going to arise the inconsistency between the asylum claim as
    mounted and the way in which the case was presented in 2011.  There  is
    no evidence before me that a longer adjournment would have  be  of  any
    benefit to the appellant; as stated above, ultimately, she  would  have
    to grapple with this inconsistency. Mr Holt suggested  that  she  would
    have been able to obtain independent advice, but that does not seem  to
    be material, as he  elected  to  remain  with  the  case  and  was  not
    professionally embarrassed.

24. Mr Holt also suggested to me that an adjournment would have allowed the
    appellant to obtain evidence as to who  completed  the  form  in  2011.
    However, even now the appellant has not obtained any evidence from  the
    2011 application and appeal to present in any Rule 15(2) application to
    exculpate her and demonstrate that  the  adverse  credibility  findings
    were unfairly made. On the basis suggested by Mr Holt, the request  for
    an adjournment in the First-tier Tribunal would have been no more  than
    a fishing expedition to see if something, anything, could be  found  to
    help the appellant out of  the  difficulties  her  case  was  then  in,
    arising entirely from two different ways in which the marriage had been
    presented. In  the  circumstances,  I  consider  this  submission  mere
    speculation irrelevant to any alleged error of law.

25. As to a change or addition of grounds to that relied on in the  RFR,  I
    find that there is nothing material in this  submission.  It  is  clear
    that the appellant's factual claim was not accepted. It  is  true  that
    the part relevant to this error of law consideration was a  matter  the
    Secretary of State considered as to whether to accord her  the  benefit
    of the doubt. Mr Holt also submitted that the Secretary of State relied
    solely on s8 matters to refuse the claim, and  thus  the  approach  was
    unlawful.  However,  there  is  an  overlap  between  some  of  the  s8
    considerations and those under paragraph 339L. Because of the delay  in
    bringing the asylum claim, the appellant was not accorded  the  benefit
    of the doubt; that is clearly a credibility issue  without  needing  s8
    findings.

26. I note that 339L(v) was also relied on, that  her  general  credibility
    had not been established, and thus that aspect of  her  claim  was  not
    accepted. Perhaps that part of the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    could have been better phrased, but I reject the  submission  that  the
    decision was unlawful and I do  not  accept  it  was  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

27. It follows that I also reject the submission that credibility  had  not
    been relied on by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  that  a  Rule  24(2)
    statement was required.

Conclusion & Decision

28. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup





Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


