
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02622/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 April 2021                      |On 21st April 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of  Iraq  who  was  born  in  1991.  He
    appeals against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 12 November
    2020 dismissing his appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal  of
    his claim for international protection.

 2. At the initial hearing on 9 April 2021, I told the  representatives  of
    both parties that I intended to set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. I shall now give my reasons.

 3. The Secretary of State, by a Rule 24 statement dated 11  January  2021,
    accepted that the judge had made a material error of law. The judge had
    not addressed the availability to the appellant of a  CSID  or  similar
    identity document in Iraq and,  as  a  consequence,  had  not  properly
    assessed risk on return to Iraq. No criticism attaches to the judge for
    that failure; at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the  judge  had  been
    informed by the respondent's  Presenting  Officer  that  the  appellant
    'could be returned direct to the IKR by direct flight' from the  United
    Kingdom. Not surprisingly, in the light of that information, the  judge
    had not considered how the appellant might safely navigate his way from
    Baghdad to his  home  area  of  Iraq.  The  information  was,  however,
    inaccurate; all forced returns to Iraq are to Baghdad.

 4. The Rule 24 letter argues that, notwithstanding  the  judge's  material
    error, the findings of fact should be preserved as the error of law had
    not 'infected' those findings. The  grounds  of  appeal  challenge  the
    findings of fact  including  what  the  judge  says  about  CCTV  video
    evidence which, for various reasons, could not be shown at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing [7].

 5. Whether findings of fact should be preserved when an  decision  is  set
    aside is often difficult to  determine  in  practice  (see  the  recent
    decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AB  (preserved  FtT   findings;
    Wisniewski principles) Iraq [2020] UKUT 00268 (IAC)). There  exists  no
    'hard-edged answer'  and  experience  indicates  that  any  attempt  to
    preserve some findings whilst discarding others can often lead to  more
    problems than it may solve. I did not hear extensive  argument  on  the
    judge's assessment of credibility but I do  note  that  permission  has
    been granted on all grounds and that those grounds  contain  challenges
    to the judge's fact-finding analysis. I consider that the challenge  to
    the judge's assessment of the CCTV evidence, in  particular,  has  some
    force. I have decided to set aside the decision  and  the  findings  of
    fact. I consider that doing so will ensure a fair determination of  the
    appeal. The appellant  will,  with  the  assistance  of  his  recently-
    appointed representative, may take the opportunity of a de novo hearing
    to produce his video evidence in  a  way  in  which  the  Tribunal  may
    properly consider it whilst  the  Secretary  of  State  will  no  doubt
    consider the evidence given to the last Tribunal and  judge's  analysis
    when preparing for the cross examination of the appellant.

 6. There was a brief discussion of the relevance to  the  listing  of  the
    appeal of the remittal of SMO, KSP  and  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
    documents) Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT  400  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  for
    reconsideration in the Upper Tribunal. The listing of this appeal is  a
    matter  for  First-tier  Tribunal  and  any  representations  regarding
    matters such as country guidance should be made to that Tribunal.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the appeal following a hearing  de
    novo.


    LISTING  DIRECTIONS:  Manchester;  first  available  date;  not   Judge
    Herwald; first available date; whether remote or face  to  face  to  be
    determined by the First-tier Tribunal; Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter;  2
    hours.



                                                                      Signed
Date   9 April 2021
        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
































