
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02882/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 31 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 oltjon [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Albania, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Moore of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 30 May
    2019 refusing his protection  claim.   The  basis  of  the  appellant's
    asylum claim was that in early 2015 he had been attacked and stabbed by
    an individual he believed to be named [LL] and would be in danger  from
    this man wherever he was returned to in Albania.  His best friend, [H],
    had also been stabbed in June 2015 and left fighting for his  life  and
    the appellant believed the same [LL] was again the assailant.  Although
    accepting that the appellant had been the victim  of  a  stabbing,  the
    judge did not find credible his account that [LL] was  the  perpetrator
    either of the appellant's or his friend [H]'s stabbing.  The judge also
    considered that in any event the appellant had  not  demonstrated  that
    [LL] had any influence over the police or the  authorities  in  Albania
    and that the appellant would also have  a  viable  option  of  internal
    relocation.

2.   The appellant's grounds were  two-pronged,  it  being  first  submitted
    that the judge's adverse  credibility  findings  were  flawed,  relying
    unduly on (im)plausibility findings and the fact that the appellant was
    a minor at the time of the  claimed  events.   The  appellant's  second
    ground alleged that the judge's assessment of the evidence rested on  a
    mistake as to fact regarding whether he was  still  involved  with  his
    girlfriend Angela (it being [LL]'s  obsession  and  jealousy  over  the
    appellant's relationship with Angela that was said to have precipitated
    [LL]'s attack on the appellant).

3.   I am grateful to Mr Youssefian and Ms Everett for their  well-presented
    submissions.

4.   Dealing with ground 2 first, I am persuaded that it discloses an  error
    of law in the judge's treatment of the appellant's  evidence  regarding
    Angela.  It was submitted by Mr Youssefian (who  also  represented  the
    appellant at the First-tier  hearing)  that  the  appellant's  evidence
    before the judge was that he had resumed contact with Angela and was in
    communication with  her.   The  appellant  had  said  that  Angela  had
    provoked [LL] by saying that the appellant was going to take her to the
    UK.  The judge's summary  of  the  evidence  does  not  refer  to  such
    evidence having been  given,  but  Ms  Everett  does  not  dispute  the
    statement in the grounds that evidence to this  effect  was  given  and
    there was no Rule 24 response asserting to the contrary.  Against  that
    background there is a serious difficulty with the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 32 that "the appellant is no longer in  any  relationship  or
    friendship with Angela".

5.   I also see force in ground 1 insofar as it identifies an over  reliance
    on the part of the judge an implausibility finding.  Nowhere  does  the
    judge evaluate to what extent the appellant's account  was  consistent,
    internally and  externally,  or  possessed  a  sufficiency  of  detail.
    Although he does not refer  to  lack  of  plausibility  expressly,  the
    judge's principal reasons for finding the appellant not  credible  were
    that it was not plausible of the appellant to assume the police  failed
    to make  proper  enquiries  when  his  parents  reported  the  stabbing
    incident and not plausible that there was any  connection  between  the
    appellant's and [H]'s stabbing.

6.   However, I am not persuaded that the  judge's  erroneous  treatment  of
    the appellant's credibility amounted to a material error of law.   That
    is because the judge's decision sets out reasons and  findings  in  the
    alternative.  They make clear that even if the appellant's account  was
    accepted that [LL] was  his  assailant  and  also  his  friend's  [H]'s
    assailant, the appellant had not established that he would not be  able
    to obtain effective protection from the authorities in his home area or
    in other parts of Albania. At paragraphs 33 - 36 the judge stated:

         "33. I do not accept that the appellant's stabbing was reported  to
             the authorities, but for completeness I should add  that  even
             if I was so satisfied, my decision in this appeal would be the
             same.  Despite the appellant's account  that  the  authorities
             were informed by his parents of the stabbing, the  police  did
             not visit or  speak  to  the  appellant  in  relation  to  the
             incident, and the absence of such process is inconsistent with
             the background  material  (Country  Information  and  Guidance
             Albania  -  July  2017).   It  would  appear   that,   despite
             corruption within the judicial system, there was an  effective
             police system in Albania and that citizens were free  to  seek
             police protection in circumstances such  as  the  appellant's.
             The appellant has failed to demonstrate that [LL], as  a  non-
             stage rogue agent has any influence over  the  police  or  the
             authorities  in  Albania.   No  evidence  has  been   provided
             demonstrating that his  family  have  any  such  influence  or
             power.  The appellant's claim that he could not  approach  the
             police or authorities in Albania for  assistance  due  to  the
             fact that [LL] had not been arrested  is  in  my  view  not  a
             reasonable explanation, if the appellant was in  genuine  fear
             of this individual, which I do not accept.

         34.  I am satisfied that internal  relocation  would  be  a  viable
             option if this appellant was in fear  of  [LL].   Despite  the
             relatively small size of Albania, the appellant could relocate
             to another part of the country since I am not  satisfied  that
             [LL] had any adverse interest in the appellant, and if he did,
             that he would have the intent, power or  influence  to  locate
             the appellant and place the appellant at real risk.

         35.  The appellant remains in contact with family in  Albania,  and
             he gave evidence that approximately one month ago he spoke  to
             family members and as far as they were concerned [LL] had  not
             "done anything" as far as they were aware, apart from the fact
             that according  to  the  appellant  his  brother  was  "scared
             something might happen to him".  It is mere speculation on the
             appellant's part that [LL] continues to have any  interest  in
             him, and even if he did, whether this appellant  would  be  at
             real risk if now returned to Albania.

         36.  My negative credibility findings fundamentally undermine  this
             appellant's claim.  I am unable to accept it.  The only aspect
             of the appellant's claim I am able to accept  is  that  he  is
             national of Albania and that  someone  may  have  stabbed  him
             before he came to the United Kingdom."

7.   In essence, the judge in these passages considered that  even  assuming
    that [LL] was his assailant and that the appellant  was  likely  to  be
    targeted by [LL] on return, the appellant had not  shown  he  would  be
    unable to receive effective protection.  The judge's finding that there
    is in general a sufficiency of protection  in  Albania,  was  based  on
    background country evidence and this finding has not been  disputed  in
    the appellant's grounds.  Therefore the appellant was only entitled  to
    succeed in  showing  he  in  particular  would  not  receive  effective
    protection if there was objective as well  as  subjective  evidence  to
    show that [LL] had influence over the police or other authorities.  The
    only evidence regarding this was the appellant's own claims  that  [LL]
    was  dangerous  and  troublesome  and  well-known  in  the   area   for
    "terrorising and intimidating people".  Yet  the  appellant  failed  to
    produce  any  supporting   evidence   to   substantiate   this   claim,
    notwithstanding  his  claim  that  this  man  was  "well-known"  to  be
    dangerous.

8.   The judge noted that before him Mr Youssefian  had  argued  that  there
    was a duty on the respondent to  make  particular  enquiries  regarding
    [LL] or his family, but in my judgment the judge was entitled to assume
    that the appellant had  not  substantiated  this  part  of  his  claim,
    without expecting the respondent to take any positive steps to verify.

9.   Mr Youssefian sought to argue (echoing a  point  made  in  his  written
    grounds)  that  if  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  findings   were
    erroneous, then such an error was "so fundamental that  it  would  have
    materially affected the whole of the determination including  available
    of sufficiency of protection and internal relocation".  I am unable  to
    agree. Mr Youssefian sought to argue that the judge's findings  in  the
    alternative were premised on a rejection of the appellant's claim  that
    [LL] had no adverse interest in him, but I do not consider that a  fair
    reading of paragraph 33, which in effect took the appellant's claim  at
    its highest.

10.  Taking the appellant's evidence at its highest  did  not  overcome  the
    absence of any objective evidence to support the appellant's claim that
    [LL] had power and influence over the police and authorities, either in
    the appellant's home area or elsewhere in Albania.

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that despite errors in  assessment  of
    the appellant's credibility, these were not material and the judge  was
    entitled to dismiss the  appeal  on  the  alternative  basis  that  the
    appellant had failed to  substantiate  his  claim  that  he  would  not
    receive sufficient protection in  his  home  area  or  other  parts  of
    Albania.

12.  To conclude:

    The judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal is not  vitiated
    by material error of law and accordingly it shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 28 July 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

