
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02858/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 2 November 2016                   |on 7 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                KAYWAN MOLANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Katani, instructed by Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boyd, dismissing his  appeal  against  refusal  of  asylum  as  a
    refugee from Iran.

 2. The substantive points raised by the appellant begin at paragraph 2  of
    the grounds on which he was granted permission. At paragraph 18 of  his
    decision, the judge was "not prepared to  draw  an  adverse  inference"
    from the appellant being asked to pay tax from his smuggling activities
    to the PKK, when he was prepared to take risks  on  their  behalf.  The
    grounds say that the judge failed to take the  appellant's  explanation
    into account, and should have found this to be a point  which  enhanced
    his credibility. In submissions, Mr Katani  said  that  the  judge  was
    bound to give the benefit of the doubt, and to take this point  to  the
    appellant's credit.

 3. Paragraph 3 of the grounds criticises paragraph 19 the decision,  where
    the judge found it not credible the appellant  would  recall  only  one
    date out of three in relation to delivering leaflets over  a  two-month
    period. The ground argues that this  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    appellant's explanation, or alternatively the judge was bound  to  give
    "reasons for placing little to no weight on a piece  of  evidence  that
    enhances the appellant's credibility". Mr Katani submitted  that  there
    were no reasons for rejecting the appellant's account, and this  matter
    could only have been held to enhance his case.

 4. At paragraph 20 the judge agreed with the respondent's  point  that  it
    was unlikely that no one from the  appellant's  home  would  have  been
    arrested if the authorities had found PKK papers  and  leaflets  there.
    Paragraph 4 of the grounds says that this is speculative, and refers to
    country guidance which in turn  cites  UNHCR  information  that  family
    members may be detained or punished, but that  there  is  no  basis  in
    Iranian law to detain a family member of a person whom the  authorities
    have failed to arrest. Mr Katani submitted that there was  no  evidence
    before the judge that family members  would  be  apprehended,  and  the
    judge had failed to note what was in the information quoted in  country
    guidance.

 5. The appellant's explanation for no one being arrested during  the  raid
    was that his parents were unwell.  At paragraph 25, the judge  rejected
    that explanation, because it was not mentioned previously. Paragraph  5
    of the grounds says that this did not previously emerge simply  because
    the appellant was not asked. The judge had no way of knowing this would
    become a contentious issue, and the judge's findings  were  "irrational
    and perverse". Mr Katani's submission was along the same lines.

 6. Grounds 6 and 7 were taken together. At paragraph 21 the judge found it
    adverse that the appellant said the PKK sought to act peacefully, apart
    from defending themselves, when background evidence was that they  have
    been in an armed struggle against the Turkish  government  since  1984.
    The appellant's knowledge was also  thought  to  be  vague.  Mr  Katani
    submitted that there was no real inconsistency between having  peaceful
    aims and being forced into armed struggle, and that the  appellant  had
    not claim to be  more  than  a  supporter  of  the  PKK.  He  said  the
    respondent and the  judge  failed  to  understand  the  mind-set  which
    applied in another country, and the emotional attraction  of  the  PKK,
    although a Turkish organisation, to Iranian Kurds. In effect, he  said,
    the judge had applied too high a threshold of proof.

 7. Paragraph 8 of the grounds says that the judge erred by failing to take
    into account  objective  evidence,  namely  a  report  on  the  serious
    consequences if the Iranian regime catches a sympathiser in an activity
    against the  government.  Mr  Katani  submitted  that  this  reinforced
    paragraphs 6 and 7 of the grounds.

 8. Paragraph 9 of the grounds turns to a different  issue.  The  appellant
    claimed to have converted in the UK to Christianity. The judge found at
    paragraph 28 that his asylum claim having been refused  on  5  November
    2015, it was no coincidence that he commenced attending  church  on  11
    November 2015. The ground says that there was no  evidence  before  the
    judge that the appellant was aware of the adverse  decision  before  11
    November 2015, and the judge fell into speculation.

 9. Ground 10 relates to paragraph 12 of  the  decision,  where  the  judge
    noted evidence of the  appellant's  regular  attendance  at  church  on
    Tuesdays and Sundays, and to paragraphs 28 and 32, where he  said  only
    that the appellant attended some Tuesday and Sunday sessions, and  that
    frequency had not  been  established.  These  errors  led  to  positive
    factors being overlooked, which should have weighed in the  appellant's
    favour.

10. Submitting on grounds 9 and 10 together, Mr Katani  said  that  judge's
    conclusions on the claimed Christian conversion could not be sustained.

11. Finally, Mr Katani submitted that the cumulative errors were such  that
    a fresh hearing in the first-tier tribunal was required.

12. Mrs O'Brien submitted as follows. The judge at  paragraph  18  gave  no
    weight to the issue about tax paid to the PKK.  There  was  no  logical
    reason for the matter to be placed in the  appellant's  favour.  As  to
    dates, these were highly risky alleged activities. It was open  to  the
    judge to consider that the appellant should have had more accurate  and
    specific  recollection.  The  appellant  quoted  country  guidance  and
    background evidence in an attempt to undermine the judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 20, but in fact that  evidence  supported  the  finding.  His
    conclusion that it was unlikely there would be no  interest  in  family
    members was consistent with the contextual evidence. The findings about
    the appellant in relation to the PKK were all sensible. It  is  not  an
    Iranian but a Turkish organisation. The appellant's evidence was vague,
    and at some points wrong. The PKK  did  not  use  peaceful  means.  The
    appellant lived not in Turkey but in Iran and had no knowledge  of  the
    Iranian organisation PJAK, as would have been more likely.  His lack of
    knowledge did not fit with the alleged risks taken  on  behalf  of  the
    PKK. The appellant said he had not been asked to explain why no one was
    arrested when his home was raided,  but  he  was  not  restricted  from
    adding information. In any  event,  any  error  in  that  part  of  the
    reasoning was not material,  given  the  reasoning  on  this  point  in
    earlier paragraphs.  The analysis at paragraphs 16 to 24,  read  fairly
    and as a whole, was legally sufficient.

13. Turning to the Christian conversion claim, Mrs O'Brien  said  that  the
    judge was entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant  knew  about  the
    rejection of his asylum claim before he began to develop  his  interest
    in Christianity. The decision was dated 5 November 2015  and  had  been
    served by post. The appellant had seen a solicitor and  placed  grounds
    of appeal before the first-tier tribunal by 18th  November.  It  was  a
    common-sense deduction that he knew about his rejection  of  his  claim
    before he began going to church on 11th November. The  judge  may  have
    gone slightly wrong about the regularity of  attendance  at  church  on
    Tuesdays, but it was clear he would not have decided  any  differently,
    even if the appellant had established that  he  went  to  church  every
    Tuesday and every Sunday.

14. In response, Mr Katani said that there was nothing unusual about  being
    unable to be specific about dates. The appellant had reason  to  recall
    one particular date, but not others. When the appellant's  family  home
    was raided, PKK materials were found, but it was not surprising that no
    one was arrested, since the reason for the authorities to go there  was
    that the appellant's anti-authority activities had become known.  There
    was no reason for  an  interest  in  anyone  else.  The  appellant  had
    explained that became involved with the PKK rather than PJAK,  and  the
    refusal letter accepted that the organisations are  closely  connected.
    The appellant's position was that PJAK is simply a part of the PKK,  so
    his account is exactly as was to be expected. There was no  reason  for
    the appellant to take the initiative in offering  explanations  of  why
    none of his family members were arrested, and the point had never  been
    put to him. There was no reason to think the appellant knew  about  the
    asylum decision by the time he first went to church.

15. I reserved my decision.

16. There is no reason why those points which the judge treated as  neutral
    should have been found to go in the appellant's favour.

17. The information cited in the grounds does not go  against  the  judge's
    finding that if the account were true, it  was  likely  family  members
    might have been detained. The information tends to support the  judge's
    conclusion.

18. The appellant's account of the PKK was vague, and  it  was  inaccurate.
    The judge did not error by taking these points against the appellant.

19. There is no reason to think that the judge was not well aware that  the
    Iranian regime does take stern action and indeed often  persecutes  its
    opponents, even at a low level. This is simply  part  of  the  commonly
    known background.

20. The inference that the appellant knew about refusal of his asylum claim
    before he began going to church, given the dates, and  the  usual  time
    documents take in the post, is not speculative but obvious.

21. The grounds do identify  that  the  evidence  suggested  slightly  more
    regular attendance at church than the judge stated  in  his  concluding
    paragraphs;  but  the  difference  is  very  minor.   It   is   not   a
    misconception of a nature which might have changed the judge's mind.

22. Both point by point and as a whole, the grounds and submissions  are  a
    dogged attempt to re-argue the case for the appellant, but they are  no
    more. They disagree on the facts, but they do not disclose legal error.



23. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

24. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            4 November 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
