
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: PA/02820/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20th June 2019                  |    On 16th July 2019              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     A Q
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Chaudry, Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C
      Burns first came before me on 29th March 2019.  On that occasion Mr
      Chaudry was disadvantaged by not having received the papers from the
      previous representatives to allow him to prepare adequately.  The
      hearing had to be adjourned.  There was, however, some discussion of
      the grounds of the application for permission to appeal, in which the
      focus was on paragraph 67 of the decision of the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal on the issue of whether the judge gave adequate reasons
      for departing from the relevant county guidance.

   2. At the hearing on 29th March 2019 a direction was made requiring a
      skeleton argument on behalf of the appellant to be lodged no later
      than 14 days prior to the resumed hearing.  This direction was not
      complied with as the skeleton argument was served on the respondent
      only the day before the resumed hearing.  Mr Chaudry explained that he
      had still had difficulty in obtaining the appeal papers and this
      accounted for the late submission of the skeleton argument.  I
      indicated to the parties that I would be very reluctant to grant a
      further adjournment.

   3. Mr Govan contended that the skeleton argument went beyond its intended
      scope and amounted to an attempt to rewrite the application for
      permission to appeal.  I informed the parties that although the
      skeleton argument was late and the point raised by Mr Govan seemed to
      have some merit, I would accept the skeleton argument as if it were a
      written submission lodged at the hearing.  Mr Govan would be entitled
      to challenge any aspect of it which fell outwith the grant of
      permission to appeal.

Submissions
   4. The principal submission for the appellant was that the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal made a finding on risk on return without giving
      adequate reasons for departing from the country guidance on Iraq set
      out in the Annex to AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  The judge found at
      paragraph 67 that if the appellant had to return to his home town,
      referred to as "Smod", to obtain a CSID the evidence did not show that
      he would face an Article 15(c) risk in so doing, assuming Smod was in
      the region of Kirkuk and not in the IKR.  The judge recorded at
      paragraph 67 that the government had regained control in Kirkuk.  The
      evidence relied upon in this regard by the judge was supposedly to be
      found at paragraph 30 of the decision.  In this paragraph the judge
      referred to an Amnesty International report of February 2018 and a
      Country Policy & Information Note (CPIN) from the Home Office of
      September 2017 but no mention was made of the situation in Kirkuk in
      paragraph 30.

   5. Mr Chaudry maintained that in terms of the country guidance Kirkuk was
      still a contested area.  A further country guideline decision issued
      after the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal, namely
      AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212,
      amended part of the country guidance in AA (Iraq) but did not alter
      the finding that in contested areas, such as Kirkuk, there was an
      Article 15(c) risk, contrary to the finding by the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal.

   6. Mr Govan submitted that the only issues before me were whether the
      judge had made a proper finding as to where the appellant originated
      from in Iraq and whether the appellant could relocate to Baghdad.  The
      appellant had a CSID at the time he left Iraq and his family could
      send him this from Kirkuk. In addition, I understood it to be Mr
      Govan's position that there was no longer an Article 15(c) risk in
      Kirkuk.  I note also that according to Mr Govan a further country
      guideline decision is anticipated.

Discussion

   7. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal sought to take a structured
      approach to the issue of internal relocation but did not make adequate
      findings or give proper reasons to support the conclusions reached.
      In terms of the country guidance in AA, a CSID would be required for a
      viable relocation to Baghdad.  The judge considered the question of
      return to Baghdad but, on the available evidence, did not seem able to
      make a finding on a suggestion by the appellant that his CSID had been
      destroyed.  The judge found that the appellant would be able to travel
      from Baghdad to Smod to obtain a new CSID without encountering an
      Article 15(c) risk.  The difficulty is that the judge's analysis of
      whether the appellant could safely travel to Smod to obtain a new
      CSID, assuming a new one was required, did not follow the country
      guidance in AA (Iraq) and nor, of course, the more detailed guidance
      in AAH on obtaining a CSID.  Strong reasons based on firm evidence
      would be required for a judge to depart from the current country
      guidance on internal relocation.  Neither the evidence referred to by
      the judge at paragraph 30 of the decision nor the reasons given at
      paragraph 67 were adequate for this purpose.

   8. Having heard the submissions of the parties I was satisfied that the
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by failing to give
      adequate reasons for departing from the relevant country guidance on
      the Article 15(c) risk facing the appellant on return to Iraq.  In
      consequence the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   9. The question then arises of how the decision may be re-made.  I
      suggested to the parties that the decision might be re-made in
      accordance with the current country guidance based on the finding at
      paragraph 57 of the decision that Smod, the town or village from which
      the appellant appeared to originate, was near Kirkuk.  Mr Govan drew
      to my attention, however, that at paragraph 60 the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal stated that on the evidence it was not possible to say
      whether the appellant was born and raised in IKR or in another part of
      Iraq.  Mr Govan submitted that the judge made contradictory findings
      over the appellant's origins at paragraphs 57 and 60.  I can only
      agree with this and I find that this constitutes a further error of
      law.

  10. Because of the contradictory findings over the appellant's place of
      origin a further hearing is required at which evidence may be led.  If
      there is to be a hearing involving further evidence, it should not be
      limited to only one issue but should allow for findings to be made on
      other matters in contention.  In view of the extent of fact-finding
      required the appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted for a
      fresh hearing before a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal
      with no findings preserved, in accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the
      Practice Statement.

  11. In rehearing the appeal, the First-tier Tribunal will have to have
      proper regard to the relevant country guidance, including any which
      may be issued before the appeal is reheard.  It is likely to be of
      crucial importance that the Tribunal makes findings on from where the
      appellant originates and whether he has, or could safely obtain, a
      CSID.

Conclusions

  12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error of law.

  13. The decision is set aside.

  14. The appeal is remitted for a fresh hearing before a differently
      constituted First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.


Anonymity

The direction for anonymity is continued in the following terms to preserve
the positions of the parties until the appeal is decided.  Unless or until
a court or tribunal directs otherwise no report of these proceedings will
identify either directly or indirectly the appellant or any member of his
family.  This direction applies to the appellant and the respondent.
Failure to comply with the direction may give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.




M E Deans
                           Dated 10th July 2019
Deputy upper Tribunal Judge















