
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02824/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3rd July 2019                     |On 18th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    V O O
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Frances Shaw (Counsel), I A S (Sheffield)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Butler, promulgated on 13th April 2018, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on  28th  March  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria,  and  was  born  on  8th
    August 1986.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    14th February 2018, refusing his claim for asylum and for  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that  he  is  a  homosexual.   He
    discovered he was  gay  when  he  was  17  years  of  age.   He  had  a
    relationship with a boy at his boarding school.  In October 2013 he was
    attacked by six homophobic men in a shop  and  badly  beaten  up.   His
    father took him to stay at a church where he confessed  to  the  pastor
    that he was gay.  The pastor told his parents in breach  of  confidence
    and his life became difficult so that he decided to leave  Nigeria  and
    come to the UK.  He fears persecution if  he  returns  to  Nigeria  now
    because homosexuality is illegal in that country.  In  the  UK  he  has
    lived as a gay man where he has had relationships with two men.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  account  contained  "many
    inconsistencies" (paragraph 34).  One of these inconsistencies involved
    the account as  to  when  the  Appellant  first  realised  he  was  gay
    (paragraph 35).  He had also given different versions of  his  how  his
    parents discovered that he was gay (paragraph 36).  Moreover, there had
    been a delay in his claiming asylum (paragraph 37).  Furthermore,  none
    of his two previous partners  in  the  UK  attended  to  give  evidence
    (paragraph 38).  He had also produced a profile of details on  an  LGBT
    website which was only two days before the appeal hearing, thus casting
    doubt on his bona fides (paragraph 39).  There  was  evidence  from  Mr
    [S], who had stated that he was convinced that the Appellant  was  gay,
    and that he had attended the Tribunal to support other asylum  seeker's
    applications, and had not ever come across someone who was not  gay  as
    he claimed to be.  The judge held, however, that the lack  of  material
    evidence and support  meant  that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed.
    Moreover, there was no psychiatric report and the GP's  report  in  his
    favour did not demonstrate the  GP  as  having  the  requisite  medical
    expertise to be able to attest to that which was being attested  to  in
    the Appellant's case.  All in all, therefore, the appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge  did  not  give  proper
    consideration to the evidence from Dr Brinkley, the Appellant's GP,  in
    the form of a written letter  of  support.   Moreover,  the  judge  had
    failed to have regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No  2  of
    2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant   guidance.
    Furthermore, the judge held that "there was no  corroborative  evidence
    even though it should have been available" (paragraph 42).  Although it
    was the case that neither of the Appellant's two previous  partners  in
    the UK had given evidence by attending court, there was  evidence  from
    Mr [S], and this was live witness evidence that the judge  should  have
    given proper credence to.

 6. On 6th August 2018, the Upper Tribunal granted permission on the  basis
    that it was arguable that the judge failed to treat the Appellant as  a
    vulnerable witness and that this clearly resulted in the  judge  really
    neglecting to ensure that the Appellant had  a  proper  opportunity  to
    respond to the concerns of the judge which had not been  identified  by
    the Respondent.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 3rd July 2019, Ms Shaw, appearing on behalf
    of  the  Appellant,  relied  upon  the  grounds  of  application.   She
    submitted that the proper way  to  approach  this  appeal  was  to  ask
    whether there was a material error  of  law,  and  if  so  whether  any
    additional evidence could be admitted.  With regard to the latter,  she
    wished to draw attention  to  a  report  from  the  Sheffield  Teaching
    Hospitals, dated 18th September 2018, which was six  months  after  the
    decision appealed against, and this confirmed that  the  Appellant  was
    associated with homosexual sexual activity.

 8. I indicated that I would first have to determine whether the judge,  on
    the evidence before him,  had  erred  as  a  question  of  law,  before
    deciding whether the additional evidence could be admitted pursuant  to
    Rule 15(2).

 9. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that there was no error of  law.   The
    judge was aware of the medical evidence, and this consisted of a letter
    from the GP (at page 16) who had only recently moved to his practice in
    the area, and did not appear to be qualified to opine upon  psychiatric
    damage to the Appellant.  There was, however, no  psychiatric  evidence
    and the judge had expressed concern over this by pointing out that "his
    medical issues are not supported  by  a  detailed  psychiatric  report"
    (paragraph 44).  That left  the  question  of  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance.  This was not raised before the judge.  It was  too  late  to
    now draw attention to this and to rely upon this in order to impugn the
    determination of the judge.

10. Most asylum seekers suffer from some degree of vulnerability or  other,
    and it was the Appellant's responsibility to demonstrate why the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance failed to be applied in his case.  Moreover,  the
    vulnerability has to explain the inconsistencies in the evidence.  This
    it did not do.  It is difficult to see exactly what it  is  that  would
    have been helped by treating the Appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness,
    given that the judge fundamentally  disbelieved  the  Appellant's  core
    account.  The judge expressly looked at the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    found that it lacked weight.

11. In reply, Ms Shaw submitted that the judge should not have not disputed
    the GP's medical evidence.  That indicated that  the  Appellant  was  a
    vulnerable witness.  Furthermore,  the  Appellant  had  explained  that
    because of his mistreatment in Nigeria, he had felt ashamed  about  his
    homosexuality and did not initially place reliance upon it and had only
    done so eventually in a reluctant manner.



Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law such that it falls to  be  set
    aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

13. First, this is a case where there was evidence before the judge from Dr
    Brinkley dated 22nd March 2018.  As the judge makes clear this  "refers
    to  symptoms  which  he  says  'appear  to  be  significant  PTSD   and
    depression'.  He refers to the Appellant suffering from flashbacks  and
    hearing voices" (paragraph 41).  Although it is the case, as the  judge
    points out that the Appellant had not previously  referred  to  any  of
    these matters in his asylum interview or in his witness statement,  the
    fact was that this was evidence from a medical practitioner  who  would
    have been able to identify "significant PTSD and depression" as matters
    that lay within his medical competence.  The question then is as to why
    the Appellant has not previously drawn attention to this.  This  brings
    me to the second reason.

14. Secondly, it is a feature of this appeal that the Appellant, who claims
    to have realised that he was gay either at the age of 13 or  14  or  17
    (see paragraph 35), had confided in a pastor, who  had  publicly  in  a
    church, and during a sermon, before the congregation, directly referred
    to him as being a homosexual, which had  led  to  the  Appellant  being
    summoned at home by his parents, and being  humiliated  (see  paragraph
    14).  The Appellant makes it clear that he had  "been  ashamed  of  his
    sexuality" (paragraph 15).  In the circumstances, it  is  difficult  to
    see why the reference to the Appellant having PTSD should not have been
    taken at face value.  The judge refers to this in the determination  at
    a number of places, including, at paragraphs 23, 27, 41, and 44.

15. Third, this should have alerted the judge  to  the  advocation  of  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note of  2010.   This  requires  judges  to
    consider, where there are  discrepancies  in  the  oral  evidence,  the
    extent to which the vulnerability of the witness was an element of that
    discrepancy or lack of clarity.  This  would  have  been  the  case  in
    relation to when the Appellant discovered that he was a homosexual, and
    whether this was at the age of  14  or  17.   Moreover,  the  judge  is
    required, upon application  of  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance,  to
    confirm whether the Appellant is a vulnerable or sensitive witness.  In
    addition, it should be stated whether vulnerability had any  impact  on
    the evidence.

16. Finally, it is in the light of the matters above, that I  have  decided
    to admit under Rule 15(2) the latest evidence, namely, the letter  from
    the Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, dated 18th September 2018 from  Dr  J
    Bassett.  This makes it clear that upon  the  Appellant  attending  the
    clinic "he  was  initially  treated  for  non-specific  urethritis  and
    chlamydia with a week of Doxycycline" at paragraph 1.  The letter  goes
    on to say then on the attendance at the clinic on  4th  September  2018
    there was a full sexual health screen undertaken of the  Appellant  and
    the hospital found that the Appellant "had evidence of rectal chlamydia
    infection which we  have  treated.   This  result  would  back  up  his
    disclosure related to his sexuality as a rectal  infection  in  men  is
    almost associated with homosexual sexual activity"  (at  paragraph  3).
    In the light of this, this matter needs to  be  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal so that the evidence can be looked at on the  basis
    of the application of the Joint Presidential Guidance  in  relation  to
    vulnerable witnesses.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge Butler
    pursuant to practice statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Directions.

18. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019

