
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02276/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 18 June 2021                  |On the 30 June 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     KQS
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gulamhussein, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction:


      1. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appeals with  permission  against
         the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who   dismissed   his
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         2 November 2020.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 18 June 2021, by means of teams which has
         been consented to and not objected to by the  parties.  A  face-to-
         face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and  both
         parties agreed that all issues could  be  determined  in  a  remote
         hearing.  The advocates attended remotely  via  video  as  did  the
         appellant so that he could listen and observe  the  hearing.  There
         were no issues regarding sound,  and  no  technical  problems  were
         encountered during the hearing and I am  satisfied  both  advocates
         were able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.

Background:


      4. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle.

      5. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of  Kurdish  ethnicity  and  was
         born in Sulaymaniyah but went to live in  Tuz  Khurmatu  and  later
         claimed to have moved to Kirkuk.

      6. The appellant's problems began in or about July 2018  when  members
         of the PMF came to his garage to repair their car which was riddled
         with bullet holes. He told them that he could not begin the  repair
         process until he got a police report as he needed  police  approval
         as set out in the law. Following  this  he  reported  them  to  the
         police (Asayesh) because the PMF by forcing  him  to  fix  the  car
         meant he would have broken the  law  as  garage  owners  have  been
         informed by the authorities they must report vehicles  with  bullet
         holes if they do not have a police report.

      7. Having gone to the police station he gave the men's description the
         make of the car and the registration plate.

      8. Sometime later around 30 July 2018 four men from the PMF raided his
         house and told him not to underestimate them. They demanded keys to
         the garage. They threatened to kill his mother if he did  not  hand
         over the keys and that he should never have reported them.  Out  of
         fear he handed the keys to the garage. They tied the appellant  and
         his mother. He fled to his cousin's house.

      9. The appellant also had problems with the PUK because the  PMF  took
         one of the cars in the garage and the car belonged to  a  PUK  high
         ranking member. The appellant claimed that he was in  fear  of  the
         PUK because they wanted to kill him as they believed he  drove  the
         PUK vehicle and harassed locals with the car. The PUK came  to  his
         house looking for him and they assumed he drove the car because  it
         was kept in his  garage  and  that  only  had  access  to  it.  The
         appellant claimed that his life is in danger if he  was  caught  by
         the PMF or the PUK.

     10. The appellant left Iraq on 23 July 2018  and  travelled  through  a
         number of countries before arriving  in  the  UK  by  lorry  on  13
         November  2018.  The  Home  Office  records  show   that   he   was
         fingerprinted in Italy on 2 August 2018.

     11. The appellant claimed asylum on 14 November 2018.

     12. In a decision letter dated 19 February 2019 the  appellant's  claim
         was dismissed. The respondent accepted that he was  from  Iraq  and
         was of Kurdish ethnicity. From paragraphs [32 - 47], the respondent
         set out the appellant's claim and identified that  the  appellant's
         account was internally inconsistent concerning his  claim  relating
         to the PMF. At paragraphs [48]-[56] the  respondent  addressed  his
         claimed fear of the PUK. At  paragraphs  [57]-[64]  the  respondent
         referred to the questions the appellant was asked about  Kirkuk,  a
         place he identified as having lived in. For the  reasons  set  out,
         the respondent concluded that the appellant  had  not  demonstrated
         that he was  resident  or  had  lived  in  Kirkuk.  The  respondent
         therefore rejected the factual claim advanced by the appellant.

     13. As to the issue of return to Iraq, it was noted that he was born in
         Sulaymaniyah before moving to Tuz and as such he originated in  the
         IKR. The respondent considered that he could contact the embassy to
         replace his CSID and the decision letter set out  the  decision  of
         SMO and others. At paragraph [102] the respondent  considered  that
         it was not unreasonable to  expect  him  to  return  to  Erbil  (or
         another location in Iraq). When considering article  15  (  c)  the
         respondent concluded that his personal circumstances did not amount
         to a breach based on the situation  in  Tuz  or  Sulaymaniyah.  His
         claim was therefore refused.

     14. The appellant appealed that decision came before  the  FtTJ  on  10
         September 2020.

     15. In a decision promulgated on the 2 November 2020 the FtTJ dismissed
         his appeal. At paragraphs [38]-[45] the FtTJ set out  his  analysis
         of the evidence and his findings of fact concerning events in  Iraq
         relating to his fear of the PMF and  the  PUK.  The  basis  of  the
         appellant's  claim  was  that  he  feared  reprisals   from   those
         identified groups.

     16. Having  considered  his  claim,  the  FtTJ  set  out  a  number  of
         inconsistencies in his evidence. In summary the FtTJ  rejected  his
         account to be at risk of harm from either named group.

     17. The FtTJ then turned to the issue of return to Iraq. The  FtTJ  set
         out the CG decision of SMO and others (article  15  (c  )  identity
         documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (hereinafter  referred  to  as
         "SMO").

     18. The FtTJ consider the issue of documentation  at  [46  -  48].  The
         judge considered his claim that he did not know the volume and page
         number of the family book but concluded that he  had  run  his  own
         business for at least a year and had been educated and was familiar
         with  administrative  procedures.  The  level  of   education   and
         knowledge was in contrast to his claimed ignorance  of  details  of
         any CSID card or family book. The judge  considered  this  in  line
         with  paragraph  13  of  SMO  that  "given  the   importance   that
         information, most Iraqi citizens will recall it."  Thus  the  judge
         did not accept that he did not know the details of his CSI  D  card
         to be re-documented.

     19. In conclusion, the judge considered as  he  was  a  Kurdish  Sorani
         speaker and may emanate from the IKR, but he would be able  to  re-
         document himself. The judge therefore dismissed his appeal.

     20. Permission to appeal was sought on 3  grounds  and  permission  was
         refused by the FTT but granted by the Upper Tribunal   on  1  March
         2021.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     21. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 12 June 2020, inter alia, indicating that it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face-to-face hearing and directions were given
         for a remote hearing.

     22. Both parties have indicated that they were content for the  hearing
         to proceed by this  method.  Therefore,  the  Tribunal  listed  the
         hearing to enable oral submissions to  be  given  by  each  of  the
         parties. I am grateful for their assistance and  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

     23. Mr Gulamhussein appeared on behalf of the appellant and relied upon
         the written grounds of appeal and a skeleton argument that  he  had
         filed on the morning of the hearing.

     24. There was no rule 24 response on behalf  of  the  respondent.  Both
         advocates provided oral submissions to which I have had regard when
         reaching my decision.

     25. At the conclusion of the submissions, I reserved my decision  which
         I now give. I intend to consider the submissions of the parties  by
         reference to each of the grounds.

    Decision on error of law:

     26. By way of a preliminary matter, it was necessary  to  consider  the
         issue of the grounds of challenge. On the morning of the hearing Mr
         Gulamhussein filed a skeleton argument on the tribunal and upon the
         respondent. In that skeleton argument he sought to rely on a number
         of matters including new policy guidance issued by  the  respondent
         and submissions based on the failure of the judge to  consider  the
         evidence  in  determining  where  the  appellant   was   from   and
         submissions relating  to  the  area  of  Tuz  Khurmatu.  Issues  of
         documentation was set out at paragraph 25.

     27. No application had been made prior to the hearing for any amendment
         of the grounds or any notice that this was being sought.

     28. The original grounds of challenge before the FtT were  based  on  3
         matters. Firstly,  it  was  asserted  that  there  were  irrational
         findings  relating  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence
         relating to the PMF/PMU. Secondly, they related to paragraph  40  -
         42 of the  FtTJ's  assessment  relating  to  the  analysis  of  the
         affiliation of the PMF with the Iraqi government and the 3rd ground
         referring to a mistake of fact  relying  on  paragraph  43  of  the
         decision relevant to material in the screening interview.

     29. The original grounds raise no challenge relating to  the  issue  of
         Article 15 (c ) or raising any issue that the judge had  failed  to
         deal with that or by reference to the appellant's  home  area.  Nor
         were there any ground issues relating to the FtTJ's  assessment  of
         the issue related to documentation.

     30. Mr Gulamhussein referred to the grant of permission  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal. That grant of permission states: "the appellant relies on
         the grounds before the FTT. I do not have a copy of these but  from
         the refusal to grant  permission  I  can  see  that  the  issue  of
         documentation was raised."

     31. In relation to the grounds relating to the PMU (which are  set  out
         in grounds 1 to 3) the UTJ granted permission  and  further  stated
         "without sight of the original grounds, the grant is limited to the
         above 2 grounds".

     32. The UTJ also made directions which included the appellant  to  file
         and serve a copy of the  grounds  of  appeal  and  stated  "if  the
         appellant seeks to rely on  any  other  ground  which  is  properly
         raised in the grounds before Judge Parks that should be  raised  in
         written submissions and/or at the error of law  hearing.  Reference
         is made to the judge determining the error  of  law  will  consider
         whether permission be granted, or any other ground pursued  by  the
         appellant and that the secretary  of  state  must  be  prepared  to
         engage with all grounds.

     33. The UT's grant of permission does not follow the guidance given  in
         SYR (PTA: electronic materials (Iraq)) [2021] UKUT 00064 where  the
         presidential panel held that it is particularly important  for  the
         judge engaging in the permission  to  appeal  process  at  whatever
         level to satisfy themselves they have the requisite material before
         them in order to make a proper decision on permission.

     34. In this case UTJ did not have the grounds of challenge. If they had
         been made available it would have been noted that there had been no
         ground of challenge raised  on  the  issue  of  documentation.  The
         refusal of permission by  the  FtTJ  did  refer  to  the  issue  of
         documentation and it is unclear to me why the judge did so when the
         grounds made no reference to it.

     35. Mr Gulamhussein accepted that the  other  issues  set  out  in  the
         skeleton argument  had  not  been  relied  on  in  the  grounds  of
         challenge. It is important that advocates approach  the  issues  of
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal by reference the  grounds  upon  which
         permission was sought. It is not  sufficient  to  file  a  skeleton
         argument setting out other grounds for which permission had neither
         been sought or granted and if the grounds are to be enlarged, there
         should be an application made on notice to the other party.

     36. However, as set out above the issue of the ambit of the appeal  was
         more problematic because of the terms of the refusal of  permission
         by the FtTJ which raised issues not in the  grounds  and  the  UT's
         grant of permission relying upon that refusal in the absence of the
         grounds of challenge.

     37. Furthermore the directions stated that if the appellant  sought  to
         rely on any other grounds which had  been  properly  raised  before
         Judge Parks it should be raised in written submissions  or  at  the
         hearing and in determining the error of law the judge will consider
         whether permission should be granted on any other ground pursued by
         the appellant. As can be seen from the directions, the reference to
         the grounds only related to the issues that had been raised  before
         Judge Parks and not any new grounds. The contents of  the  skeleton
         argument were drafted to include both new and the original  grounds
         but I accept that the directions given were unclear.

     38. On the issue of documentation I was prepared to accept that the UTJ
         had granted permission on this issue and that it could be  said  to
         be a  "Robinson  obvious  point".  Mr  Diwnycz  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent also made  reference  to  paragraph  47  of  the  FtTJ's
         decision and the reference made to paragraph 13 of SMO relating  to
         the issue of the family book. He submitted that this was  an  issue
         that had been set aside by the Court of Appeal and  one  which  the
         Upper Tribunal was to reconsider. Any  finding  relying  upon  this
         issue would be an error of law.

     39. Mr Gulamhussein submitted that the issue of  the  appellant's  home
         area was similarly "Robinson obvious" however if it were so obvious
         a point, this raises the issue as to why it had not been set out in
         the original grounds.

     40. Be that as it may, in the light of  the  submissions  that  I  have
         heard relating to the  grounds  of  which  permission  was  granted
         (grounds 1 and 3) it is not necessary  for  me  to  set  reach  any
         finding on the grounds which were not originally raised or pleaded.
         In respect of  grounds  1  to  3,  Mr  Diwnycz  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent accepted the ground 1 was made out and acknowledged that
         the submission made on behalf of the appellant had  been  reflected
         in the respondent's CPIN and also addressed in the decision of SMO.
         On ground 2 he stated that he was neutral and as  to  ground  3  he
         accepted that that was also made out in relation to the PUK.

     41. Given the acceptance of the grounds which form the central plank of
         the credibility assessment of the FtTJ, I shall set out briefly why
         I agree with that concession and why there is an error of law.

     42. The basis of the appellant's claim related to the  events  in  July
         2018 when the PMF came to the garage to repair their  car.  I  have
         set out earlier  the  factual  account  given  which  included  the
         appellant reporting the PMF to the Asayesh (police) because the PMF
         said they would force them to fix the car which meant he would have
         broken  the  law  as  garage  owners  had  been  informed  by   the
         authorities that they must report vehicles  with  bullet  holes  if
         there was no police report. His account also referred to members of
         PMF later raiding his home. Arising from this  the  appellant  also
         had problems with the PUK.

     43. The FtTJ set out his findings at paragraph 39 -  44.  At  [39]  the
         judge found the appellant's account to not be credible because  the
         PMF are closely affiliated to the Iraqi government and  thus  would
         not encounter any difficulties in obtaining the permission for  the
         car to be repaired. The judge made the finding on  the  basis  that
         the appellant had stated that the PMF were  unable  to  obtain  the
         proper paperwork (at [41]). However as the grounds  that  out,  the
         appellant had not stated that  the  PMF  would  not  encounter  any
         problems with obtaining the paperwork to report the  car,  or  that
         the appellant had said they had  not  obtained  it.  Therefore  the
         judge did not take into account the appellant's  evidence  on  this
         issue.

     44. Furthermore the FtTJ's  credibility  findings  were  based  on  the
         assumption that the PMF were  closely  affiliated  with  the  Iraqi
         government. The skeleton argument on this issue at paragraph  13  -
         16 is not easy to follow but the evidence set out both in  SMO  and
         in  the  respondent's  CPIN:  actors  of  protection  set  out  the
         background and constitution of the PMU/PMF.  In  SMO  the  tribunal
         heard evidence concerning  the  existence  of  the  PMF.  They  are
         described that the most powerful of the militia who  have  ties  to
         Iran and whilst technically under Baghdad control since 2016,  they
         answer to their Iranian sponsors and therefore not all militias are
         answerable to the Iraqi authorities. At paragraphs 146 and  147  of
         SMO Dr Fatah provided general observations concerning Iraq  and  at
         [146] referred to the significant  corruption  in  the  government,
         Peshmerga and the PMF and that there was "significant international
         interference, particularly in relation  to  the  Iranian  influence
         over the PMF which  did  not  fall  under  the  Iraqi  Ministry  of
         interior and had no code of conduct. It was to be recalled that the
         PMF had been created after Ayatollah Sistani in Iran called for  in
         a 2014 fatwa for sheer Muslims to mobilise against ISIL."

     45. Dr Fatah also gave evidence that the PMU and other  actors  do  not
         provide security for the people and their roles  are  not  defined.
         There was no operational police force  and  now,  if  you  knew  an
         influential person, you could get away with murder.  He pointed out
         that there was no one to stop ISIL or the abuse of power by the PMU
         and reminded us that the PMU were  not  under  the  control  of  an
         elected body. That evidence appeared to be given in relation to the
         area of Mosul, but it demonstrates that it is necessary to consider
         the area in which the PMU  is  said  to  operate  to  consider  its
         allegiances and its conduct. At paragraph 89 of SMO, Dr Fatah  gave
         evidence about Salah al Din and that "the PMU  was  not  like  the
         police; they are not educated and are hard-line,  sectarian  people
         who had responded to a fatwa.  Iran relied on them and had  trained
         them.  They had narrow political and religious views.  They had not
         forgiven the Sunnis and they did not like the Kurds".

     46. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the CPIN also gives  details  of  the  PMU
         which  operated  with  an  "autonomous   agenda   and   extra-legal
         authority" which also  undermines  the  basis  of  the  credibility
         assessment.

     47. At paragraph 40 the judge found against the appellant based on  his
         answer to question 98 in his interview where he stated that the PMF
         were not supported by the government and he did not  know  and  was
         not sure. The judge found that the appellant would be  expected  to
         know of their affiliation with the Iraqi government if he lived  in
         Kirkuk or the government-controlled area in Iraq.  However  as  the
         country material set out both in the CPIN and in SMO, they make  it
         clear that the issue is not as straightforward and  that  some  PMF
         are supported by the Iraqi government, but others are not  in  that
         they have their own agenda and act outside of the authority of  the
         Iraqi government.

     48. Thus the assessment of the appellant's account in  the  context  of
         the evidence concerning the PMU was  central  to  his  account  and
         given the differences set out in the country  material  which  were
         not taken into account, it is accepted, and I find  it  to  be  the
         case that the assessment  did  not  take  that  into  account  when
         reaching a decision on the issue of credibility.

     49. There are other matters set out in  the  grounds  relating  to  the
         FtTJ's consideration of the failure  to  mention  the  PUK  in  his
         screening interview. Whilst the appellant did not mention the  risk
         in his screening interview at  paragraph  4.1  and  referred  being
         threatened by ISIS or PMF, that had to be seen in  the  context  of
         his interview where he referred to the basis of his claim as  being
         in fear of PMF but could have been from ISIS.  As the core  of  his
         claim was based on the fear of the PMF, the failure to mention  the
         PUK in the screening interview does not  by  itself  undermine  the
         account.

     50. There were other findings made that were adverse to the appellant's
         account but given the centrality of the findings concerning the PMF
         to  the  appellant's  case,  I  am  satisfied  that  it   is   been
         demonstrated that the findings are unsafe.

     51. As to the issue of documentation, in the light of the  decision  of
         the Court of Appeal which was specific to paragraph 13 of SMO which
         the judge relied upon at  [47],  it  is  also  accepted  that  this
         constituted an error of law. There can be no criticism of the  FtTJ
         in this respect, but it remains the  position  that  the  issue  of
         knowledge of details of the family book remains one which is to  be
         considered afresh by the Upper Tribunal.

     52. This leads me to the ground for which permission  was  not  granted
         and was not set out in the original grounds of challenge. As I have
         already reached the  conclusion  that  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ
         involved the making of an error  on  a  point  of  law  it  is  not
         strictly necessary to deal with this ground.  However  it  will  be
         relevant to any rehearing.

     53.  The appellant stated that whilst he was born  in  Sulaymaniyah  he
         lived in Tuz Khurmatu which is  in  the  Salah  al-Din  governorate
         lying directly to the north-west of Baghdad.

     54. It is submitted that the FtTJ made no assessment of the appellant's
         claim in this regard and appeared to address the issue of return on
         the basis that he maybe from the IKR. It is right that  no  finding
         was made as to what the appellant's home area was and at  best  the
         FtTJ considered that he may emanate from the IKR given his  failure
         to be  able  to  answer  questions  about  Kirkuk  (at  [50]).  The
         respondent and the decision  letter  accepted  he  was  of  Kurdish
         ethnicity but did not accept that he had ever lived in  Kirkuk  (at
         paragraphs [57 - 64]. However the decision letter  did  record  the
         appellant's account that he was born in Sulaymaniyah  but  that  he
         lived in Tuz and considered whether the appellant will be  at  risk
         of article 15 C  treatment  based  on  the  situation  in  Tuz  (at
         paragraph 118). In his interview at question 17 he set out that the
         family had moved to Tuz when he was a baby and  lived  there  until
         2017 before moving to Kirkuk. The FtTJ therefore did  not  consider
         the issue of return and the documents that would be required in the
         context of the appellant's former place of residence. It is unclear
         whether the judge considered him to be from the IKR and  if  so  on
         what basis.

     55. Those were relevant issues set out in the decision letter  and  did
         not appear to be the subject of any  analysis  in  the  conclusions
         reached.

     56. Consequently, I am satisfied that as this was  a  protection  claim
         and thus the requirement of anxious scrutiny applied, the  findings
         of fact are unsafe and therefore cannot stand.

     57. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision should be set aside.

     58. I have therefore considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

              "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is
             satisfied that:-
             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or
             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

     59. Both advocates agree that the venue for hearing the appeal should
         be the FtT. I have carefully considered the submissions of the
         advocates and have done so in the light of the practice statement
         recited. It  will be necessary for the appellant  to give evidence
         and  to deal with the evidential issues, and therefore further fact-
         finding will be necessary alongside the analysis of risk on return
         in the light of the relevant country evidence,  and in my judgement
         the best course and consistent with the overriding objective is for
         it to be remitted to the FTT for a hearing. As to the revision of
         SMO by the Upper Tribunal it will before the FTT to decide when to
         list the hearing after considering any relevant submissions from
         the parties.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision is set aside  and  remitted  to
the FtT for a hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated    22 June 2021
