



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers
PA/02071/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 22 June 2021                      |On 13 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sills


                                   Between

                                   MR AAJ
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates



     Introduction

    1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  Judge  Bannerman,
       promulgated on 23 November 2020.

       Factual Background

    2. The Appellant (A) is a national of Iraq  from  Kirkuk,  born  on  18
       February 1997.  A first claimed asylum in October 2015.   A  claimed
       that in 2007 a friend had been killed while  crossing  a  road  with
       him.  His friend's family were  powerful  and  influential  and  had
       blamed A, threatening to kill him.  A was hit by a car in  2009,  in
       2012 shots were fired at A, and in 2013  there  was  an  attempt  to
       kidnap him.  After this A fled Iraq and came to the UK.

    3. The Respondent refused the claim and A's appeal to  the  First  Tier
       Tribunal (FTT) was dismissed.  The FTT found  A's  account  was  not
       credible and that A could return to Kirkuk.  A appealed to  the  UT.
       The UT found that the FTT had erred in failing to apply  or  explain
       why they were departing  from,  the  country  guidance  case  of  AA
       (Article 15c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 and failing to  give  adequate
       reasons in relation to internal relocation.  The  UT  preserved  the
       FTT's findings aside from the findings that A faced no risk for  any
       reason in Kirkuk  and  that  he  could  reasonably  relocate.  On  7
       December 2017 the UT remade the decision.  The UT found that A would
       not be at risk of serious harm in his home area and  that  he  could
       safely return there via Baghdad or the IKR.

    4. A then made further submissions leading to the decision under appeal
       dated 29 November 2019.  A's appeal came before Judge  Bannerman  on
       12 October 2020.  The Judge noted the medical evidence stating  that
       A had 'multiple issues with low mood, anxiety and PTSD.'  The format
       of the hearing is not clear from the determination.  Para 30  states
       that the hearing was listed for 10am, and by 12 noon neither  A  nor
       his  representative  had  attended  the  hearing  or  provided   any
       explanation  for  this.   Several  phone  calls  were  made  to  A's
       representative Mr Malik by the Tribunal  without  success.   Contact
       was made with A's representative's    office who confirmed they were
       aware of the hearing, but did not know where Mr Malik  was.   At  12
       noon, Judge Bannerman heard submissions from R's representative.  In
       the  determination  promulgated  on  23  November  2020  the   Judge
       dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

       Application for permission to appeal

    5. A appealed on 2 grounds.  The first ground is procedural unfairness.
        A stated the appeal had been via Cloud  Video  Platform  (CVP)  but
       that  the  hearing  could  not  be  accessed  on   the   day.    The
       representatives informed the Tribunal 'via phone  email'  that  they
       were having difficulties in accessing the  CVP.   The  determination
       made no reference to the email from A's  representatives  explaining
       the difficulties they were having.  The hearing should not have been
       listed via CVP  given  that  the  Appellant  could  not  attend  his
       solicitor's office and had inadequate Wi-Fi  in  his  accommodation.
       Second, A argued that the FTT had erred in applying the case of N  v
       SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 instead of Paposhvili v Belgium (Application  No
       41738/10) and AM Zimbabwe [2020] UKSC 17.

    6. FTT Judge Nightingale granted permission to appeal  on  24  February
       2021 on the basis that if A contacted the Tribunal on the day of the
       hearing  to  indicate  difficulties  a  clear  arguable   procedural
       unfairness arises.  A's representatives were  instructed  to  supply
       evidence of all communications with the Tribunal on the day  of  the
       hearing.  Permission was granted on all grounds.

    7.

       The Hearing

    8. On the day of the hearing,  A  filed  an  additional  bundle.   This
       contained email correspondence between the Tribunal  and  Mr  Malik,
       A's representative.  The Tribunal emailed A at 10.11 on  12  October
       2020 to ask, 'Are you  trying  to  get  on  and  connect  to  todays
       hearing?'  Mr Malik replied at 12.52 as follows:

         Tried in vain to connect but a series of issues did not allow me,
         beginning with my computers         anti-
         virus programme not allowing me to connect due
         to CVP source/server being high risk.

         My client could not log-
         in either as his internet proved unreliable due to the
         fact that he is living
         in NASS hotel accommodation shared by many others.

    9. Mr Malik explained that this had been his first  CVP  hearing.   His
       phone had been on airplane mode when initially he tried  to  connect
       to the hearing. After being unable to connect in his home,  he  went
       to the local Starbucks to try to connect there.  He managed to break
       his mobile phone in the car park while  there.   After  sending  the
       email he simply waited for a response.

   10. Mr Bates adopted a neutral position but queried why it took Mr Malik
       so long to inform the Tribunal of difficulties.

       Findings

   11. We make the following criticisms of Mr Malik at the  outset.   Given
       the hearing was listed for 10am, Mr Malik should have contacted  the
       Tribunal by email or telephone well before the email at 12.52pm.  He
       should also have made further contact with the Tribunal  after  this
       initial email  of  12.52pm.   That  email  explains  the  connection
       difficulties but does not set out what Mr Malik wanted the  Tribunal
       to do.

   12. Notwithstanding these criticisms, we accept that  neither  Mr  Malik
       nor A were able to connect to the CVP hearing.  In our experience it
       is not uncommon for representatives,  particularly  when  attempting
       for the first time, to have difficulties connecting to CVP.  Nor  is
       it uncommon for appellants in  asylum  appeals  to  have  difficulty
       connecting to CVP, particularly where they are in NASS accommodation
       with multiple users accessing the Wi-Fi.  We accept that  they  both
       attempted to but were unable to attend the  hearing  on  12  October
       2020.  Further, in view of the fact that there is  no  reference  to
       the email from Mr Malik of 12 October 2020, it is clear  that  Judge
       Bannerman was not provided with this email and  so  was  unaware  of
       these connection difficulties.

   13. In view of the fact that neither A nor his representative were  able
       to  attend  the  hearing,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  subsequent
       determination was the result of an unfair procedure.  Whether or not
       A would have given oral evidence is irrelevant as oral  evidence  is
       only one part of an oral hearing.   As  the  determination  was  the
       result  of  an  unfair  procedure,  we  are   satisfied   that   the
       determination of Judge Bannerman contains  a  material  error  on  a
       point of law and must be set aside. As the email of Mr Malik  of  12
       October 2020 was not before Judge Bannerman, Judge Bannerman  cannot
       be criticised for the procedural unfairness.

   14. As A was denied a fair hearing, we are  satisfied  that  the  appeal
       should be remitted to the FTT with no findings  of  fact  preserved.
       In view of the medical evidence, the appeal should be listed  for  a
       face-to-face hearing not before FTT Judges Chapman or Bannerman.

   15. It follows that we need not address in any detail the second ground,
       which is that the Tribunal impermissibly applied the test in N v  UK
       rather than the  less  exacting  test  in  AM  (Zimbabwe).   In  any
       consideration of a health claim, it is uncontroversially the  latter
       approach which should be taken and to  that  extent  the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law. We are not however satisfied that absent  the
       procedural fairness point this error would have been  sufficient  to
       justify setting the decision aside: on the evidence presented, A was
       unable to meet this still high threshold.




       Notice of Decision

       The FTT determination involved the making of an error on a point  of
       law.

       The FTT determination is set aside.

       The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  FTT  with  no  findings  of  fact
       preserved.  The appeal should be listed for a  face-to-face  hearing
       not before Judges Bannerman or Chapman.

       Signed     [pic]                      Date    5 July 2021

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sills

       Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2008

       Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
       Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
       shall directly or indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their
       family. This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  the
       Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
       contempt of Court proceedings.

       Signed     [pic]                      Date 5 July 2021

       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sills

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sills



