
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02216/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2018                            |On 21 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     HA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Morgan Dias, Immigration
Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, HA, is a male citizen of Iran who was born in 1998.   He
    claims  to  have  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  December  2015
    clandestinely.  He claimed asylum in  December  2015.   By  a  decision
    dated 2 February 2018, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant
    international protection.  The appellant appealed against that decision
    to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Turnock)  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 April 2018, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  First, the  appellant  claims  that
    the judge failed to take account of his youth before  reaching  adverse
    credibility findings.  At [49], the judge observed that  the  appellant
    had not claimed asylum whilst in France.  He notes that  the  appellant
    claims that his failure to do so was because he was under  the  control
    of an agent.  The judge did not "find it credible  that  the  appellant
    would have been told by the agent to remain in accommodation in France"
    and prevented him from claiming asylum in that country.  That  is  also
    not consistent with his claim that he was "hit  with  gas"  in  France.
    The judge found that the appellant's failure to claim asylum in  France
    engaged the provisions of Section 8(4) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and that his  "credibility  is,
    accordingly, damaged".  The appellant submits  that  the  judge  should
    have had regard to the fact that he  could  not  break  free  from  the
    control of the agent given his youth whilst passing through  France  to
    the United Kingdom.  It was also relevant  that  the  appellant  was  a
    minor at the relevant time and would not have been  in  a  position  to
    claim asylum.

 3. I reject that submission.  In this case, the judge has sought a  reason
    from the appellant for his failure to claim asylum whilst in France and
    has been given an explanation which he has recorded.  That  explanation
    was not that he was too young to know how to claim asylum,  but  rather
    that he was forced to remain indoors by the agent.  That  evidence  was
    directly contradicted by the appellant's own evidence that he had in  a
    public place been "hit with gas" whilst in France.  I find that it  was
    open to the judge to  identify  an  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's
    evidence and to reject his  explanation  for  not  claiming  asylum  in
    France.  Having rejected that explanation, it was open to the judge  to
    make a finding in respect of Section 8.

 4. Secondly, the appellant claims that the judge attached too much  weight
    to his initial screening interview.  Again, the appellant's  young  age
    is pleaded in support.  Mr Holmes, who appeared before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, had submitted that the interview was unlawful  and  that  its
    content  should  be  ignored  because  the  appellant  had   not   been
    accompanied by a responsible adult at  the  screening  interview.   The
    judge considered that submission [46]  but  concluded  that  whilst  he
    would not reject entirely the content of the screening  interview,  its
    content should be "viewed with caution".  At [62] the judge noted  that
    the appellant had failed to mention at the screening interview  crucial
    aspects of his account.  The judge proceeded to regard the omission  as
    "surprising" although he does not say in terms that  the  omission  has
    diminished the appellant's credibility as  a  witness.   Moreover,  the
    judge again states at [62] that he was aware that the appellant had not
    been accompanied at the screening interview by a responsible adult.   I
    find that the judge's approach was careful  and  even-handed.   He  was
    obliged to take into account the absence of an adult at  the  interview
    and also the appellant's young age, and I find  that  is  exactly  what
    Judge Turnock has done in this instance.

 5. The third ground of appeal challenges the  judge  on  his  findings  of
    fact.  At [64] the judge commented that there was "no  explanation  how
    the appellant's father was able to raise the money to pay for an  agent
    particularly in light of the appellant's evidence that his  father  was
    not a wealthy man".  The grounds of appeal assert  that  there  was  no
    evidence at all before the judge to show that  the  appellant's  father
    was not "a wealthy man".  Further, it was procedurally unfair  to  hold
    this against the appellant when the matter had not been put to  him  at
    the hearing.  There  was  a  further  allegation  that  the  judge  had
    questioned why the appellant's partner's family had  not  involved  the
    authorities following the discovery  of  the  appellant's  relationship
    with Lano from the outset.

 6. I find that none of these submissions have merit.  The  appellant  has,
    so far as I can see from the written evidence,  not  claimed  that  his
    father was a wealthy man, nor has he  sought  to  address  at  all  the
    question of how his father obtained funds to send the appellant to  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant has not sought disclosure of the judge's
    notes of evidence, nor indeed have the notes  of  Mr  Holmes  been  put
    forward.  I was not asked by either advocate to consider the  notes  of
    evidence on the file.   Given  the  absence  of  any  obvious  evidence
    regarding the wealth or otherwise of the appellant's  father,  I  still
    find the judge's observation pertinent.  In any event, I find that  the
    judge's observation regarding the appellant's  journey  to  the  United
    Kingdom and who paid for it are discrete and in no way affect his other
    clear and cogent findings regarding the appellant's lack of credibility
    as a witness.  I am not satisfied that, even if the judge is  wrong  in
    what he says at [62], that should entitle the appellant  to  a  setting
    aside of all the findings made by the judge, some  of  which  have  not
    been challenged, or  entitle  him  to  a  rehearing  of  the  evidence.
    Ultimately, I am satisfied that the judge has had proper regard to  all
    the relevant evidence and he has not considered evidence which was  not
    relevant.  He has given clear and cogent reasons  for  making  findings
    which, in my opinion, were plainly available to him on the evidence.  I
    see no reason for his  analysis  to  be  set  aside  and  the  exercise
    repeated.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

 8. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 2 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 2 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

