
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02052/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 November 2019                            |On 12 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                           HER HONOUR JUDGE STACEY
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     Nk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Harris, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision dated 1 May  2019  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beg  which
    allowed the appeal of NK on asylum and human rights grounds.

 2. For the purposes of this decision we refer to NK as the  appellant  and
    to the Secretary of State for the Home Department  as  the  respondent,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born in 1973.  He came to  the
    UK in 2005 and claimed asylum. The respondent refused  his  asylum  and
    human rights claim, the decision under challenge here being made on  26
    February 2019.

 4. In the decision of 26 February 2019 the respondent maintained that  the
    appellant was excluded from the protection of  the  Refugee  Convention
    under Article 1F(a).

 5. Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention states:

         "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person to
         whom there are serious reasons for considering that:

         Article 1F(a) - he has committed  a  crime  against  peace,  a  war
         crime, or a crime against humanity as defined in the  international
         instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes."

 6. The respondent's case was that the appellant had committed acts  coming
    under Article 1F(a) as he had identified suspected LTTE members for the
    Sri Lankan authorities, knowing that those identified were very  likely
    to be tortured or extrajudicially killed.

 7. The respondent also maintained that the appellant was not  entitled  to
    rely on the defence of duress. The relevant provision on duress is  not
    found within the Refugee Convention itself but in  Article  31  of  the
    Rome  Statute  of  the  International  Criminal  Court.  Article  31(d)
    provides that the defence of duress arises where:

         "The conduct which is alleged to  constitute  a  crime  within  the
         jurisdiction of the court has been caused by duress resulting  from
         a threat of imminent death or of  continuing  or  imminent  serious
         bodily harm against that person or another person  and  the  person
         acts necessarily and reasonably to avoid this threat, provided that
         the person does not intend to cause a greater  harm  than  the  one
         sought to be avoided.  Such a threat may either be  made  by  other
         persons or constituted by other circumstances beyond that  person's
         control."

 8. The respondent's position was  that  the  appellant  had  assisted  the
    authorities  "by  choice"  and  "had  the  opportunity  to  escape  and
    dissociate yourself but you did not choose to do this  at  any  point";
    see paragraph 316 of the refusal decision dated 26  February  2019.  It
    was uncontentious before us that if the appellant could  make  out  the
    defence of duress  that  this  would  be  a  complete  defence  to  the
    application of Article 1F(a); see paragraph 54 of AB (Article  1F(a)  -
    defence - duress) Iran [2016] UKUT 00376(IAC)

 9. Given her position on Article 1F(a) and the defence of duress not being
    available to the appellant, the respondent  made  a  certificate  under
    Section 55 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.   That
    certificate required the First-tier Tribunal to begin  any  substantive
    deliberations on the asylum appeal by first considering  Article  1F(a)
    and whether the appellant was  excluded  from  the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention.

10. Before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent  accepted  that  when
    assessing whether the appellant had the defence of duress  the  refusal
    letter had relied on an incorrect factual matrix.   The  appellant  had
    not joined the Tamil National Army (TNA), a  pro-government  group.  He
    had gone to them to seek protection from the LTTE  but  had  then  been
    handed over to the Sri Lankan Army (SLA). The  SLA  had  tortured  him,
    subjected him to sexual abuse and forced him to identify possible  LTTE
    members. He had not worked as an interpreter for the SLA or  identified
    LTTE members "by choice" and was not free  to  leave  in  a  meaningful
    sense. This concession by the respondent is shown in paragraphs 30,  31
    and 55 of the decision:

         "30. Mr Das-Gupta submitted on behalf of  the  respondent  that  he
             relied upon the decision letter dated 26  February  2019.   He
             submitted that in respect of Article 1F there has to  be  mens
             rea.  He said the respondent has  not  engaged  with  all  the
             aspects of the appellant's claims.  He submitted that  he  had
             read the psychiatric report and it should be given weight.  He
             said the respondent accepts that the appellant suffered abuse.
              He said the respondent did not engage with the  ramifications
             of that abuse.

         31.   Mr  Das-Gupta  submitted  that  some  individuals  that   the
             appellant pointed fingers at were innocent and  the  appellant
             accepts that.  He submitted that the Home Office accepts  that
             the appellant was held for seven years.  In respect of Article
             3, he submitted that the Home Office does not dispute that the
             appellant was tortured and  suffered  sexual  abuse.   He  has
             PTSD.  He said if he returns to a place where he suffered  the
             abuse, his mental health is likely to  deteriorate.   He  said
             the issue relating to Mr Perera falls away.  He said the  Home
             Office  do  not  contest  the  documents  the  appellant   has
             provided.

              ...

         50.  Mr Das-Gupta on behalf of the respondent did not  dispute  the
             report of Dr Singh or indeed any of the medical evidence.   He
             submitted that the respondent accepts that the  appellant  was
             tortured and sexually abused by the authorities in Sri  Lanka.
             He also accepted in his submissions, that  the  appellant  was
             detained by the Sri Lankan authorities for a period  of  seven
             years.  Ms Harris in her skeleton  argument  at  paragraph  37
             states that following the decision  in  JS,  the  organisation
             under consideration is the Sri Lankan  Army  which  is  not  a
             proscribed organisation.  The appellant was never recruited by
             the Sri Lankan Army.  He joined the TNA for his own protection
             but was handed over to the Sri Lankan Army where he  was  held
             as a prisoner for seven years."

11. Where the appellant's account was  not  materially  challenged  by  the
    respondent, the First-tier Tribunal Judge went  on  to  find  that  the
    appellant had committed acts capable of coming within Article 1F(a)  of
    the Refugee Convention but that he  was  entitled  to  the  defence  of
    duress. Her consideration of whether  the  appellant  was  entitled  to
    claim duress is at paragraphs 56 and 57:

         "56. Ms Harris accepts that the appellant was granted a  degree  of
             freedom during his captivity over seven  years.   However,  at
             all times he remained a prisoner.  I find  that  although  the
             appellant was taken out on raids, he was  aware  that  at  all
             times he was under the control of the Sri Lankan Army.  I find
             that the appellant's relative freedom was  to  enable  him  to
             assist the Sri Lankan Army by  identifying  LTTE  members.   I
             find that all the activities that he did, he was  directed  to
             do.  I find that despite the appellant's  torture  and  sexual
             abuse, he nonetheless remained with the Sri  Lankan  Army.   I
             find that if the appellant considered that it was  viable  for
             him to escape without coming to further harm,  he  would  have
             done so.  I accept Ms Harris' submission  that  the  appellant
             had the lowest position in the organisation and had no rank or
             influence of any kind.

         57.  He did have knowledge of the Sri Lankan Army's activities,  he
             was involved as an interpreter and as an  identifier  of  LTTE
             carders.  In light of the appellant's position as  a  prisoner
             under the direct control of the Sri Lankan Army, I  find  that
             the defence of duress is made out.  Consequently, I find  that
             the appellant does not fall within Article 1F of  the  Refugee
             Convention."

12. The respondent's challenge to the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    concerns only the approach taken to the availability of the defence  of
    duress.  The respondent accepts that whilst he was detained by the SLA,
    the appellant was under "a threat of imminent death or of continuing or
    imminent serious bodily harm" and had acted "reasonably to  avoid  this
    threat". The respondent maintained that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    in law in not going on to assess the final limb of Article  31(d),  the
    question of whether the appellant had the intent "to  cause  a  greater
    harm than the one sought to be avoided".

13. We accepted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  show
    that this part of the definition of duress was considered by the First-
    tier Tribunal. We did  not  find  that  this  omission  amounted  to  a
    material error on a point of law.

14. We drew further assistance from the case of AB.  The head note of  that
    case states:

         "1.  In response to an allegation that a person should be  excluded
             under Article 1F(a) of the Refugee  Convention  because  there
             are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  the  person  has
             committed a crime against  peace,  a  war  crime  or  a  crime
             against humanity as defined in the Rome Statute, there  is  an
             initial evidential burden on an appellant to  raise  a  ground
             for excluding criminal responsibility such as duress.

         2.   The overall burden remains on the respondent to establish that
             there are serious reasons for considering that  the  appellant
             did not act under duress.

15. The Upper Tribunal elaborated on this principle in paragraph 62 of  AB:



         "62.     Having considered the matter in the light of  the  various
             authorities, textbooks and  commentaries  set  out  above,  as
             explained, we propose to proceed upon the basis  that  Article
             31 paragraph 1(d) of the ICC Statute makes available a defence
             of duress which the appellant is entitled to state in response
             to the Secretary of  State's  claim  that  there  are  serious
             reasons for considering that she has  been  guilty  of  crimes
             against humanity.  We propose to proceed upon the view that an
             evidential burden is imposed on the  appellant  to  raise  the
             existence of circumstances such as would permit the defence to
             be given  effect  to,  and  that  if  that  burden  is  met  a
             persuasive onus shifts to the Secretary of State to  establish
             that there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering  that  the
             appellant did not act under duress.  We would treat the phrase
             'serious reasons for considering' in this  context  as  having
             the same autonomous meaning as before.  We consider that  this
             approach is in line with the terms of the  ICC  Statute,  with
             the  views  of  the  Commentators  mentioned  and   with   the
             interpretation of international criminal  law  by  the  United
             Nations Special Tribunal for East Timor, subject  only  to  an
             adjustment on the approach to onus of proof."

16. We therefore asked  ourselves  this  question:  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, did the respondent identify evidence showing serious  grounds
    for believing that the appellant intended to cause a greater harm  than
    the one he sought to avoid? Our answer to this  question  was  negative
    for the following reasons.

17. Firstly, it was undisputed before us that the  appellant  was  tortured
    when he was passed to the SLA and during his seven  year  period  being
    forced to work for them faced a threat  of  further  torture.  He  also
    experienced sexual abuse - rape  -  continuously  during  that  period,
    submitting only because he feared being subjected again to other  forms
    of torture. It was also his evidence that if he left the SLA  he  faced
    the risk of being killed by them or LTTE; see paragraph 50 of the First-
    tier Tribunal decision. It was therefore our conclusion that he  cannot
    be said to have intended to cause a greater harm than the one sought to
    be avoided. His intention was to avoid  further  acts  of  torture  and
    sexual abuse being perpetrated against him. Furthermore  we  find  that
    that the harm arising from the acts committed by the  appellant  cannot
    be characterised as "greater" than that the appellant sought to avoid.

18. Further, Ms Bassi conceded that it was not  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position that even if the appellant did not fear extrajudicial  killing
    but only torture and rape, that he could be expected to  submit  to  or
    accept that treatment even if he knew that those  he  identified  could
    well face not only torture but being killed.  Ms Bassi accepted for the
    respondent that this was a "grotesque" or "abhorrent" premise on  which
    she did not seek to rely.

19. For these  reasons,  therefore,  we  concluded  that  the  omission  of
    consideration of the final limb of Article 31(d) of  the  Rome  Statute
    could not be material where  nothing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    permitted a finding that the appellant  had  the  requisite  intent  to
    cause a greater harm than the one he sought to avoid.

20. For these reasons we do not  find  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error on a point of law and shall stand.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 7 November  2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

