
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02444/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th September 2018                        |On 5th October 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           Mr MOHAMED SULTAN ABDI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimmons, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Wilcox-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 13th January  1989.   The
    Appellant has had an extremely extensive immigration  history.   It  is
    set out at paragraph 1 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  In
    a Notice of Refusal  dated  4th  March  2016  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the Appellant  was  from  Somalia  and  stated  that  the
    objective evidence showed that the Biyomaal clan belonged  to  the  Dir
    group, a majority clan in Somalia.  The Appellant fears that  he  would
    suffer persecution from the majority Hawiye clan as they  attacked  him
    in 2009 and also fear from persecution from Al Shabab who attacked  him
    in 2013 and 2015.  Further, he claims that he no longer has any  family
    members left in Somalia and will have no family support there including
    in Mogadishu.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Roopnarine-Davies on 15th August 2016.  In a decision and
    promulgation  dated  26th  August  2016  the  Appellant's  appeal   was
    dismissed.  Following the lodging of Grounds of Appeal  permission  was
    eventually granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  in  October  2016  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In an error of law  decision  dated  9th
    January 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Craig remitted the  hearing  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  That hearing came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Beg sitting at  Taylor  House  on  25th  September  2017.   Again,  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds, on this occasion in  a
    promulgation dated 4th October 2017.

 3. Fresh Grounds of Appeal were lodged  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  18th
    October 2017.  Those grounds contended:-

      i) that the Immigration Judge had failed to provide reasons for making
         flawed credibility findings regarding  the  Appellant's  exit  from
         Somalia;

     ii) had made  a  flawed  treatment  and  analysis  of  the  Appellant's
         screening interview;

    iii) had made flawed  credibility  findings  regarding  the  Appellant's
         wife;

     iv) had made flawed findings in respect of internal relocation.

 4. Permission to appeal was refused by Immigration Judge  Saffer  on  22nd
    November 2017.  The Grounds of Appeal were  renewed  on  22nd  February
    2018 and  on  10th  May  2018  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jackson  granted
    permission to appeal, concluding that all grounds at least cumulatively
    may be arguable and affect the  outcome  of  the  appeal  and  that  in
    particular  there  are  repeated  statements  of  adverse   credibility
    findings, the reasons for which are arguably not  entirely  clear  even
    within the context of the paragraph in which they appear.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by his instructed  Counsel,
    Ms Fitzsimmons.  Ms Fitzsimmons is extremely familiar with this matter.
     The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting  Officer,
    Ms Wilcox-Briscoe.





Submissions/Discussion

 6. Ms Fitzsimmons narrows the issues by pointing  out  that  it  has  been
    accepted that the Appellant has been subjected to persecution and  that
    the key  issue  is  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  can  relocate  to
    Mogadishu.  She points out that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contends
    that the Appellant would have a support network.  She submits that  the
    argument is one of consideration of the judge's reasoning.

 7. Ms Fitzsimmons turns to the grounds, noting that at paragraphs  26  and
    27 Judge Beg in her decision rejected the Appellant's account as to why
    his family sent him to the UK.  She points out that the  judge  earlier
    on in her analysis states that  she  does  not  "find  the  Appellant's
    explanations" credible but does not give reasons why  his  explanations
    were not credible.  She further continues that the  fact  that  he  was
    under the control of an agent  is  not  credible  but  again  does  not
    provide reasons as to why specifically it is incredible.   She  submits
    there is nothing inherently implausible in the Appellant's account that
    essentially, his exit was prioritised because of his risk profile.  She
    submits that as he left using an agent it is highly plausible  that  he
    would have been targeted.

 8. Secondly,  she  turns  to  the  contention  that  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility findings at paragraphs 28 and 32 are flawed for reasons  of
    her treatment of the Appellant's  attempt  to  correct  inconsistencies
    said to arise from his screening  interview.   She  contends  that  the
    judge failed to take into account the decision of the Court  of  Appeal
    in JA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 450 in  which  it  was  held
    that  the  common  law   principle   of   fairness   required   careful
    consideration of the extent to which reliance can properly be placed on
    answers purportedly given by claimants in  screening  interviews.   She
    submits that the Appellant puts his explanation of what is disputed  to
    the judge but she ignores his case about the screening interview  being
    a fair record.

 9. Thirdly, she contends that the judge made flawed  credibility  findings
    regarding the Appellant's wife in rejecting his account as  to  how  he
    became separated from her before he left Somalia  submitting  that  the
    judge fell foul of the principle in HK (Sierra  Leone)  v  SSHD  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1037, namely that decision makers should guard against finding
    an  account  to  be  incredible  on  the  basis   of   the   supposedly
    unreasonable,  unusual  or  improbable  way  in  which  actors  in  the
    returning state are said to have behaved.

10. Ms Fitzsimmons refers me to paragraphs  9  to  15  of  her  Grounds  of
    Appeal, all of which I have considered, and particularly points out the
    Appellant cannot discern why precisely the judge has  at  paragraph  31
    rejected the credibility of his account of his wife being an only child
    other than the judge's view that he  is  not  a  credible  witness  and
    submits that this is entirely circular supposition and a  party  to  an
    appeal must know the reasons as to why their account is rejected.

11. Finally, she takes me to paragraphs  21  to  24  of  the  supplementary
    bundle and the rejection  by  the  judge  of  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account that his father was  in  Mogadishu  partly  on  the
    basis of the remittance slip contained therein.  Again, she submits the
    judge has failed to make clear findings.

12. Ms Wilcox-Briscoe in response addresses each purported Ground of Appeal
    in turn.  Firstly, so far as  the  Appellant's  exit  from  Somalia  is
    concerned she takes me to paragraph 26 of the decision, submitting that
    the judge has looked at the  evidence  and  made  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant would have been instrumental in the decision to travel to the
    United Kingdom separate from other family members.   She  submits  that
    the analysis by the judge is not taken out of context, that  the  judge
    has looked at the evidence and given an explanation which  is  reasoned
    and one which she was entitled to make.

13. Secondly, she turns to the screening interview.  Whilst  accepting  the
    reasoning in JA (Afghanistan) she submits that the judge has looked  in
    detail at what was carried out at the screening interview and that that
    in any event is merely one requirement of  the  judicial  function  and
    that it is appropriate to look at the decision in the round.  While she
    would not concede that there is an error of law on this allegation, she
    would submit that even if there were it does not affect  the  remaining
    findings.

14. So far as the third contention is concerned and the suggestion that the
    findings are speculative, Ms Wilcox-Briscoe points out the evidence was
    submitted even though the judge may not have referred to  it  and  that
    there is objective evidence available of roadblocks, the presence of Al
    Shabab and the abduction of women and forced  marriages.   She  reminds
    that the Appellant's wife would have been a lone female  travelling  to
    Mogadishu on her own and she submits that the  findings  made  in  some
    detail by the judge  are  ones  that  were  sustainable  and  that  her
    findings of  adverse  credibility  are  ones  that  she  was  perfectly
    entitled to reach.

15. Finally, with regard to the fourth ground she submits  that  the  judge
    has given adequate reasons, for  example  mobile  phones  can  be  used
    across various countries, and it was open to the  judge  not  to  place
    weight on the remittance slip showing a Kenyan mobile number  and  that
    the judge has dealt with this aspect satisfactorily.  For all the above
    reasons she asked me to reject the Appellant's appeal and  to  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Law

16.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

17. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

18. I have taken the opportunity to read in  detail  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  There  are  numerous  findings  of  adverse
    credibility throughout the decision between paragraphs 21 and 32.   All
    of  those  credibility  findings  are  backed  with  reasons.   It   is
    appropriate to look at the approach that has been adopted by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to  credibility.   Clearly  a  proper  approach  to
    credibility will require an assessment  of  the  evidence  and  of  the
    general claim and it would be  appropriate  to  look  at  the  internal
    consistency, the plausibility and the consistency  of  the  claim  with
    external factors of the sort typically found in  country  guidance.   I
    accept that in theory a claimant need do no more than state  his  claim
    but that claim would still need to  be  examined  for  consistency  and
    inherent plausibility and in nearly  every  case  external  information
    against which the claim could be checked will be available, as  is  the
    case here.

19. That is exactly what the judge has done in this particular  matter  and
    even if it were to be arguable that if one of  those  reasons  did  not
    bear analysis, as is contended so far as the second Ground of Appeal is
    maintained, the Court of Appeal in JA (Afghanistan) have set  out  that
    the mere fact that some of their reasons do not bear analysis is not of
    itself enough to justify an Appellate Court setting aside the decision.



20. This is a judge that has looked at all the evidence in the round.   She
    has made findings based on  reasons  that  she  was  entitled  to.   In
    effect, with the greatest of respect to the efforts of Ms  Fitzsimmons,
    all that is set out in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  in  the  current
    submissions is an attempt to re-argue this matter and to disagree  with
    the findings of the judge.

21. The judge has addressed all issues  and  given  reasoned  explanations.
    Even if it could be contended that there is an error at paragraph 2  as
    set out in the Grounds of Appeal, it is incumbent upon the Tribunal  to
    look at the matters in the round.  Overall, the judge has made findings
    on credibility which are sustainable and she has  given  reasons.   For
    all the  above  reasons  therefore,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge discloses no material error of law and  the  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    maintained.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error of  law.
 The Appellant's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           1 October 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           1 October 2018
