
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02912/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2018                           |On 23 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss V Adams, instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hands promulgated on 8  May  2017,  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 10 March 2017  to
    refuse his asylum and protection claim.

 2. The appellant is married and has two children under the age of  5.   He
    and his wife are Sikhs from Afghanistan.  The appellant's case is  that
    he and his wife travelled to Russia when they were both aged 14, albeit
    the appellant in 2002 and his wife in 2008.  The appellant claims  that
    he was sent there by his father and he lived  there  in  hiding,  later
    selling goods to generate income and whilst there he was joined by  his
    wife.  His case is that he was able to save US$20,000 s using which  he
    was able to arrange for him, his wife and their children to  travel  to
    the United Kingdom where they claimed asylum.

 3. The judge concluded [26] that, for the reasons set out in paragraphs 22
    to 25 of her decision, that the appellant was not a  credible  witness,
    that his account of events could not be relied upon  and  that  he  had
    fabricated the story in order to substantiate his erroneous  claim  for
    asylum and that he travelled to the  United  Kingdom  for  economic  or
    other reasons known only to him.  She found "I find that the claim  has
    been concocted by him in order to create an  asylum  claim  where  none
    exists".

 4. The judge did, however,  [28]  find  that  the  appellant  had  amassed
    considerable wealth in the past from  his  entrepreneurial  skills  and
    that there was no reason why he could not do so again.

 5. The judge found [29] that the appellant  had  not  shown  that  he  had
    severed all ties with Russia or could not return there.  She  concluded
    having considered TG and Others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted)  (CG)  [2015]
    UKUT 595 that he was not at risk on return [32]  and  that  [41]  there
    were schools for the children to attend.  It had not  been  established
    that the appellant's wife would be unable to live her life  as  a  Sikh
    woman and that [42] the appellant  was  able  to  support  himself  and
    family for  many  years,  it  was  equally  likely  that  he  could  be
    resourceful in the same way on return to Afghanistan.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on three primary grounds:-

      i) the failure properly to consider the risk posed to the  appellant's
         wife;

     ii) the failure properly  to  apply  the  country  guidance  in  TG  in
         particular reaching unsustainable conclusions about  the  appellant
         amassing considerable wealth in the past and in failing properly to
         assess the education available for the children  and  finding  that
         the appellant would be able to find employment or set himself up in
         business given the difficulties TG and Others identified;

    iii) failure to consider paragraph 276ADE given that  the  family  would
         effectively be confined to living in a gurdwara which would not  be
         reasonable  and  that  there  would  be  significant  obstacles  to
         reintegration.

 7. Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson granted  permission  on  grounds  (ii)  and
    (iii).

 8. The judicial headnote in TG provides as follows at paragraph (iii):

         "A consideration of whether an individual member of  the  Sikh  and
         Hindu communities is at risk real of  persecution  upon  return  to
         Afghanistan is fact-sensitive. All the relevant circumstances  must
         be  considered  but  careful  attention  should  be  paid  to   the
         following:

         a.        women  are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence of
         appropriate protection from a male member of the family;

         b.        likely  financial  circumstances  and  ability  to access
         basic accommodation bearing in mind

             -           Muslims are generally unlikely to employ  a member
             of the Sikh and Hindu communities

             -           such individuals may face  difficulties (including
             threats, extortion, seizure of land and acts of  violence)  in
             retaining  property  and  /  or   pursuing   their   remaining
             traditional pursuit, that of a shopkeeper / trader

             -             the  traditional  source  of  support   for such
             individuals,  the  Gurdwara  is  much  less  able  to  provide
             adequate support; ..."

 9. There is no proper indication that the judge identified  or  considered
    the factors set out at (iii) (b) properly in assessing in a  structured
    way the risk to the appellant on return to Afghanistan.  Further, there
    is no indication despite the indication that she  found  the  appellant
    not to be credible what facts she did accept as being proved.   It  was
    accepted that he was a Sikh and that he is an Afghan national.   It  is
    not, however, clear whether the judge accepted he had left the  country
    in 2002  nor  why,  given  her  clearly  expressed  doubts  as  to  the
    appellant's account of how he had been operating and trading in Russia,
    she considered that he had amassed  a  considerable  fortune  over  and
    above the 20,000 dollars he said he had used to bring his wife, himself
    and the children to the United Kingdom.

10. Further, although the judge appears to have found  that  the  appellant
    had not shown he would have  no  accommodation,  equally  there  is  no
    proper analysis of how she believed he would be able to find employment
    or self-employment given  the  very  clear  difficulties  in  so  doing
    identified in TG.

11. As Mr Diwnycz accepted, there are significant  inconsistencies  in  the
    findings of fact made by the judge as set out above.  These go  to  the
    core as to how the appellant and his family would be able  to  live  on
    return.  In particular, there are also difficulties  with  seizures  of
    land (see TG at [96] to [101]).  Of particular regard is also what  was
    said in TG at paragraph [110]:

         "A family without adequate resources is unlikely to be able to  pay
         for private education which may be relevant  when  considering  the
         situation of Sikh and Hindu children  in  Afghanistan  whom  it  is
         proposed to return if receiving such education is  demonstrated  to
         be fundamental to that person's identity. There  is  also  evidence
         that a Muslim is unlikely to employ a member of the Sikh  or  Hindu
         community in place of a Muslim, out of fear of  potential  reprisal
         or loss of business, indicating difficulties in securing an  income
         with which to  fund  accommodation  or  essentials  such  as  food,
         heating, clothing. The evidence  we  have  been  able  to  consider
         indicates that there is nothing in the law,  the  attitude  of  the
         Afghan government, or in theory preventing a member  of  either  of
         these faith groups returned to Afghanistan from being able  to  set
         up their own businesses but whether they are able  to  do  so  will
         depend upon the availability of adequate funding, their ability  to
         secure business premises in the  light  of  possible  hostility  or
         opposition from Muslim traders who may see them as  competition  or
         not wish to rent premises out to them, making it difficult for them
         to pursue what has now become the remaining  traditional  trade  of
         shopkeeper/trader. Whether an individual is in such a  position  is
         fact specific and they will have to satisfy the Tribunal that  they
         are  without  economic  means  especially  if  they  have  paid   a
         considerable sum of money to come to the United Kingdom, that  they
         will not be able to re-establish themselves economically,  and  the
         impact upon family members as a result. Such individuals  may  also
         be required to provide appropriate evidence to show that there  are
         no alternatives such as being supported  by  NGOs  or  through  the
         Gurdwara and that any impact upon them, if destitution is  alleged,
         is such that the threshold of Article 3 ECHR will be breached."

12. I considered that these failures are material in that they  go  to  the
    circumstances in which the appellant and his family would be living  on
    return to Afghanistan.

13. I considered whether it would  in  the  circumstances  be  possible  to
    remake the decision in the Upper Tribunal.  As both  parties  conceded,
    however, there are  significant  inconsistencies  in  the  fact-finding
    reached by the judge as outlined  above  which  would  make  that  task
    difficult if not impossible, the judge having failed to explain why she
    accepted some facts which the appellant had said but had  rejected  the
    core.

14. Accordingly, for these reasons, I set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and I remit it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  fresh
    findings of fact on all issues.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.  I remit  the  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.




 2) The appeal must not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge P Hands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date   22 March 2018

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
