
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/02047/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8th December 2017                       |On 16th February 2018          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                    I M J
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Scott of Counsel, Pickup Scott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  Anonymity  Order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This prohibition applies to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties.  Failure to comply with this order could lead to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission granted in the Upper Tribunal,  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, (Judge Graham) promulgated on 21st
    April 2017, in which the judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against
    the refusal of his claim for international protection.

 3. The Appellant is an Afghan minor who made  a  claim  for  international
    protection. He claimed that his father had been killed by  the  Taliban
    at the behest of his paternal uncle who,  in  the  context  of  a  land
    dispute, had informed the Taliban that his father had been working  for
    the Afghan Army. The same Uncle subsequently put the Appellant at  risk
    of forcible recruitment by the Taliban.  The Appellant says that he was
    kidnapped by the Taliban and was in  the  process  of  being  taken  to
    become a suicide bomber or fighter for the Taliban when, as a result of
    an intervention by the Afghan Army, he was able to make good an escape,
    and that subsequently his family were able to achieve his  flight  from
    Afghanistan.  The Respondent rejected the credibility of  that  account
    and  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant  contested   the
    credibility findings made by the Respondent.  In the  event  the  judge
    found in favour of the arguments put forward by the Respondent.

 4. The renewed  grounds  of  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    challenging the credibility findings were found to have merit by  Judge
    Taylor who concluded that the judge may have erred in her  approach  in
    considering the Appellant's conduct in Hungary to be adverse given that
    he was only 14 years old at the time.  Judge Taylor also  thought  that
    it was arguable that the judge's finding that there was no  resemblance
    between the Appellant's name and the identity that he provided  to  the
    Hungarian authorities was incorrect and  that  in  those  circumstances
    there ought to have been greater consideration given to his explanation
    that his name had been mis-recorded.  Judge Taylor  found  it  arguable
    that the judge had placed substantial weight upon the failure to  claim
    asylum during his journey to the United Kingdom  and  that  might  have
    undermined her credibility findings generally and led to her conclusion
    that his position was consistent with his being  an  economic  migrant,
    and in that context Judge Taylor thought it arguable that Judge  Graham
    had failed to give sufficient weight to the Appellant's age.

 5. Permission was not restricted to those grounds and before me  Mr  Scott
    maintained Grounds 1 to 4.  In the event the  Respondent  has  accepted
    that Ground  4,  which  dealt  with  the  cursory  attention  given  to
    humanitarian  protection,  revealed  an  error  of  law  and  in  those
    circumstances, it has not been necessary for Mr Scott to address me  in
    respect of that ground or for me to give detailed consideration to  the
    point.  So far as Ground 5 was concerned Mr Scott  accepted  that  that
    was not a position which he was going to pursue before me today.

 6. In those circumstances I deal with Grounds 1 to 3 at this stage in  the
    judgment.  The grounds go to the treatment by the judge  of  Section  8
    and in this regard the challenge is brought  to  paragraph  35  of  the
    judge's decision.  I begin my consideration by noting  that  the  judge
    has correctly self-directed in the context  of  Section  8,  noting  at
    paragraph 26 that the matters which the Respondent has  relied  on  are
    matters which are potentially but not determinatively damaging  of  the
    claim.  That is the position which the judge reinforces in paragraph 36
    where, having considered the Section 8 position, the judge continues in
    the reasoning to note that the overall credibility  findings  have  not
    rested on Section 8 alone. I find no error on this ground.

 7. The grounds also complain that  the  Appellant's  conduct  in  Hungary,
    given his  age  of  14,  should  not  have  counted  against  him.   In
    particular his middle name and first name are very similar to the names
    put forward by the Hungarian authorities.  In this regard, I note  that
    this was not a position which was misunderstood by the judge because at
    paragraph 35 the judge is very  clear  that  the  difference  in  names
    relates to the surname and in that context, it is the name J  which  is
    relevant rather than the name M.  However, more importantly  the  judge
    points out that the Appellant had given a different date of  birth  and
    in that regard, I find merit in Mr Wilding's  submission  that  on  any
    reading there was a significant difference in terms of the  details  of
    his identity provided to the Hungarian authorities.  It was open to the
    judge to conclude that the Appellant had  failed  to  put  forward  any
    reasonable or proper explanation in that regard.  The  explanation  the
    Appellant put forward was initially that he had not made any  claim  in
    Hungary at all and then, faced with the  incontrovertible  evidence  of
    having done so, his explanation was then that he  had  been  under  the
    control of an agent, and, as the judge notes,  in  fact  at  that  time
    physically he was not under  the  control  of  an  agent.  Further  the
    response that he gave in his screening interview,  whilst  denying  any
    application for asylum including in Hungary or anywhere, for failure to
    claim was that he thought he would be better off making  his  claim  in
    the United Kingdom on the basis of advice of friends.  In that  context
    it was open to the judge to reach the conclusion that the failures were
    matters which counted adversely  in  the  context  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility. I find no error arises.

 8. So far as the position of the judge finding the Appellant's actions  to
    be consistent with that of an economic migrant as referred  to  in  the
    grant of permission, Mr Scott indicated that he was not arguing that it
    was not open to the judge to reach that view.  In  any  event  although
    the judge concludes that it is behaviour which is more consistent  with
    that of an economic migrant the judge stops short of finding  that  the
    Appellant is an economic  migrant.   Additionally,  the  term  economic
    migrant is much wider than the suggestion that a 14-year-old is coming,
    for example, to work.  In this context an economic migrant can be  more
    properly read as being a migrant who is seeking to  move  in  order  to
    obtain a better life in the widest context, and of course where  minors
    are concerned, that motivation may be  the  motivation  of  responsible
    adults.  I find no error on this point.

 9. So far as the remainder of the challenge  to  the  judge's  credibility
    findings are concerned, I find that there is no  merit  in  the  points
    raised by the Appellant.  Although it said that  the  Appellant  denied
    that he had made the statements which were  found  to  be  inconsistent
    that  was  not  an  explanation  that  the  judge  was  bound  to  find
    determinative, and the judge has given a detailed account at paragraphs
    36, 37, 38, 39, 40 and 41 as to why  overall  the  credibility  is  the
    Appellant's account does not stand up to scrutiny.

10. I turn to the position in respect of the objective evidence because the
    final complaint is that in referring only  to  the  objective  evidence
    relied upon by the Respondent the judge had been unfair to the position
    of the Appellant.  I have spent some considerable time  with  Mr  Scott
    investigating precisely  what  the  objective  evidence  was  that  the
    Appellant had put forward in the context of both the application and in
    respect of the bundle put before the First-tier Tribunal.

11. In respect of  the  correspondence  from  the  previous  representative
    Duncan Lewis to the Respondent, which appears at H5 of the Respondent's
    bundle there is a reference to forcible recruitment of some 68 children
    by various actors, including the Taliban.  It is not clear what  period
    of time this relates to.  It appears to come from information from  the
    United Nations, and I say that because at H6 there is a reference to  a
    further report of the Secretary General which uses the same figure  and
    indicates that 22 accounts of forced recruitment have been verified and
    it said that this marks a decrease in child recruitment  when  compared
    with 2013, and the reasons for refusal letter refers  to  the  position
    prior to that in respect of 2012.

12. Mr Scott also took me to documents attached to  his  skeleton  argument
    before the First-tier Tribunal and I have looked at those.  They relate
    in the main to 2015 which is after  the  Appellant  left  the  country.
    Those documents talk about the Taliban recruiting children  from  their
    own madrassas which were set up to indoctrinate and train children, and
    the situation is described in the province of Kunduz, which is not  the
    province of the Appellant. The position there seems to support that set
    out by the Respondent i.e. that the position  of  forcible  recruitment
    arises in the context of children being recruited from those madrassas,
    and then  their  families  being  unable  to  achieve,  even  with  the
    assistance of community elders, the release of  the  children.  Further
    the children themselves, having become so indoctrinated,  are  prepared
    to say they do not want to return to their families.  That  is  a  very
    different circumstance from the situation described  by  the  Appellant
    when he said that he was kidnapped from a pastoral landscape  where  he
    was looking after sheep.

13. Finally, I was taken to the report at 29 of the Appellant's bundle  and
    a reference to a doubling of the numbers when compared  with  2014,  in
    reaching the total of 115. That seems to  indicate  that  the  previous
    figure of 68 related to the period 2014.

14. I find that there is nothing  significant  in  the  objective  evidence
    which has been put forward  by  the  Appellant  which  shows  that  the
    information relied on by the judge is  incorrect  or  would  justify  a
    different view from that set out by the judge in the  consideration  at
    paragraph 41.  Mr Wilding has invited me to find that in any event  the
    68 children referred to there are within a recruiting period as long as
    2010 to 2014 but I am assessing the position on the higher  basis  that
    that would be within the previous twelve months, and I think  there  is
    some substance to that consideration when, in other documents there  is
    a reference in 2015 to those figures increasing to approximately double
    that amount.

15. The judge has indicated that she has been  referred  to  and  read  the
    skeleton argument submitted by  Mr  Scott  during  the  course  of  the
    consideration of the case. In all the circumstances I am not  satisfied
    that in reading this decision it can properly be said she had  not  had
    regard to the Appellant's objective evidence. There was no  requirement
    on her to deal with it in any further or more significant detail  given
    its contents, for the reasons I have described above.

16.  Returning  briefly  to  the  position  in  respect   of   humanitarian
    protection,  the  grounds  assert  that  the   judge's   dealing   with
    humanitarian protection is cursory in the extreme because the judge has
    simply referred to the adverse credibility findings and then  moved  on
    to dismiss the  Grounds  of  Appeal  in  the  alternative  without  any
    reference to the resources of the Appellant on return or  the  position
    that he would be likely to find himself in on return, and as Mr Wilding
    has properly conceded that is  a  material  error  of  law  which  will
    require  the  point  in  respect  of  humanitarian  protection  to   be
    considered again.  The nature of the fact-finding required to deal with
    that matter means that the case must now be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal  for  the  issue  to  be  decided  taking  forward  that   the
    Appellant's appeal in  respect  of  the  Refugee  Convention  has  been
    dismissed with adverse credibility findings.



Decision
The  decision  of  the  FtT  reveals  no  error  in  the  dismissal  of  the
international  protection  claim  under  the  Refugee  convention  and   the
decision on that ground of appeal is to stand. The decision on  Humanitarian
Protection is conceded to be flawed by legal error and the decision on  that
ground is set aside. The appeal is remitted to  the  Ft  T  on  Humanitarian
Protection grounds only.


Signed                                                           Date     09
February 2018





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge






