
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02876/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 9th April 2019                    |On 23rd April 2019                      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     KH
                       (ANONYMITY direction PRESERVED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Cohen, Counsel instructed by Migrants Resource
Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Respondent  refused  the  application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
    protection on 11 February 2018.  The Appellant's  appeal  against  this
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant  following  a  hearing
    that took place on 13 and 29 November 2018.

 2. In summary, the judge did not accept that the  Appellant  had  given  a
    truthful account regarding the circumstances  by  which  she  had  left
    Italy.  The two hearing dates before Judge Grant were due to  the  fact
    that after having concluded the hearing on 13  November,  in  preparing
    the decision and going  through  the  voluminous  amount  of  paperwork
    provided for the appeal, she  identified  a  particular  document  that
    caused her to feel that additional enquiries needed to be made  of  the
    representatives and the matter was therefore brought  back  before  the
    Tribunal on 29 November.  The relevance of a document dated 6  December
    2016 issued by the British Embassy in Tirana which  had  been  redacted
    became essential to the assessment by Judge Grant of the credibility of
    the Appellant and in particular how she had left Albania.

 3. The judge at [29] stated "Contrary to  what  was  submitted  to  me  by
    Counsel for the Appellant, this evidence did not come  to  light  after
    the NRM issued the decision accepting that the Appellant was  a  victim
    of trafficking".

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribual Judge Chalkley on  13
    March 2019 as "it is possible the First Tier Tribunal  Judge  may  have
    erred by thinking  that  the  Albanian  Interior  Ministry  Report  was
    received after the decision to recognise the appellant as a  victim  of
    trafficking."

 5. It is accepted by Ms Jones that there was an error  as  the  Respondent
    did have the document before issuing the Conclusive Ground letter.  The
    issue for me is whether that error is material.

 6. Ms Cohen sought to persuade me to adjourn  the  hearing  to  enable  Mr
    Steven Harvey to prepare a specific report in relation  essentially  to
    corruption within the various stages of the Albanian state such  as  to
    cast doubt on the information they provided the  Respondent  with  that
    led to the letter of 6 December 2016.  I refused the application  as  I
    was not satisfied that such a specific report was necessary for  me  to
    determine whether the judge had materially erred  in  relation  to  the
    chronology.

 7. There was no Rule 24 notice. Ms Jones submitted, in essence,  that  the
    adverse credibility findings, for example at [28], stand on their  own.



 8. I do not agree.  That paragraph falls in the middle of consideration by
    the judge of the documentation  she  had  brought  to  light  from  the
    Albanian Interior Ministry.  It is referred to at [22[.   At  [23]  and
    [24] there is a discussion surrounding that evidence.  [25]  refers  to
    obtaining the provisions of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding.   [27]
    lists documents  before  a  Dr  Agnew  Davies.   [28]  deals  with  the
    Appellant's statements as to how  she  had  left  Albania  and  adverse
    criticisms are made within that.  The judge then  refers  back  to  the
    Albanian authorities' documentation at [29].   It  cannot  be  said  to
    stand alone.

 9. In those circumstances I am  satisfied  that  having  made  an  adverse
    finding in relation to the chronology, that  adverse  finding  infected
    the rest of the findings on credibility. The heart of  the  is  whether
    the Appellant is reasonably likely to be the victim of trafficking upon
    return to Albania, with it being argued that she had  been  trafficked,
    escaped and then been re-trafficked. It cannot be said to be immaterial
    when a Conclusive Grounds decision went in her  favour  for  the  judge
    then essentially to say that the Appellant was lying about how she  got
    out without additional information.

10. If I have not already done  so  I  make  it  clear  that  there  is  no
    criticism at all of Ms Cohen not applying  for  an  adjournment  on  28
    November, bearing in mind the expert was out of the country and  simply
    was not able to prepare a report.  Had she been in a position to do so,
    no doubt the judge would have  considered  an  adjournment  application
    because that information is plainly relevant.

11. I am therefore satisfied that there was a material error of law in  the
    decision of Judge Grant. Having  considered  the  submissions  by  both
    representatives, I am satisfied it is appropriate to set  the  decision
    aside and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing not before Judge Grant at Birmingham for reasons that  are  not
    needed to be recorded  here.   I  am  not  issuing  any  directions  in
    relation to that save that the hearing shall not be before 1 July  2019
    to enable a report from Mr  Steven  Harvey  of  a  specific  nature  in
    relation to corruption at  all  levels  of  the  Albanian  Ministry  of
    Interior to be filed and served.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 April 2019




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 April 2019




FEE/COSTS AWARD

The matter is ongoing, and I therefore make no fee or costs award.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 April 2019

