

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02720/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision sent to parties on:|
|On 11 December 2020                          |On 20 January 2021          |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                A W (Somalia)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Toby Lindsay, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Vijay Jagadesham, Counsel instructed by TRP
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of A W  who is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission from the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing on human  rights  grounds  the  claimant's
    appeal against her decision on 7 February 2018 to  refuse  him  refugee
    status under the 1951 Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds  and  to  make  an
    automatic deportation order pursuant to section 32 of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Somalia.    He is a practising Muslim.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal upheld a section 72 certificate  regarding  the
    claimant's protection claim.   The  claimant  has  not  challenged  the
    dismissal of  his  protection  claim  and  the  respondent's  challenge
    therefore sounds only in human rights.

Background

 4.  The  claimant  was  born  in  1971,  and  is  of  mixed   Bajuni   and
    Benadiri/Ashraf clan membership.  He speaks Kibajuni, and some  Somali.
    He grew up in a farm in the Lower Shabelle region of Somalia, a coastal
    area immediately south of Mogadishu.   His  sister  is  married  to  an
    interpreter who is a member of the Darod majority clan.

 5. The claimant's father was killed in Somalia  in  an  explosion  at  the
    factory where he worked; the claimant and his mother  and  two  sisters
    then moved first to Kismayo, then to a refugee camp in Kenya, where his
    older sister met her husband, who was working there as an  interpreter.
    The claimant's mother has died in the Kenyan refugee camp. The  younger
    sister also married in Somalia, but the marriage failed and  she  still
    lives in a refugee camp in Kenya.

 6. The First-tier Judge accepted that the claimant was able,  through  his
    brother-in-law, to sell his mother's family land  and  raise  money  to
    travel to the United Kingdom.

 7. The claimant left Somalia, on his account, in 1996 or 1997,  travelling
    to the Republic of Ireland, where he unsuccessfully claimed asylum.  In
    November 2000, he came to the United Kingdom, and was  removed  to  the
    Republic of Ireland.

 8. The claimant came back to the United Kingdom in January 2004, and again
    claimed asylum.    The  claim  was  refused.   The  claimant  had,  and
    exercised, a full in-country right of  appeal.   The  First-tier  Judge
    refused the claim, the claimant appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    following remittal to the First-tier Tribunal, the Secretary  of  State
    withdrew her decision.

 9. After coming to the United Kingdom, the claimant accrued 8  convictions
    for 13 offences committed over a period of six years between  2003  and
    2008, for offences of robbery,  intention  to  pervert  the  course  of
    justice, and rape.  The last conviction, which is the index offence for
    the purpose of the Secretary of State's decision, was for two  offences
    of rape, on different women, one on 21 January 2007 (in which he used a
    knife) and the second on 4 April  2008.   Both  are  extremely  serious
    offences.

10. The claimant was sentenced to 7 years and 108 days' imprisonment on  12
    January 2009.    He remains in immigration  detention.   While  at  HMP
    Stafford, he was not able always to behave  appropriately:  on  several
    occasions after  January  2017,  he  was  placed  in  segregation,  his
    attitude and behaviour being  aggressive  and  unacceptable.  His  last
    adjudication was in March 2018.  In prison, he completed a sex offender
    programme.  Arrangements for an anger management course through Resolve
    were abortive, though the course  will  be  available  to  him  in  the
    community if he is released.

11. The OASys report dated 27 September 2018 assessed him as  presenting  a
    high risk of serious harm to members of the public  in  the  community,
    high to known adults, and medium to staff.  In custody, he was assessed
    as a medium risk to both staff and other prisoners.

12. The claimant has long-standing mental health issues, diagnosed in 2015,
    which have  improved  to  some  extent  during  his  imprisonment  with
    medication and  counselling:   he  has  schizophreniform  psychosis,  a
    history of depression, alcohol dependence syndrome, and  chronic  post-
    traumatic stress disorder, including severe anxiety, sleep difficulties
    and panic attacks.

First-tier Tribunal decision

13. The First-tier Judge accepted that the claimant's father was Bajuni and
    his mother Benadiri, and that his home area  was  Marka  in  the  lower
    Shabelle area, south of Mogadishu.  He accepted that the  claimant  had
    been displaced from Marka to Kismayo with his mother and sister when he
    was 17, that he travelled on to the United Kingdom after  his  sister's
    husband helped him by selling the maternal family land,  and  that  his
    mother and sister remained in a refugee camp in Kenya, where his mother
    died.

14. The judge accepted that the claimant  now  had  no  family  members  in
    Somalia, his only living  relative  being  his  sister  in  the  Kenyan
    refugee camp, and that the claimant knows nobody in Mogadishu  and  has
    never lived there.

15. The First-tier Judge reviewed the mental health evidence carefully  and
    at length, at [48]-[71] of the decision.  He concluded that:

         "78. It was while he was in prison in 2015 that the [claimant]  was
         invited to attend a PTSD group due to his symptoms, and there was a
         strong underlying assumption at this point that his  symptoms  were
         the result of his experiences in the civil war in Somalia.  That in
         my view was an unwarranted assumption and it has been adopted by Dr
         Sen and Dr Davies, without any real assessment by them of the cause
         of his symptoms.

         79.   But  whatever  the  cause  of  his  current   mental   health
         conditions, I have to  accept  that  the  [claimant]  suffers  from
         schizophreniform psychosis with depression, high levels of anxiety,
         sleep  difficulties   and   panic   attacks.    He   has   auditory
         hallucinations.  His symptoms have improved markedly over the  last
         18-24 months in a better prison environment and with the support of
         medication and therapy.

         80.  Schizophreniform psychosis is not the  same  as  schizophrenia
         and   the   [claimant's]   distressing   symptoms    of    auditory
         hallucinations and nightmares have not  persisted  in  his  current
         detention environment.  I am not satisfied that they  will  persist
         in the community,  should  he  be  able  to  continue  to  get  the
         medication he requires and not be exposed to violent and  stressful
         situations. "

16. The First-tier Judge found that the claimant would be returned, not  to
    Marka but to Mogadishu, but rejected the assertion  that  the  claimant
    presented a real risk of suicide at the point of removal.   His  sister
    in Kenya provided  a  high  degree  of  emotional  support  in  regular
    telephone calls between them, which had  not  been  considered  in  the
    experts' reports.  The claimant had been able to  work  in  the  United
    Kingdom and sent money to his sister when he could: she was  not  in  a
    position to assist him financially on return.

17. The judge accepted the  evidence  of  Dr  Markus  Hoehne,  the  country
    expert, that the understanding and treatment of mental health issues in
    Somalia is 'extremely poor' and that those with apparent mental  health
    problems are often stigmatised, considered 'possessed',  and  subjected
    to inhuman and degrading treatment within society and in their families
    such as stoning and chaining, particularly if they  become  aggressive.
    The prison records show that the claimant has  a  history  of  becoming
    aggressive when under pressure.

18. The judge held that:

         "89. I accept on  the  background  evidence  that  Al  Shabaab  are
         present and active in  the  lower  Shabelle  region  and  that  the
         [claimant]  as  a  minority  Bajuni/Benadiri  clan  member  who  is
         westernised to a degree after spending so many years in Europe, and
         who suffers from psychological difficulties, will not  be  able  to
         avoid the adverse attention of Al Shabaab and he will  be  at  real
         risk of violence in his home area, such as to amount to a real risk
         of being killed or subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment.  He
         does have an internal relocation option to Mogadishu and he will be
         returned to that city from the United Kingdom.  The  CPINs  suggest
         that there is an area  of  Mogadishu  where  the  Bajuni  can  live
         peacefully and also suggests that the Benadiri are doing reasonably
         well there."

19. He applied the country guidance in MOJ & Others (Return  to  Mogadishu)
    CG Somalia [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC) and held that the claimant was  likely
    to end up in an internally displaced persons camp because he was a  man
    of mixed  minority  clan  ethnicity,  had  no  contacts  or  family  in
    Mogadishu and was a vulnerable individual.  In  particular,  the  judge
    found that:

         ""91.    ...

             (e) without financial,  practical  and  medical  support,  his
             mental health conditions will more probably than  not  worsen,
             and he will not be able to find and keep employment and secure
             the necessities of life;

             (f)  his mental health  difficulties  including  his  auditory
             psychosis will more probably than not worsen and he will  then
             be exposed to being shunned,  and/or  subjected  to  treatment
             that is in itself a breach  of  Article  3  [ECHR]  (including
             chaining).

         92.  The country guidance indicates  that  conditions  in  the  IDP
         camps are such as to amount to inhuman or degrading  treatment  and
         such as to exacerbate the [claimant's] mental health  difficulties.
         Even  if  the  [claimant]  does  manage  to  secure  mental  health
         treatment, including medication, the symptoms that he has displayed
         when unwell would leave him exposed, if he has a recurrence of  his
         auditory psychosis, to being treated in an inhumane  [sic]  manner.
         I rely on the  report  of  [Dr  Markus]  Hoehne  in  reaching  this
         conclusion (see paragraph 29 above).

         93.  given his  mental  health  difficulties,  his  ethnicity,  the
         length of his absence from Somalia, his lack  of  family  or  other
         support in Somalia, I find that this [claimant] will  face  a  real
         risk of a breach of Article 3 in Mogadishu.  Given this finding,  I
         do not need further to consider his  appeal  on  Article  8  [ECHR]
         grounds. "

20. The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.  The Secretary of State
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

21. The Secretary of State advanced three grounds of  appeal:  first,  that
    the First-tier Judge had  erred  in  fact  in  assessing  the  risk  of
    persecution due to the claimant's ethnicity.  The  Secretary  of  State
    contended that the First-tier Judge had failed to have regrard  to  her
    January 2019 CPIN Somalia: majority clans and minority groups in  south
    and central Somalia at 5.4.3 and 5.5.4; second, that the judge erred in
    law in relying on MOJ (Somalia),  a 2014 decision, since  the  claimant
    had worked in both the Republic of Ireland and the United  Kingdom  and
    would be able to find employment if returned to Somalia:  see Secretary
    of State for the Home  Department  v  Said  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  442,  SB
    (refugee revocation; IDP camps) Somalia [2019] UKUT  00358  (IAC);  and
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v MA (Somalia)  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 994 at [63].  All of these decisions go to the  economic  situation
    on return and the likelihood of destitution.

22. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  Judge  McClure,  who
    considered that:

         "Whilst the judge was entitled to conclude that the [claimant]  had
         mental health difficulties, the [claimant]  had  managed  to  work,
         both in the United Kingdom and Ireland, for significant periods  of
         time. In assessing whether or  not  the  [claimant]  could  support
         himself in Mogadishu, in the light of the [claimant's]  ability  to
         work the information in the CPIN was clearly relevant.   Similarly,
         the paragraph cited from the case law [in the  grounds  of  appeal]
         deal with the prospects of  an  individual  on  being  returned  to
         Mogadishu."

Rule 24 Reply

23. Mr Jagadesham settled a Rule 24 reply on behalf of  the  claimant.   He
    observed that none of the factual findings about chaining  and  stoning
    had been challenged by the Secretary of State, nor the finding that the
    claimant has significant mental health issues.

24. The First-tier Judge had accepted, expressly, the evidence of Dr Hoehne
    that mental healthcare was extremely poor in  Somalia  and  that  those
    with mental health issues, particularly those who are aggressive,  were
    often stigmatised, considered 'possessed', and subjected to inhuman and
    degrading treatment within both society and families, including stoning
    and chaining.  The claimant had a history  of  becoming  aggressive  at
    times when he was under  pressure.   There  was  no  challenge  to  the
    finding of fact at [91(f)] and [92] quoted above.   The  basis  of  the
    judge's decision stood unchallenged and should be upheld.

25. The Secretary of State had not challenged the finding by the First-tier
    Judge that the claimant was at risk of mistreatment from Al Shabaab  in
    his home area and he had taken into account the CPIN:  see  [89].   The
    basis of the First-tier Judge's decision was that there was more to the
    claimant's risk than  merely  ending  up  in  an  internally  displaced
    persons camp, because of the treatment he was likely to  receive  as  a
    result of his mental health difficulties: see [91(e)].

26. The caselaw relied upon by the Secretary of State was not  relevant  to
    the particular facts of this appeal. The grounds of appeal were no more
    than a disagreement with certain immaterial matters in the decision and
    an attempt to reargue the case.

27. The submissions at  [14]  in  Mr  Jagadesham's  grounds  regarding  the
    trafficking issue are not relevant to the grounds of appeal or  to  the
    basis of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

28. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

29. For the Secretary of State, Mr Lindsay accepted  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal should be treated as limited to Article 3 ECHR,  as  the  appeal
    had not been allowed on other grounds.  there was uncontested  evidence
    regarding the claimant's therapy and medication for his  mental  health
    problems.

30. Mr Lindsay acknowledged that there was  nothing  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's CPIN which dealt with the  conditions  for  those  with  mental
    health difficulties in Somalia.  He accepted that stoning and  chaining
    were amount to Article 3 harm  but  argued  that  there  was  no  clear
    finding of a real risk of such harm to this claimant.  A fact-sensitive
    assessment was required, but had not been  carried  out.    Mr  Lindsay
    considered that the judge had conflated Article 15(c) risk with Article
    3 ECHR.  The Elgafaji sliding scale was not applicable.

31. Mr Lindsay accepted that the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17,
    handed down on 29 April 2020, was material. However, he argued that the
    test at the time of the First-tier Tribunal's decision was the test  in
    N v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Terrence Higgins  Trust
    intervening) [2005] UKHL 31,  [2005]  2  AC  296   and  the  'deathbed'
    threshold was not reached in this appeal.

32. He reminded me that in Said, the Court of Appeal had held that being in
    an internally displaced persons camp  in  Somalia  would  not,  without
    more, meet the Article 3 test, in contrast to the  earlier  finding  in
    MOJ that it did.  It was, he contended, a material error for the First-
    tier Judge to have relied on MOJ when he was bound by the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in Said.  Mr Lindsay contended (though he  accepted
    that this was not one of the Secretary of State's pleaded grounds) that
    applying AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT  673  (IAC)
    at [55], the Benadiri could provide  support  to  members  looking  for
    assistance.

33. Mr Lindsay  contended  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had  not  properly
    considered the Article 3 test and noted that the claimant in  his  Rule
    24 reply had  not  sought  to  challenge  the  finding  on  section  72
    certification and the dismissal of his protection claim.

34. Mr Lindsay asked me to  allow  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  and
    dismiss the human rights finding in the claimant's favour.

35. For the claimant, Mr Jagadesham reminded me of all of the  unchallenged
    positive factual findings and the evidence about stoning  and  chaining
    of mentally ill persons in Somalia.  At page 710  and  onwards  in  the
    claimant's bundle, there were  multiple  country  materials  mentioning
    this treatment, which the Secretary of State had not sought to rebut.

36. The judge  had  considered  the  CPIN:  see  [89]  quoted  above.   The
    claimant's mental health issues had begun in 2015  and  the  employment
    relied upon was not relevant, given the serious nature of  his  present
    symptoms.  The Secretary of State's reliance on the CPIN was based on a
    selective citation and overlooked evidence, for example  at  2.4.13  of
    the report, which dealt with the position of unsupported minority  clan
    members.  The evidence  that  only  majority  clan  members  could  get
    medical assistance (see MOJ (vii)) had not been  rebutted.   There  was
    neither an error of law, nor a material error of law in the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision, which had been open to the judge on  the  evidence
    before him.

37. Mr Jagadesham relied on his Rule 24 reply and asked me  to  uphold  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Analysis

38. The Secretary of State asserts in her grounds of appeal that the  judge
    erred by not concluding that the claimant could  be  expected  to  find
    work and some support from one of his minority  clans  if  returned  to
    Mogadishu.  His ethnicity would be no problem, she argues, because both
    his minority clans have 'safe' areas in Mogadishu.

39. The passage relied upon in AAW at [55] is not, nor was it  intended  to
    be, country guidance: that decision is reported on a procedural  point.
    At [55], the Upper Tribunal said this:

         "55.   This evidence [summarised above]  indicates  that,  even  if
         some minority clans have little to offer to those  of  its  members
         looking for assistance, the Benadiri, of which the appellant's clan
         is a sub-clan, is not in such a  position.  On  the  contrary,  the
         economic enterprise of this  clan  is  such  that  it  has  created
         businesses that will inevitably generate  employment  opportunities
         and it is not easy to see why this would not be to the  appellant's
         advantage."

40. However, this decision did not turn on the claimant's ability to obtain
    employment before his incarceration  in  2009,  six  years  before  his
    mental health problems were diagnosed.   It must  be  assessed  on  the
    present situation and his health and other characteristics today.

41. The Secretary of  State  has  not  challenged  the  First-tier  Judge's
    findings on the likelihood, which he assessed to  the  civil  standard,
    not the lower standard appropriate  for  protection  claims,  that  the
    claimant would end up in an internally displaced persons camp.  It  was
    an error of law to assess to  that  higher  standard,  but  immaterial,
    since if the judge were satisfied to the ordinary civil  standard  that
    the claimant would end up in an internally displaced persons  camp,  he
    would certainly have reached the same conclusion  had  he  applied  the
    lower standard applicable in protection claims.

42. Similarly, while it is right that the Court of  Appeal  in  Said  found
    that conditions in internally displaced persons camps were not  now  of
    themselves capable of constituting an Article 3 ECHR  breach,  as  they
    were in 2014, when MOJ was decided, that is not the First-tier  Judge's
    reasoning: the claimant's mental health and behavioural issues are  the
    crux of his decision.

43. There is no challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's  findings  regarding
    the claimant's mental health issues, nor  his  conclusions  as  to  the
    inhuman and degrading treatment (stoning, chaining and  stigmatisation)
    which a mentally ill person  risks  in  Somalia.   This  man  would  be
    returned with no family support and a known  tendency  to  violence  as
    well as auditory hallucinations when under stress, which is said to  be
    a trigger for chaining in Somalia.

44. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are misconceived.   They  do
    not engage with the reason the First-tier  Judge  allowed  the  appeal,
    which was the risk to the claimant as a person who has  a  long-lasting
    and severe mental health problem, diagnosed in 2015 and only  partially
    addressed by treatment in prison, and the evidence about the  treatment
    of the mentally ill in Somalia.   There  was  no  evidence  before  the
    judge to indicate that the claimant's mental health at present is  such
    that he could now hold down a job  or,  without  access  to  sufficient
    treatment and medication, refrain from behaving in a manner which would
    see him chained and stoned,  and  treated  as  possessed.   Mr  Lindsay
    accepts that those are Article 3 ECHR harms, if proved.

45. The claimant's criminal  history  is  a  serious  and  concerning  one,
    although he may have had undiagnosed mental  health  problems.  He  got
    into a fight  in  Ireland  and  was  stabbed.   He  committed  robbery,
    attempted  to  pervert  the  course  of  justice,  and  committed   two
    particularly unpleasant rapes.  The Secretary of  State  has  correctly
    concluded that he is not  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  international
    protection under the  Refugee  Convention  or  humanitarian  protection
    under the Qualification Directive Regulations.  The judge  agreed,  and
    the claimant has not challenged that.

46. The judge's conclusion is that nevertheless, by reason of  his  serious
    mental health problems and the treatment he would receive as a mentally
    ill person with a tendency  to  violence,  in  Somalia,  he  cannot  at
    present be returned there without a breach by the United Kingdom of its
    international responsibilities under Article 3 ECHR.  That  is  not  an
    easy conclusion for the judge to have reached, but he did so carefully,
    cogently, and fairly, with no want of anxious scrutiny of the materials
    before him.

47. For the avoidance of doubt, I find that the First-tier  Judge  examined
    all of the evidence with care, and in particular  Dr  Hoehne's  country
    report, and the medical evidence of Dr Piyal Sen, Dr Lisa Davies and Dr
    Karen Bailey (the latter in a joint report in  2019  with  Dr  Davies).
    The factual conclusions he drew from that evidence were unarguably open
    to him and the Secretary of State has not challenged them.  There is no
    inadequacy of reasoning here.

48. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, with which the grounds  of
    appeal do not engage, at pages 705-733 of the  bundle,  amply  supports
    the judge's finding and the conclusion as to risk which  he  drew  from
    it.  I remind myself that, following the decision of the Supreme  Court
    in AM (Zimbabwe), the Paposhvili extension of the death bed  test  must
    be applied and that if the First-tier Judge erred in failing  to  apply
    the N test, that has become immaterial, since  the  Supreme  Court  has
    expressly departed from the reasoning in that decision. The  Paposhvili
    test, which would be applied if this decision were to be remade  today,
    was cited and relied upon at [22] in AM (Zimbabwe) and is as follows:
           "183.  The Court considers  that  the  'other  very  exceptional
           cases' within the meaning of the judgment  in  N  v  The  United
           Kingdom (para 43) which may  raise  an  issue  under  article  3
           should be  understood  to  refer  to  situations  involving  the
           removal of a seriously ill person in which  substantial  grounds
           have been shown for believing that he or she,  although  not  at
           imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk,  on  account  of
           the absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving country or
           the lack of access to such treatment,  of  being  exposed  to  a
           serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her  state  of
           health resulting  in  intense  suffering  or  to  a  significant
           reduction in life expectancy. The Court points  out  that  these
           situations correspond to a high threshold for the application of
           article 3 of the Convention in cases concerning the  removal  of
           aliens suffering from serious illness."

49. On any view, this claimant is a seriously ill  person.   The  evidence,
    accepted by the judge and not challenged by the Secretary of State,  is
    that there is very poor mental health provision in Somalia,  such  that
    'his mental health difficulties, including his auditory psychosis, will
    ... worsen and he  will  then  be  exposed  to  being  shunned,  and/or
    subjected to treatment  that  is  in  itself  a  breach  of  Article  3
    (including chaining)'.  Being chained or stoned, or both, as Mr Lindsay
    accepted, is inhuman and degrading treatment, capable  of  meeting  the
    Article 3 ECHR standard.

50. For all of the above reasons, I find that there is no material error of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Judge, which I uphold.


DECISION

51. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     22 December
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



