
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/02878/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   | Determination Promulgated   |
|On 6 December 2017                     | On 8 February 2018          |
|                                       |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

                          Mr MUHAMMAD SALEEM IQBAL
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, counsel (instructed by Lupins)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  Designated
           Judge First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 13 July 2017 against
           the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lucas  who  had
           dismissed the appeal of the Appellant against the refusal of his
           international protection claim.  The decision  and  reasons  was
           promulgated on 9 January 2017.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of  Afghanistan,  born  on  17  June
           1997.  He had claimed asylum on 3 June 2015 after  entering  the
           United Kingdom illegally, having previously made a similar claim
           in Austria but absconded.  He asserted that he was  at  risk  in
           Afghanistan because of the Taliban.  His father had been  killed
           by the Taliban because he had refused to  join.   The  Appellant
           maintained that he was born in 2000 and so still a  minor.   The
           Kent County Council assessment concluded he was over 18.


      3.    Judge Lucas found that the Appellant had  failed  to  prove  his
           claims.  He was likely  to  have  family  in  Afghanistan,  with
           resources,  as  contacts  such  as  sending  his  Taskira   from
           Afghanistan showed.  The  Appellant  could  safely  relocate  in
           Kabul.  The appeal was accordingly dismissed.


      4.    Permission to appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  McCarthy
           because it was held arguable that the judge  had  erred  in  his
           approach to  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  age,  and  had
           misunderstood the level of experience of the Appellant's  expert
           and had failed to consider the Merton [2003] EWHC  1689  (Admin)
           guidelines.   The  judge  had  been  distracted  by   immaterial
           considerations he had raised  himself,  such  as  the  Appellant
           relocating  to  Pakistan.   The  judge  had  misunderstood   the
           Appellant's expert report and had not  considered  the  separate
           elements comprising the Article  15(c)  humanitarian  protection
           claim.




      Submissions


      5.    Ms Radford for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal  and  grant.   In  summary,  she   submitted   that   the
           Appellant's age had been wrongly assessed and  he  was  still  a
           child, meaning that his evidence had to be assessed on the basis
           that he was accordingly a vulnerable witness.  The  hearing  had
           not been conducted on that basis and it should have  been.   The
           judge had misunderstood the qualifications of the social workers
           who had prepared the  Appellant's  age  assessment,  which  were
           extensive.  The Merton guidelines had not been followed  in  the
           Kent report and their social workers were less experienced  than
           those of the Appellant, particularly Ms Angeline Seymour.


      6.    Ms Radford further submitted that the  judge  had  strayed  into
           irrelevancy when discussing why protection had not  been  sought
           in  Pakistan.   Then  the  judge  had  failed  to  see  that  Dr
           Guistozzi, the Appellant's expert, had not  supported  his  case
           without discernment.  The judge had erred when  considering  the
           availability   of   state   protection.    The   Article   15(c)
           Qualification Directive claim had not  been  considered  against
           the  Appellant's  evidence  and  case.   There  were  cumulative
           errors, not forgetting the problem of  the  standard  of  proof.
           The determination should be set aside and remade in  the  First-
           tier Tribunal.


      7.    Mr Kandola for  the  Respondent  submitted  that  there  was  no
           material error of law.  The judge had been  entitled  to  prefer
           the  Kent  County  Council   assessment,   which   was   plainly
           independent and the result of  a  multi  disciplinary  approach.
           The judge had been entitled to treat the Appellant as an  adult.
           The expert's report had been taken into account.  The judge  had
           found that the Appellant had an uncle in Afghanistan so would be
           returning  to  his  family.  Humanitarian  protection  had  been
           sufficiently considered. The onwards appeal should be dismissed.


      8.    In reply, Ms Radford emphasised the absence of  independence  in
           the  Kent  report.   The  Appellant's   expert   had   expressly
           recognised her duty to the tribunal.  The judge  had  failed  to
           factor in  country  guidance  for  Afghanistan  and  the  recent
           situation.




      No material error of law finding


      9.    In the tribunal's view, the errors  asserted  to  exist  in  the
           decision and reasons are illusory.  It is plain,  in  the  first
           instance, that the experienced judge examined the whole  of  the
           evidence with appropriate care, applying the correct standard of
           proof, in the  round,  returning  to  the  Appellant's  expert's
           reports a number of times during his discussion of the evidence.
            When considering  the  competing  age  assessments,  the  judge
           placed the Appellant's story into  its  proper  context,  namely
           that the Appellant had  access  to  the  considerable  resources
           which enabled him to reach the United Kingdom  via  Austria  and
           was able to contact his family after his  arrival,  on  his  own
           admission.  The judge's reference to the availability of  refuge
           in Pakistan (with a relative, according to  the  Appellant)  was
           simply to illustrate the implausibility of the Appellant's claim
           that there was any need for  him  to  make  a  long  and  costly
           journey to reach safety.  There was no misunderstanding  by  the
           judge   of   the   Appellant's   age   expert's   Ms   Seymour's
           qualifications: [83] of the decision is a  part  quotation  from
           her report, which was the subject of the  submissions  noted  by
           the judge and which report was in any event examined in  detail.
           In the tribunal's view it is likely that the judge inadvertently
           omitted "the first and" from before "second social worker"  when
           describing Ms Seymour's qualifications.


      10.   The point the judge was making is that Ms Seymour's  report  was
           in effect  an  attack  on  the  local  authority's  report.   He
           explained why he found that there was no good reason for him  to
           go behind the Kent County  Council  multi  disciplinary  report,
           prepared in accordance with  Merton  standards,  and  which  was
           undoubtedly independent and unequivocal in its conclusions as to
           the Appellant's age.  The Appellant himself was uncertain as  to
           his age, even at the late stage of the hearing, as  recorded  in
           the summary of his evidence.  The judge  was  entitled  to  find
           that there was a gulf between the competing reports and  had  to
           choose  one  over  the  other.   In  doing  so,  the  judge  had
           considered whether it was possible that the  Appellant's  story,
           including his claimed age, was reasonably likely to be true  and
           he  explained  why  he  concluded  otherwise.   The  Appellant's
           selective disclosure of documents was but one significant reason
           why the judge found against the Appellant.


      11.   The judge gave close attention  to  the  country  report  of  Dr
           Guistozzi, accepting his expertise but noting,  correctly,  that
           the first report was mostly generic.  Dr Guistozzi's opinion  in
           his supplementary  report  that  the  Taliban  "rarely  practice
           forced recruitment" (see  [51]  of  the  decision  and  reasons)
           directly undercut the central elements of the Appellant's  story
           of his father's death at the hands of the  Taliban  and  of  the
           supposed subsequent attempt to  recruit  the  Appellant  by  the
           Taliban: see [90] to [95] of the decision and reasons.


      12.   The judge indicated at the start of  his  decision  and  reasons
           that humanitarian protection was part of the  Appellant's  case,
           and there are subsequent references to Article 15(c),  including
           a summary of Ms Radford's submissions on that issue.  It was  an
           issue  that  the  judge  plainly  had  in  mind  throughout  his
           consideration  of  the  evidence.   The  judge  found  that  the
           Appellant could  safely  relocate  to  Kabul  if  necessary  and
           expressly  found  that  there  was  no  basis  for  a  grant  of
           humanitarian protection, i.e., that  he  found  the  submissions
           advanced to the contrary insufficient.  Current country guidance
           for Afghanistan supports that finding and there was no need  for
           the judge to have said more.
      13.   Ms Radford's submissions, like the onwards grounds, amounted  in
           the end no more than  disagreement  with  the  judge's  decision
           which exposed a transparently weak  and  implausible  case.  The
           tribunal finds that there was no material error of  law  in  the
           decision challenged.




      DECISION


      The appeal is dismissed


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
      material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.



      Signed                                  Dated 5 February 2018




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




