
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02903/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 July 2021                               |On 4 August 2021              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AFM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms M. Cleghorn, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant.



                            DECISION AND REASONS






    Introduction:
    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because
    the case involves protection issues. I find that it is  appropriate  to
    continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Hanlon) (hereinafter  referred  to  as
    the "FtTJ") who allowed the appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
    appeal in a decision promulgated on the 11 January 2021.


 2. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and on  2  February  2021
    permission was granted by FtTJ Andrew.


 3. Whilst this is an appeal on behalf of the Secretary of State  I  intend
    to refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The hearing took place on 14 July 2021, by  means  of  Microsoft  Teams
    which has been consented to and not objected to by the parties. A face-
    to-face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and  both
    parties agreed that all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.
      The advocates attended remotely  via  video.  There  were  no  issues
    regarding sound, and no substantial technical problems were encountered
    during the hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were able to  make
    their respective cases by the chosen means.



The background:

 5. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity. The  appellant
    left Iraq for Turkey on 5 October 2017 concealed in a  lorry,  arriving
    in Istanbul 3 to 4 days later. He remained there for  a  week  and  was
    then taken to Romania. He was stopped by the Romanian  authorities  and
    spent a few days in custody prior to his release. Home  Office  records
    show that he  claimed  asylum  in  Romania  on  1  November  2017.  The
    appellant stated  that  after  10  days  there,  the  agent  found  the
    appellant put him in a lorry taking him to an unknown location where he
    remained for 2 months.

 6. On 8 January 2018 the appellant entered the UK clandestinely  by  lorry
    and he claimed asylum.

 7. The basis of his claim was that in April 2017  he  was  employed  at  a
    woman's clothes shop Makhmour and where he met a young  woman  whom  he
    continued to meet with outside of the shop.

 8. On 4 October 2017 the woman  spotted  her  father  while  she  and  the
    appellant were embracing in the park. The appellant was  aware  of  the
    tribal and political connections of her family and  the  appellant  ran
    away. He contacted his employer who took him to a  nearby  village  and
    whilst there the appellant was telephoned by the  woman's  brother  who
    threatened to kill him for having an unsanctioned relationship with his
    sister.

 9. Later that evening the appellant's mother telephoned him to  warn  that
    this woman's family had come to the house demanding that the  appellant
    be handed over to them. He was advised to leave Iraq and  his  employer
    agreed to help the appellant to be smuggled out of Iraq.

10. In March 2018 after he had arrived in the United Kingdom, the appellant
    contacted his former employer and through him was put into contact with
    his mother. He was told that the  appellant's  family  relocated  to  a
    village near Koya to avoid further trouble from the woman's family.

11. The appellant therefore feared that an event  of  return  he  would  be
    killed by the family due to his unsanctioned relationship with her.  He
    also feared the general situation in his home area.

12. His asylum claim was refused in a decision letter dated 11 March  2020.
    The FtTJ summarised the respondent's case is set out in  that  decision
    letter at paragraph [25] of his decision. Whilst it was  accepted  that
    the reasons given by the appellant for claiming asylum was that he  was
    a potential victim of an honour crime  and  as  such,  a  member  of  a
    particular social group and the reasons engaged the U.K.'s  obligations
    under the 1951 Convention, the  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant  had  given  a  consistent  and  credible  account   of   the
    relationship with the woman concerned and that the inconsistencies  and
    contradictions undermined his claim. The  issues  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent were set out at paragraph [37 - 58] of the decision letter.

13. Section 8 of the 2004 Act applied for the reasons set out at paragraphs
    [59 - 61].

14. By reference to SMO and others (Article 15 (  c);  identity  documents)
    Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 ("SMO") the respondent concluded that in  the
    event of his return, solely on account of his presence in Iraq that the
    appellant did not face a real risk of being subjected to indiscriminate
    violence amounting to serious harm within the scope of article 15 (  c)
    of the qualification directive.

15. The respondent set out the headnote of SMO  relating  to  documentation
    (excluding the  IKR)  and  the  civil  status  identity  documentation,
    internal relocation within GOI -controlled Iraq.

16. As to the IKR by reference to SMO the respondent  cited  that  decision
    and there are regular direct flights to the UK  to  the  Iraqi  Kurdish
    Region and that returns might be to Baghdad or to that region  that  it
    is the respondent to state whether she intends to  remove  to  Baghdad,
    Erbil or Sulaymaniyah (page 16 of decision letter).

17. Having set out SMO, the respondent considered  that  as  a  Kurdish  ex
    resident from Makhmour in the Erbil governorate he would be returned to
    the IKR which was not an area  subject  to  article  15  (c  )  of  the
    qualification directive, via Erbil  or  Sulaymaniyah  airport.  It  was
    stated "it is considered that, as an ethnic Kurd,  who  could  evidence
    their recent return from the United Kingdom, you would be  admitted  by
    the Kurdish authorities" (at paragraph 50).

18. At paragraph 51, the respondent noted that the appellant had family  in
    Iraq with whom he had had contact with since leaving  the  country  and
    thus could vouch for him and assist in  his  re-documentation.  As  his
    relationship with the lady had been  rejected,  it  followed  that  his
    family would have no need to relocate  and  therefore  would  still  be
    present in Makhmour.

19. The appellant would be able to redocument himself either at  the  Iraqi
    embassy in the UK or once returned to Iraq at the local CSA office  and
    that  he  should  be  able  to  recall  it  and  thus  facilitate   his
    redocumentation.

20. At [53] it was noted that even in the absence  of  family  support,  he
    could avail himself of funds by the  voluntary  returns  program  which
    would allow him to support himself and mitigate any  initial  hardships
    upon return whilst reintegrating to the KRG.

21. The issue of sufficiency protection was set out at paragraph 68  -  76.
    Internal relocation to anywhere in the IKR was considered at paragraphs
    77-85.

22. The application was therefore refused.

The decision of the FtTJ:

23. The appeal came before the FtT on  22  December  2020.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 January 2021 the FtTJ allowed the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and on  human  rights  grounds  but  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

24. The FtTJ made the following findings.

25. At paragraphs [42 - 51], the FtTJ set out his analysis of the  evidence
    and gave his reasons for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    claimed relationship with a woman in his home area.  The  FtTJ  reached
    the conclusion that the appellant had given an inconsistent  and  vague
    account in his evidence concerning the core aspect of his claim to have
    been in a relationship with a woman in Iraq.  The judge therefore found
    that if returned to Iraq, he would not  face  persecution  due  to  his
    claim relationship with the woman and that the appellant did not have a
    genuine subjective or objective fear on return to Iraq on  the  grounds
    of his relationship with her.

26. At [50] the FtTJ considered section 8 of the  2004  Act  in  accordance
    with the issue set out in the respondent's decision letter.  The  judge
    rejected the appellant's evidence for having failed to claim asylum  in
    a safe country, namely Romania  and  found  that  his  credibility  was
    damaged under section 8 (4) of the 2004 Act.

27. At paragraphs 52 - 53 the judge addressed the issue as to the place the
    appellant originated from. The  judge  recorded  the  position  of  the
    respondent set out in the  decision  letter  and  in  the  respondent's
    response to the appellant's  skeleton  argument  which  maintained  the
    position that the appellant's claimed hometown of Makhmour was in Erbil
    and that the appellant's family had relocated to a  place  also  within
    Erbil and that the appellant originates from the IKR.

28. The appellant disputed the respondent's position  and  that  he  stated
    that Makhmour belonged to Mosel governorate and that it was a  disputed
    area as referred to in paragraph 60 of SMO.

29. At [53] the FtTJ set out his conclusions on the issue as follows.

               1) the respondent states that Makhmour is part  of  the  IKR,
                  and the appellant can return there.

               2) Paragraph 60 of SMO describes  Makhmour  as  part  of  the
                  disputed territories,  administered  by  Nineveh  that  to
                  which Erbil lays claim and this  is  consistent  with  the
                  appellant's evidence in his witness statement.

               3) Paragraph 60 of SMO refers to Isis having held Makhmour in
                  August 2016 before being forced out by Kurdish forces. The
                  peshmerga withdrew from Makhmour in October 2017 which  is
                  consistent with the appellant's claim at paragraph  49  of
                  witness statement  that  Makhmour  is  part  of  the  Iraq
                  central government although it continues to be a  disputed
                  area.

               4) Therefore, having considered the evidence,  and  that  set
                  out at paragraph 60 of SMO, Makhmour  was  formally  in  a
                  contested area, Isis having taken over a short bit of time
                  before  being  ejected  by  a  combination  of  the  Iraqi
                  government forces and the Peshmerga  that  that  following
                  the independence referendum in  October  2017Makhmour  has
                  been under the control of the federal government  of  Iraq
                  that remains  a  disputed  territory,  the  dispute  being
                  between the IKR and the federal government of Iraq.

               5) The appellant was therefore not  formally  a  resident  of
                  IKR.

               6) SMO held  that  former  residents  of  the  IKR  would  be
                  returned to the IKR and all other Iraqis would be returned
                  to Baghdad.

               7) The judge therefore found that  the  appellant  is  not  a
                  former resident of the IKR, and his return would therefore
                  be to Baghdad.

30. As to the issue of documentation, the FtTJ considered the evidence from
    the appellant and at [54]  the  FtTJ  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    evidence in this respect to be "vague and lacking in credibility" as to
    what had happened to his documentation on route.

31. At [55 - 56] the FtTJ address the issue of whether or not the appellant
    was in contact with his family. The  FtTJ  considered  the  appellant's
    evidence that he lived with his mother  in  Iraq  and  that  he  had  a
    brother in a nearby village but that he had not been  in  contact  with
    them since March 2018 and  he  had  lost  contact  with  them.  He  had
    contacted them once since he left Iraq in March 2018. He had  contacted
    his former employer and persuaded him to go and find his mother  so  he
    could talk directly to her by using his  employers  mobile  phone.  The
    appellant stated that when he last spoke to his mother  in  March  2018
    she was residing in Goma Shin.

32. The FtTJ considered the appellant's evidence and that he had given  the
    explanation that his mother had  left  their  former  home  because  of
    threats from the woman's family. As a judge had not been satisfied that
    the  appellant's  account  of  his  relationship  with  the  woman  was
    credible, he did not accept that  the  appellant's  mother  would  have
    needed to relocate from the home that she shared with the appellant due
    to  threats.  However  the  judge  found  "it  is  possible  that   the
    appellant's mother had moved from Makhmour due to what is  referred  to
    in paragraph 60 of SMO, which describes renewed presence of Isis in the
    area with Isis cells plainly remaining active in the area and  sporadic
    attacks continuing".

33. The judge therefore concluded at [56],"Although I do not therefore find
    the appellant's mother and brother had been forced from their home area
    due to threats from the family of S, it is  plausible  that  they  have
    needed to move from their original home given the security situation in
    Makhmour as referred to in paragraph 60 of SMO. It follows that finding
    that the appellant's claim loss of contact with his family  members  in
    Iraq is plausible."

34. The FtTJ took into account that whilst he found  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence regarding his claim about documentation (CSID and  nationality
    certificate) as being vague, he was satisfied that  the  appellant  had
    lost contact with his family and that  whilst  the  appellant  had  not
    given any evidence of any efforts to trace or locate his  family  other
    than contact with the Red  Cross,  given  the  situation  described  in
    Makhmour set out at paragraph 60 of SMO,  it  is  "plausible  that  the
    appellant may have been unable to  maintain  contact  with  his  family
    members and indeed his  former  employer  to  whom  he  had  previously
    contacted his mother. In this case I find that the appellant would  not
    be able to contact his family members with a view to obtaining his CSID
    card credit be left in Iraq or  in  obtaining  the  assistance  of  his
    family to obtain a replacement in the event of his return to Iraq " (at
    [57]).

35.  As  to  the  issue  of  redocumentation,  the  FtTJ  referred  to  the
    respondent's guidance on this issue at paragraph [58] of his  decision.
    As set out at paragraph 2.6.16 of the Home Office  Country  Policy  and
    Information  Note   entitled:   "Iraq:   Internal   relocation,   civil
    documentation and returns", version 11.0, dated  June  2020  (hereafter
    "the June 2020 CPIN"): "it is highly unlikely that an individual  would
    be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy while in the UK.

36. At [59] the FtTJ made the following assessment:

               1) situation faced by the appellant upon return  is  that  he
                  would  be  returned  to  Baghdad  and  without  being   in
                  possession of a CSID card.

               2) Paragraph  2.6.17  of  the  CPIN  June  2020  provides  an
                  individual who is not from Baghdad is  not  likely  to  be
                  able to obtain a replacement car there, certainly within a
                  reasonable timescale.

               3) Without the benefit of a CSID card the appellant would not
                  be able to remain in Baghdad regardless of  other  factors
                  which would make relocation  for  the  appellant  and  the
                  Baghdad area to be unduly harsh, in particular his Kurdish
                  ethnicity.

               4) As to whether or not the appellant will be up to make  his
                  way from Baghdad to his home area, applying  the  decision
                  in SMO, the principles established at paragraph  21  -  24
                  refer to the difficulties  in  making  a  journey  between
                  Baghdad and the IKR to be the  same  as  those  which  the
                  appellant would face in making his way from Baghdad to his
                  home area without being in  possession  of  a  valid  CSID
                  card.

               5) Paragraph 23 of SMO provided a personal face  considerable
                  difficulty in making the journey between Baghdad  and  the
                  IKR by land without a CSID or INID.

               6) Paragraph 23 refers to the numerous  checkpoints  provided
                  of a person was making this journey without  a  CSID  card
                  there is a real risk of being detained at a checkpoint and
                  it is not reasonable to  require  such  person  to  travel
                  between Baghdad and the IKR by land without the ability to
                  verify his identity checkpoints.  This  normally  requires
                  the attendance of a male family member and the  production
                  of identity documents.

               7) The judge found on the basis of SMO that the appellant did
                  not have a CSID card and on the factual findings made,  he
                  would be unable to contact his family for  assistance  and
                  that there would be a "real risk that the appellant  would
                  suffer persecution, serious harm or article  3  ECHR  ill-
                  treatment and  the  difficulties  he  would  face  on  the
                  journey from Baghdad to his  home  area  would  be  unduly
                  harsh."

37. For those reasons, the judge concluded that for this appellant,  "there
    is a real risk that the appellant would suffer persecution  or  serious
    harm in making the journey from Baghdad to his home area" and therefore
    he allowed the asylum appeal on that basis.

38. As he had allowed the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds,  the  judge
    found at [61] that he could not qualify  for  humanitarian  protection.
    However whilst he did not find that  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    problems with the family was reasonably likely to  be  true,  he  found
    that in the absence  of  a  valid  CSID  card  the  risk  of  suffering
    persecution, serious harm, or article 3  ill-treatment  in  making  the
    journey from Baghdad to the appellant's  home  area  would  breach  the
    appellant's rights under articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

39. The respondent sought permission to appeal that decision and permission
    was granted by FtTJ Andrew on  2nd  February  2021  for  the  following
    reasons:

    "It appears that the  judges  allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds
    because of the claimed lack of a CSID.  However,  other  parts  of  the
    asylum claim were disbelieved. As there is no Convention reason  it  is
    arguable that the judge did not allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

    Notwithstanding this  the  judge  gave  insufficient  reasons  for  his
    finding as to why a replacement CSID could not be obtained and why  the
    appellant could not resume contact with his family  and/or  friends  on
    return to Iraq thus enabling him to  have  assistance  in  obtaining  a
    replacement  CSID.  It  is  further  arguable  that  the   judge   gave
    insufficient reasons as to why the appellant's  home  area  may  be  in
    disputed territory."



The submissions of the parties:

40. Mr McVeety on behalf of the respondent  relied upon part of the written
    grounds.

41. The written grounds set out that the FtTJ allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    basis of the Refugee Convention but erred in law. The judge  found  the
    appellant to be incredible as to his claim for asylum but to be  unable
    to make the journey from Baghdad to his home area due to  his  apparent
    lack of documentation. It is submitted that, the appellant  having  not
    demonstrated a risk due to one of the protected characteristics defined
    in the Convention, cannot be found to be a refugee for reasons  of  his
    race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or
    political opinion, as such to find otherwise is a misdirection in law.

42. Both advocates agree that this was an error  of  law  in  view  of  the
    factual findings made and that in the alternative the FtTJ had  allowed
    the appeal on article 3 grounds, therefore the issue is the materiality
    of that error based on the other grounds of challenge.

43.  The written grounds also submitted that the FtTJ's assessment  of  the
    appellant's home area and any associated risks was a misdirection.  The
    area of Makhmour whilst "disputed"  is  not  one  which  remains  in  a
    contested area, SMO, and under the  control  of  ISIS  as  such  it  is
    unclear on what basis it is found  that  the  current  situation  would
    prevent contact former residents, including his family or the  employer
    who assisted in previously, who are likely to have returned  since  the
    departure of ISIS. It is submitted that it  is  for  the  appellant  to
    demonstrate by way of efforts made that he is unable to do so,  he  has
    failed to make  such  efforts  either  to  regain  contact  or  attempt
    redocumentation via the Iraqi embassy in the UK, as such  to  find  out
    more that is unable to do so is to err in law. Again,  Mr  McVeety  did
    not seek to advance that argument in his oral submissions.

44. Ground 3 submits that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  why,
    despite the appellant began to make contact with his family previously,
    he would be unable to do it again in  order  to  obtain  assistance  in
    securing a new CSID or other documentation which will allow his passage
    throughout Iraq. It had been accepted that the appellant  made  contact
    with his  mother  by  his  prior  employer,  and  it  is  unclear  why,
    therefore, he  would  be  unable  to  make  contact  in  the  same  way
    currently. His employer was in possession of a  mobile  phone  and  was
    able to meet with the appellant's mother even after her relocation  who
    in turn spoke to the appellant  directly.  The  judge  failed  to  give
    reasons why this would now not be possible and therefore  the  findings
    as regards the appellant's ability to redocument himself are unsound.

45. Mr McVeety, in his oral submissions relied upon  paragraph  [54]  where
    the FtTJ had set out  that  the  appellant's  evidence  concerning  the
    documentation (CSID) had been vague  and  lacking  in  credibility.  He
    accepted that a judge is entitled to find some  parts  of  a  witness's
    evidence to be credible and others to be incredible but when looking at
    the appellant's account the FtTJ had found the core of his account  not
    to be credible.

46. Furthermore the judge had found at [56] that the appellant had been  in
    contact with his mother in 2018 but  gave  no  reason  as  to  why  the
    appellant should now not be in contact with his mother. The judge found
    that she had relocated out of the  home  area  and  the  appellant  had
    managed to contact with her. Therefore the appellant had been  able  to
    make contact with her after she left the home  area.  In  summary,  the
    judge  should  have  done  more  in  his  assessment  and  the  logical
    conclusion from the appellant's evidence which was vague about his CSID
    is that he either had it or had access to it.

47. There was no rule 24 response in behalf of the appellant I  heard  oral
    submissions  from  Ms  Cleghorn.  She  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    separated the core of the account which  related  to  the  reasons  for
    leaving  Iraq  and  considered  separately  the   issue   relating   to
    documentation. She submitted that when reading the decision as a  whole
    it was a well thought out and properly reasoned decision. The judge had
    properly considered the background evidence and had cited paragraph  60
    of SMO and had taken into account the circumstances of the  appellant's
    home area. In particular Dr Fatah's evidence to the  tribunal  recorded
    at paragraphs 369 and 372.

48. As to the issue  of  documents,  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  the
    appellant did not have his CSID with him in the UK when he  arrived  as
    recorded in the screening interview. It is now the  position  from  the
    most recent CPIN Iraq: internal relocation, civil documentation returns
    version 11.0 June 2020 at paragraph 2.6.16 that it is  highly  unlikely
    that an individual would be able  to  obtain  a  CSID  from  the  Iraqi
    embassy while in the UK. Instead a person would need  to  apply  for  a
    registration document (1957) and then apply for an INID upon return  to
    their local CSA office in Iraq.

49. Ms Cleghorn submitted that the judge considered whether the appellant's
    mother would be able to obtain the documents but reached the conclusion
    having  considered  paragraph  60  of  SMO  that  the  home  area   and
    governorate of Nineveh had been razed to the ground and that ISIS  were
    operating in that area and  that  many  had  fled  as  a  result.  This
    paragraph demonstrated that it would be unlikely that  the  appellant's
    mother remained in Makhmour and that  in  the  light  of  the  security
    situation the reality is that she would not have taken  documents  with
    her. She submitted that it was not known if the appellant's mother  was
    living as an IDP given the mass displacement are set out in SMO.

50. Ms Cleghorn submitted that the issue turned on  whether  the  appellant
    was in contact with his mother and whether she had documents or not and
    that the  judge  had  given  a  thorough  decision  and  therefore  the
    respondent's  grounds  were  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision. The judge had been aware of his previous negative credibility
    findings  and  referred  back  to  them  before  reaching  his  overall
    decision.

51. Mr McVeety by way of response submitted that as the appellant's  mother
    had relocated away from the home area in line with the decision of  SMO
    it is likely that she would have taken her documents in order  for  her
    to access food and other services. The  judge  did  not  consider  that
    issue. The judge had failed to say why he could not get back  in  touch
    with her.

52. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.

Decision on error of law:

53. Dealing with the first ground, the advocates were in agreement that the
    FtTJ was in error by allowing the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.
    The appellant's claim had been advanced on the basis of  the  appellant
    being a potential victim of an honour crime and as such a member  of  a
    particular social group and it was  for  this  reason  that  the  claim
    engaged the U.K.'s obligations under the 1951 Convention.  However  for
    the reasons set out at paragraphs [40 - 49]  (which  are  unchallenged)
    the FtTJ rejected the appellant's account that he would be at  risk  of
    harm in his home area of Makhmour on the basis that he  claimed,  which
    arose from his relationship with a woman. It must follow that his claim
    under the Refugee Convention must fail on that basis.

54. The FtTJ appeared to allow the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds  on
    the basis that the appellant would suffer persecution or  serious  harm
    in making the journey from Baghdad to his home area without having  the
    necessary documentation that would be necessary  (  at  [58]-[60]).  At
    [61] the FtTJ also found that in the absence of a valid  CSID  card  he
    would be at risk of  persecution,  serious  harm,  or  article  3  ill-
    treatment in making the journey from Baghdad to  the  appellant's  home
    area and therefore it would also be a breach of articles 2 and 3 of the
    ECHR.

55. It is therefore common ground between the advocates that  in  light  of
    his factual findings and his rejection of the appellant's account,  the
    FtTJ had no basis upon which to allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

56. However the error is not material if  on  his  analysis,  or  the  same
    analysis,  the  FtTJ  was  entitled  to  allow  the  appeal  either  on
    humanitarian protection grounds or on Article 3 grounds.

57. This is because paragraph [317] of SMO states as follows:

         "317.       The starting point for our consideration must  be  the
         respondent's repetition, at [150] of her  closing  submissions,  of
         her concession in previous cases that 'it remains the position that
         a person returning to Iraq without either family  connections  able
         to assist him, or the means to obtain a CSID, may  be  at  risk  of
         enduring conditions contrary to Article 3 ECHR'.  This  section  of
         our decision is therefore principally relevant to those who have or
         are able to obtain a CSID (or INID) within  a  reasonable  time  or
         have family  members  from  whom  they  can  secure  assistance  or
         support."


58. When looking at the FtTJ's decision and his  analysis  of  the  country
    materials and SMO, he  did  not  allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of
    feasibility of  return  but  based  his  decision  on  the  appellant's
    inability to access an essential document, namely a CSID or INID. There
    is no dispute that the previous and current CG decisions refer  to  the
    importance of being in possession such a document to enable its  holder
    to access services, to obtain support and employment and to be able  to
    find accommodation and therefore is essential to life  in  Iraq  (  see
    paragraph 337 of SMO).

59. As to the ground  where  it  is  suggested  that  the  appellant  could
    redocument himself in the UK, Mr McVeety did not seek to  advance  that
    ground in the light of the evidence which the FtTJ was provided with at
    the hearing as set out in the respondents CPIN which  states  that  the
    embassy no longer issues CSID's  in  the  UK.  According  to  the  Home
    Office's own guidance, therefore,  it  is  therefore  accepted  by  the
    respondent that the Appellant is not able to redocument himself  whilst
    in the UK. The FtTJ was not in error in reaching that view despite  the
    respondent's grounds.

60. The only ground now advanced on behalf of the respondent  is  that  the
    judge gave insufficient reasons as to why a replacement CSID could  not
    be obtained or why the appellant could  not  resume  contact  with  his
    family members.

61. As Ms Cleghorn has stated upon entry to the UK the  appellant  did  not
    have any of the documents with him. The judge heard evidence  from  the
    appellant concerning the location of his documents previously and  what
    had happened to them and recorded  this  at  [54].  The  appellant  had
    stated in his interview that the agent who had facilitated  his  travel
    to the UK had taken both his CSID card and his INC  from  him.  In  his
    oral evidence he stated that he only had his CSID card with  him  which
    was taken off him when he was in Turkey. When referred to  the  earlier
    response in his interview, the judge recorded his evidence as "somewhat
    vague" and that he was not sure that he had his INC with him,  but  the
    document had been taken of him in Turkey and was unsure  about  whether
    his CSID and INC had been removed as it was done in  a  sudden  manner.
    The FtTJ then recorded that  the  appellant  changed  his  evidence  by
    stating that both documents were  taken  from  him,  both  having  been
    inside an  envelope  together.  The  judge  therefore  found  that  the
    appellant's  evidence  in  this  respect  was  "vague  and  lacking  in
    credibility".

62. As Mr McVeety submitted, it is open to a judge to accept some parts  of
    the appellant's evidence and the fact that the judge rejected his  core
    account of events in Iraq does not necessarily mean that other evidence
    should be discounted on that basis. What is important  is  whether  the
    judge gave adequate reasons for reaching the conclusion he did  on  the
    other issue of family contact.

63. The issue as to contact with the family was relevant to  the  issue  of
    documentation. The judge addressed this issue at paragraphs  [55]-[57].
    The appellant's evidence was that the last time he had had contact with
    his mother was in March 2018 and he had lost  contact  with  her  since
    that date. At [55] the appellant's account was that the call  had  been
    facilitated by his former employer and that she was  residing  in  Goma
    shin.

64. Whilst the FtTJ did not accept that  she  had  left  the  area  due  to
    threats made from the woman's family (the  judge  having  rejected  the
    appellant's core account on that), the FtTJ considered  that  the  real
    reason for leaving the family home was as a result of the conditions in
    her home village as set out in the country information and recorded  in
    the country guidance decision of SMO at paragraph 60.  As  Ms  Cleghorn
    submits, the country information concerning  the  area  demonstrated  a
    renewed presence of ISIS in the area and evidence of sporadic  attacks.
    Dr Fatah's evidence to the tribunal was  that  a  security  vacuum  had
    developed in the area with a vast increase in  the  number  of  attacks
    (and see paragraph 259 of SMO).  Similarly  the  evidence  recorded  at
    paragraph 69 from EASO was that the presence of ISIS  exerted  a  great
    deal of physical and psychological pressure on those in  the  area  and
    that there had been an  abandonment  of  populated  villages,  repeated
    raids, and destruction of agricultural products and infrastructure, and
    that civilians could not rely on the security services for protection.

65. In the light of that evidence the  FtTJ  stated  that  the  appellant's
    claim loss of contact with family members was plausible.

66. The point made by Mr McVeety is that the appellant was able to  contact
    his mother after she left her home, and the judge gave no reasons as to
    why the appellant could not have re-established contact with her again.

67. Having read the decision I am satisfied that the judge did address this
    at [57] and gave adequate reasons for reaching his  decision.  Contrary
    to the respondent's submissions, the  judge  reminded  himself  of  his
    previous adverse finding concerning the evidence  about  the  CSID  but
    that even in the light of  that  finding  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had lost contact with  his  family  because  the  appellant's
    evidence of the conditions in the area and the circumstances  in  which
    he had last had contact with his mother in 2018 which was supported  by
    the country materials which he again referred to at [57].

68. The judge's reasoning was that in light of the  security  situation  in
    Makhmour (also described in SMO at paragraph 369 and 372  (  summarised
    by the UT at paragraph 259) in terms  of  mass  displacement  and  that
    governorate  of  Ninewa  had  been  "bombed  the  ground"),  that   the
    appellant's account was plausible that he had been unable  to  maintain
    contact with his  mother  and  his  employer.  The  way  in  which  the
    appellant had contacted his mother in  March  2018  had  been  via  his
    employer and not directly. The judge therefore reached the  finding  as
    to the appellant having lost contact with his family based on what  was
    known about the last location of the appellant's family member, and the
    employer alongside the displacement and the length  of  time  since  he
    last had contact which was not  direct  contact,  but  via  his  former
    employer in March 2018.

69. Neither advocate expressly referred to Goma shin but on the map  it  is
    not far from Makhmour which the FtTJ found was  part of  the  "disputed
    area" ( see findings at [53]) and consistent with the  UT's  assessment
    at paragraph 259 of SMO where they adopted the  evidence  of  Dr  Fatah
    about Makhmour.

70. The grounds are advanced on a very narrow basis, and in reality  it  is
    whether the judge gave adequate reasons for finding that the  appellant
    was not in contact with his mother. I am satisfied that  the  FtTJ  did
    give adequate reasons for accepting the plausibility of the appellant's
    account. Whilst the judge did not find  the  core  of  the  appellant's
    account to be credible and found the  appellant's  evidence  concerning
    how the CSID was taken at [54] to be vague,, the judge was entitled  to
    reflect on these previous findings, and he expressly did so at [57] but
    reached a different view on the issue  of  loss  of  contact  with  his
    family. The finding was based on the country  materials  which  he  had
    identified and was consistent with  the  conditions  described  by  the
    appellant and supported the  view  that  the  appellant's  account  was
    credible that he had lost contact with them.

71. The FtTJ considered the issue on the basis of the appellant's return to
    Baghdad. The appellant as a former resident of Iraq as opposed  to  the
    IKR, will be returned to Baghdad. The position  of  the  respondent  is
    that for this appellant the only destination  for  an  enforced  return
    would be to Baghdad. The Appellant would be returned  to  Baghdad,  not
    the KRI. As set out at 4.2.1 of the June 2020 CPIN,


      "There are international flights to Erbil International Airport (EBL)
      and Sulaymaniyah International Airport (ISU). However, it should be
      noted that all enforced returns are to Baghdad and that only those
      willing to return voluntarily can travel directly to the KRI."

72. Therefore the question of documentation  was  relevant  to  that  issue
    also. The FtTJ considered the circumstances for the appellant on return
    without a CSID/INID and therefore at risk of  treatment  in  breach  of
    Article 3 if he seeks to travel from Baghdad. In this  context,  it  is
    common ground that he would arrive without any form  of  documentation,
    having not been able to obtain it in the  United  Kingdom.  He  has  no
    contact with any family.

73. An appellant without any documentation would remain at the airport  and
    not be able to travel to Baghdad as such a  journey  would  entail  him
    passing through several checkpoints (see SMO cited above).

74. It is clear that the judge should have allowed the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 15(b) of the Qualification Directive and Art 3 of the ECHR on
    the basis that he was at risk of  serious  harm  falling  within  those
    provisions if he were returned to Iraq  without  a  CSID.  In SMO  and
    Others, the Upper Tribunal expressed the following view in relation  to
    a person who lacked a CSID or the more recent Iraqi  National  Identity
    Card as summarised at paragraph 11 of the headnote:

    "As a general matter, it is necessary for an individual to have one  of
    these two documents in order to live and  travel  within  Iraq  without
    encountering treatment or conditions which are contrary to Art 3  ECHR.
    Many of the checkpoints in the country are manned by Shia  militia  who
    are not controlled by the GOI and are unlikely to permit an  individual
    without a CSID or an INID to pass."

75. The FtTJ considered the  circumstances  for  the  appellant  on  return
    without a CSID/INID and therefore at risk of  treatment  in  breach  of
    Article 3 if he seeks to travel from Baghdad.

76. In SMO, paragraph 425 provides:

"The CSID is being replaced with a new  biometric  Iraqi  National  Identity
Card - the INID.  As a general matter, it is necessary for an individual  to
have one of these two documents in order to  live  and  travel  within  Iraq
without encountering treatment or conditions which are contrary  to  Article
3 ECHR.   Many of the checkpoints in the country are manned by Shia  militia
who are not controlled by the GOI and are unlikely to permit  an  individual
without a CSID  or  an  INID  to  pass.   A  valid  Iraqi  passport  is  not
recognised as acceptable proof of identity for internal travel.

77. An appellant without any documentation would remain at the airport  and
    not be able to travel to Baghdad as such a  journey  would  entail  him
    passing through several checkpoints (see SMO cited above).

78. As to obtaining a CSID from Baghdad, an individual returnee who is  not
    from Baghdad, which is the position of this appellant, is not likely to
    be able to obtain a replacement document or to do so  in  a  reasonable
    time. The central archive and the facilities for IDP's are  not  likely
    to provide assistance for an undocumented returnee. The appellant would
    not be able to board a domestic flight beyond Baghdad  or  to  the  IKR
    without either a CSID or INID or invalid passport.

79. The grounds do not challenge the above assessment of the FtTJ which  he
    set out at paragraphs [59]-[60]. When set against his finding that  the
    appellant was not in contact with his  family  relatives,  the  factual
    assessment of the FtTJ is that the appellant could not be provided with
    support from his family members or obtain any replacement documents. It
    must follow that in the event that he has no access to a CSID, and that
    he is not able to obtain a replacement in the UK, I am  satisfied  that
    as the Upper Tribunal said in SMO, and as  the  FtTJ  found,  that  his
    return  to  Iraq  would  be  in  breach  of  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.
    Consequently whilst the FtTJ was  clearly  in  error  in  allowing  the
    appeal on asylum grounds, he  was  entitled  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    Article 3 grounds.

80. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should  be
    set aside because of an error of law in allowing the appeal on  Refugee
    Convention  grounds,  but  also  that  I  should  remake  the  decision
    consistently with the judge's conclusions  and  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.



Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and the decision is set aside; the appeal  is  re-made  as
follows: the appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection  grounds  (Article
15 (b) and under  the  Immigration  Rules,  and    human  rights  grounds  (
Article 3).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed
                                Date:  15/7 / 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
