
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02856/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th July 2016                             |On 19th July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal deputy judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Ibrahim Isse
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Murphy, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  against  the  decision  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Petherbridge) in which it allowed the Respondent's appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  him  asylum  and  to  make  a
    deportation order against him under Section 32(5) of  the  Borders  Act
    2007.

 2. Although the Secretary of State brings this appeal,  for  the  sake  of
    clarity, I shall refer to the parties as they were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal; the Secretary of State as the Respondent and Ibrahim Isse  as
    the Appellant.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of  Somalia  (born  8th  August  1967).   He
    entered the UK in 1991 and was given  leave  to  remain  exceptionally.
    That leave expired in June 1997. He never sought any  other  leave  and
    therefore has remained here without leave since 1997.

 4. In 1999 he married his wife, a Somali national who subsequently  became
    a British citizen.  There are three children of the  marriage,  all  of
    whom are British citizens and who are now aged  12,  13  and  15  years
    respectively.

 5. On 3rd May 2012 the Appellant was convicted of an offence of conspiracy
    to defraud and sentenced to a term of imprisonment of fourteen  months.
    Following that conviction, the  Respondent  made  a  deportation  order
    against the Appellant dated 24th April 2015.

 6. The Appellant appealed the making of the deportation order and  claimed
    he could not return to Somalia on protection grounds on account of  his
    clan membership and that the exceptions to paragraph 399(a) and (b)  of
    the Immigration Rules applied, in that it would be unduly harsh on  his
    wife and children if he  were  to  be  deported.  It  has  always  been
    accepted by the Respondent that it would be unduly harsh to expect  the
    Appellant's wife and children to relocate to Somalia.

The FtT Hearing

 7. The First-tier Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant's  claim  to  need
    international protection, was not founded.  So far as that part of  the
    appeal is concerned, there is no challenge  to  those  conclusions  and
    accordingly I see no reason  to  disturb  the  findings  made  in  that
    respect.  The FtT  however  did  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8, ECHR private life considerations concluding it would  appear
    that the appellant mat the exceptions to paragraph 399(a) and (b).

Permission to Appeal

 8. The Respondent sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds seeking permission asserted that the FtT had  given  inadequate
    reasons for finding that the Appellant met the exception in  paragraphs
    399(a) and 399(b).

 9. Permission was granted in brief terms simply saying a material error of
    law is identified by the grounds, inadequate reasons having been  given
    for findings made.

Error of Law Hearing

10. Mr Walker for the Respondent relied on the grounds  seeking  permission
    and said that the  decision,  so  far  as  the  deportation  issue  was
    concerned, was one where the judge had failed to give any  identifiable
    reasons for the conclusions he had made.  This  rendered  the  decision
    unsustainable and that part of the decision  therefore  should  be  set
    aside and remade.

11. Mr Murphy argued that when the decision is read as a whole, it sets out
    and gives adequate reasons for the findings which the judge  made.   He
    said the judge referred to the evidence before him at [8]  and  to  the
    chronology at [12].  The judge considered whether the  Appellant  could
    be said to be at least "sharing responsibility" for the three  children
    and by tying that into [63] had arrived  at  a  sustainable  conclusion
    that it would be unduly harsh upon them to have to  remain  in  the  UK
    without the Appellant.  The decision should stand.

Consideration

12. I find I disagree with Mr Murphy's submissions.  I  find  the  decision
    concerning the deportation aspect must be set aside and remade.  Having
    reserved my decision, I now give  my  reasons.   Whilst  I  accept  the
    argument that reasons only have to be adequate, in the sense that brief
    reasons will suffice I find that in this decision, the reasoning is  so
    scant as to make it unclear whether the judge has turned  his  mind  to
    the issues in front of him.  A significant part of this  appeal  turned
    on  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  three   children.   The
    Appellant's claim amounts to saying that he 'shares' the care of  them.
    The Appellant's wife however would remain in the UK as  the  children's
    primary carer.  At [57] the judge says that the evidence  is  that  the
    Appellant and his wife 'share'  responsibility  for  the  children  but
    gives no discernible reasoning for that analysis, because he goes on to
    accept in the same paragraph that the Appellant's wife works at best 24
    hours a week and not during the school holidays.  He then says at  [63]
    I find that in the light of the circumstances of the Appellant at least
    sharing responsibility for looking after his children who are at an all
    important part of their education that it would be  unduly  harsh  upon
    them to have to remain in the United  Kingdom  without  the  Appellant.
    That is a broad sweep assertion and I can find  no  reasoning  to  show
    clearly why the circumstances alluded to amount to "unduly harsh" ones.



13. Likewise at [69] the judge simply states that he finds that  there  are
    very compelling circumstances that the Appellant should not be deported
    and then failed to give a reasoned justification  for  that  assertion.
    Indeed my impression of a lack of analysis  justifying  conclusions  is
    reinforced at [71] where the judge sums up by saying that this is 'just
    one of those cases where there are compelling  circumstances  to  allow
    the appellant to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  notwithstanding  the
    automatic deportation provision'. That, I find, is  not  sufficient  or
    adequate reasoning in a case of this type.

14. I find therefore that the decision so far as the Section 23(5)  element
    is concerned must be set aside and remade.   I  restate  here  that  no
    challenge was raised on the asylum protection issue and I see no reason
    to disturb the findings on that part of the decision.

15. Both representatives were in agreement that should I find an  error  of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision making, then the  appropriate
    course would be to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.  I agree with that course.   Full  and
    properly reasoned findings of fact need to be made in the light of  the
    oral and documentary evidence available. I direct that that the  matter
    is remitted to that Tribunal (not Judge Petherbridge) accordingly.

16. The findings of fact in relation to the  Appellant's  asylum/protection
    claim are preserved.  There is no reason  to  disturb  those  findings.
    Fresh findings of fact will  need  to  be  made  only  on  whether  the
    consequences of deportation in the Appellant's  case  would  result  in
    unduly harsh consequences for the Appellant's children and partner.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which is dated 26th April  2016
is set aside.  I direct that the  appeal  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to remake the decision (not Judge Petherbridge).

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed    C E Roberts                                 Date          19  July
2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
