

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/02484/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11th of January 2018                    |On 5th of February 2018        |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                              MRS SARAH MAHMOOD
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ali of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born  on  15th  of  March  1997.  She
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent  dated  24th  of  February
    2017 to refuse to grant  her  international  protection.  The  Appellant
    claimed to be a refugee on the ground of her membership of a  particular
    social group, namely a lone female with  no  family  support  and  being
    someone at  risk  of  destitution.  Alternatively,  she  claimed  to  be
    entitled to humanitarian protection under Article 15(c) of the  European
    Union Directive 2004/83/C. Her appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Gribble sitting at Birmingham on 25th of  July  2017.  The
    Respondent appealed with leave against that decision and for the reasons
    which I have set out below I have set the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    aside. Further I have proceeded to remake the decision and  I  therefore
    continue to refer to the parties as they were known  at  first  instance
    for the sake of convenience.

The Appellant's Case

 2. The Appellant's case was summarised by the Judge at [5] to  [7]  of  the
    determination. The Appellant had married her husband with  her  family's
    approval. He was from Iraq initially but had been in the United  Kingdom
    for many years and was now a British citizen. On their marriage he moved
    to Iraq to live with her although the plan was for the couple to move to
    the United Kingdom at some  point.  The  Appellant  gave  birth  to  the
    couple's first child a daughter in 2014. During the pregnancy  with  her
    2nd child her  father  and  her  husband's  father,  who  were  business
    partners, began having problems. She was asked by her father to  divorce
    her husband in order to create problems for the Appellant and  ruin  her
    life. Her father and her husband's father had had a fall out over money.
    Her father told her to separate from her husband or he the father  would
    make the Appellant abort her unborn baby.


 3. The couple's first child A, was living with her husband's family at  the
    time but the Appellant's father came to her house and removed the  child
    in or about March or April 2016  when  her  husband  was  at  work.  The
    Appellant did not tell her father she was pregnant with  her  2nd  child
    until 5 or 6 months of the pregnancy had elapsed. Her husband  left  for
    the United Kingdom because he did not want to divorce the Appellant  and
    because he hoped the problem would settle. He did not take the Appellant
    or the couple's child  with  him  because  the  Appellant's  father  had
    imprisoned the Appellant in the father's house. The Appellant's  in-laws
    were very supportive but could not help the Appellant because everything
    was under her father's control. These problems were not reported to  the
    police because they would not have intervened but would have  viewed  it
    as a family problem.


 4. The Appellant contacted her husband's cousin who told the Appellant that
    the Appellant's husband had  gone  to  United  Kingdom.  She  asked  her
    husband's cousin to help her get to the United Kingdom and he  made  the
    necessary arrangements. The  journey  took  5  to  6  days.  The  cousin
    collected her from her father's home but only her grandmother  knew  she
    was leaving and she managed to  escape  without  her  mother  or  sister
    finding out. She had no chance to collect her daughter because questions
    would have been asked. She  did  not  use  passport  and  left  her  own
    passport in Iraq. She did not have her husband's number  on  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom although her husband  and  his  cousin  had  been  in
    contact on Facebook.


 5.  The Appellant relied on a report from a country expert, Ms Julia Guest.
    Ms Guest was asked to consider the risk to the Appellant  on  return  to
    Baghdad, the general  security  situation,  the  availability  of  state
    protection connecting the Appellant's profile  to  the  region  and  any
    relevant comments on the refusal letter. Ms Guest's report accepted  the
    Appellant's account of being at risk due  to  honour-based  violence  as
    plausible and said that she could not return to her home  area.  Due  to
    age and gender it was unlikely the Appellant would be able to find a job
    in any part of Iraq and would be at a high risk of  becoming  destitute.
    The situation in the area between Baghdad and Kirkuk was highly unstable
    and unsafe. The Appellant would be at great risk of kidnapping and would
    not be able to relocate to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (the IKR).


 6. The Respondent did not accept the Appellant's  credibility  finding  the
    Appellant's account vague  and  not  plausible.  On  the  one  hand  the
    Appellant had said she was not safe with her in-laws but  on  the  other
    hand had said  her  in-laws  had  not  received  any  threats  from  the
    Appellant's parents, only the Appellant and  her  husband  had  received
    threats.

The Decision at First Instance

 7.  At  [48]  the  Judge  noted  significant  inconsistencies  between  the
    Appellant's account and that of her husband both in  their  written  and
    oral evidence. The Judge did not find the Appellant's asylum claim to be
    credible at all. She found  that  the  Appellant  and  her  husband  had
    fabricated the account of risk  in  order  to  justify  the  Appellant's
    arrival in the United Kingdom in August  2016  when  the  Appellant  was
    heavily pregnant.


 8. At [49] and following the Judge gave her reasons for finding the account
    fabricated. There was no credible explanation for the Appellant's father
    threatening the Appellant directly and not his former business  partner.
    It simply made no sense to threaten his own daughter  for  a  matter  in
    which she was not involved at all and about which she could have had  no
    influence. The Appellant had been inconsistent about whether her father-
    in-law had been threatened at all, with her oral evidence being that  he
    was but the account in the asylum interview being that he was not.


 9.  The Appellant's husband in oral evidence had said that his  father  had
    been threatened with something but again this was  not  consistent  with
    the initial account from the Appellant. There were other inconsistencies
    too. Neither the Appellant nor her husband gave a consistent response to
    the actual nature of the business their respective fathers were involved
    in, whether it was importing goods or simply buying and selling them. It
    was wholly implausible the Appellant would not know something  at  least
    of her father and her father-in-law's business bearing in mind that  she
    lived with her father for 16 years then  lived  with  her  father-in-law
    then lived with her husband who would also be expected to know.


10. The account  of  how  the  Appellant  came  to  leave  Iraq  was  wholly
    contradicted by her husband's version of his  involvement.  The  husband
    had denied any responsibility for the arrangements  when  the  Appellant
    said he was fully involved and had helped to pay for  the  journey.  The
    Judge found it reasonably likely that the Appellant and her husband  had
    agreed that he would say he was not involved to protect himself  and  to
    place responsibility on his cousin. The account that the  Appellant  had
    no means of contacting her husband was simply not  credible  if  he  had
    been involved in the arrangements. There was no evidence to support  the
    claim from either the Appellant's father-in-law or her husband's  cousin
    which could reasonably have been expected to be given. She rejected  the
    explanation for the absence of this evidence that the Appellant and  her
    husband had not thought about this aspect of  the  case.  Both  were  in
    contact with people in Iraq very regularly and there was no satisfactory
    reason why a letter or statement  could  not  have  been  provided  from
    either the father-in-law or the cousin.


11. The Appellant and her husband knew they could not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules within a reasonable time after  his  return  to
    the United Kingdom in June 2016 and made a plan accordingly due  to  the
    Appellant's pregnancy. Even to the lower standard  of  proof  the  Judge
    could not accept the account  of  risk  and  potential  death  as  being
    reasonably likely to be true. The couple had avoided meeting the  strict
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. The Appellant was not in fear  of
    her father and there was no feud. She wished to jump the queue and  took
    a risk her daughter would be safe in the meantime  in  Kirkuk  with  her
    grandparents until a passport could be arranged. The Appellant could not
    be a refugee on account of the membership of a particular social group.


12. The Judge then went on to  consider  the  Article  15(c)  risk  at  [55]
    onwards. The Judge noted that the country expert, Ms Guest, had accepted
    the Appellant's claims as  plausible  and  evaluated  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant on the basis that the Appellant would have no family to return
    to. By contrast  the  Judge  had  found  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
    fabricated but she approached the expert's report on the basis that  the
    Appellant would not be returning to Baghdad  as  a  lone  woman  without
    family support but rather as a woman with either a passport or a laisser
    passer and CSID.


13. Kirkuk was still a contested area and the Judge  considered  what  risks
    the Appellant might face upon return to Baghdad. The Appellant's husband
    was free to accompany her to Baghdad if he wished. He had a passport and
    he could go with his wife to Baghdad and ensure she transited from there
    to the IKR. As she had documents including the CSID she would be able to
    transit to Erbil by air and gain access to the IKR. She might  not  even
    have to leave Baghdad airport. She would be accompanied by her husband.


14. The question was whether it would be unduly harsh for the  Appellant  to
    move to the IKR. Citing the case of Januzi [2006] UKHL 5  the  test  was
    whether the Appellant would be able to live  a  relatively  normal  life
    without undue hardships. The Appellant was a healthy young woman who had
    no work history and whose family  were  in  Kirkuk,  apparently  without
    problems. Employment opportunities for women in the IKR were low and for
    low skilled woman even lower with an economic crisis underway due to the
    sheer number of internally displaced persons (IDP). At  [61]  the  Judge
    concluded her determination with the words "I agree  with  [Ms  Guest's]
    conclusion at paragraph 35 that  given  the  Appellant's  age,  lack  of
    skills and gender she is likely to find herself in an IDP  camp  in  the
    IKR. Conditions there would be unduly harsh and would breach Article 3".
    She allowed the appeal.


The Onward Appeal

15. The Respondent appealed against that decision  arguing  that  the  Judge
    had failed to take  into  account  a  material  factor  in  finding  the
    Appellant would be at risk of having to go to an IDP camp this was  that
    the Appellant was not in fear of her father and there was no  feud.  The
    Appellant would not therefore be returning to Iraq as a lone female. The
    Judge accepted that the Appellant had family in Iraq who she was clearly
    in contact with. The Judge had failed to consider  why  the  Appellant's
    family would be unable or unwilling to provide support for  her  as  the
    Appellant's daughter was living in safety in  Kirkuk  and  had  been  so
    since 2014.


16. The application for permission to  appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Gillespie  on  27  October  2017.  In
    granting permission to appeal he found it arguable  that  there  was  an
    unresolved conflict in the determination. This was between  the  finding
    of the Judge rejecting the asylum claim (based on an alleged fear of  an
    honour killing) and the finding that despite having supportive family in
    Iraq and that her husband could accompany her  the  Appellant  would  be
    likely to be displaced and suffer inhumane privation in an IDP camp.

The Hearing Before Me

17. At the hearing before me to  determine  whether  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the determination the Presenting Officer relied  on  the
    grounds arguing  that  the  Judge's  findings  were  contradictory.  The
    Appellant had a CSID and would be able to transit via Erbil.


18. For the Appellant, Counsel relied on a skeleton argument which had  been
    filed at the Tribunal on the day of the hearing. This  argued  that  the
    Judge set out relevant aspects of the Appellant's case  in  the  correct
    context having addressed the Respondent's country policy information and
    the recent Court of Appeal decision in AA Iraq [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  The
    Judge recognised that  Kirkuk  was  a  contested  area  and  the  agreed
    position was that the Appellant would be returned to Baghdad from  where
    she would be expected to return to her home area.


19. The expert instructed by the Appellant had noted at paragraph 35 of  her
    report that due to the Appellant's age and lack of employment experience
    in general it was highly unlikely she would gain employment in any  part
    of Iraq due to the current situation  with  IDPs  and  refugees  in  the
    region. There  was  a  very  high  chance  the  Appellant  would  become
    destitute and a high risk of abuse including rape if she was not able to
    return to her family or her husband's family. The  Judge's  findings  on
    other matters were not the answer to the issue of  internal  relocation.
    The Judge was entitled to accept the expert's report and she had taken a
    balanced approach  towards  it.  This  was  demonstrated  by  the  Judge
    departing  from  the  expert's  view  as  to  the  plausibility  of  the
    Appellant's subjective  claim.  The  Judge  was  not  required  to  give
    detailed reasons but sufficient reasons which she did give.


20. In oral submissions Counsel argued  that  the  Judge  had  set  out  the
    guidance which was annexed to AA Iraq. She had looked  at  the  personal
    history of the Appellant who had no work history. The Judge was aware of
    country conditions. I raised with Counsel the argument that the expert's
    report was based on an acceptance of the  Appellant's  credibility  (see
    the reference cited in the skeleton argument that the Appellant  was  at
    risk if she was not (my emphasis) able to return to her family). Counsel
    replied that family considerations were not the only ones. There  was  a
    risk of violence because of the existence of an armed conflict.


21. The Presenting Officer reiterated that the Appellant was not at risk  on
    return and could be accompanied by her United Kingdom  citizen  husband.
    The expert's report was based on a wrong premise, that the Appellant had
    no family  to  return  to.  In  conclusion  for  the  Appellant  Counsel
    reiterated that the Judge  had  properly  looked  at  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant upon return to Baghdad.

The Error of Law

22. The Judge rejected a substantial part of the Appellant's case which  was
    that she had fallen out with her family and would be at risk  from  them
    upon return. On the contrary the Judge found the Appellant  was  not  in
    fear of her father and there was no family feud. In  travelling  to  the
    United Kingdom and making an asylum application the Appellant was simply
    jumping the queue and taking a risk that her daughter  could  remain  in
    Kirkuk until the Appellant acquired status and could bring the  daughter
    to the United Kingdom. The difficulty with her case which relied heavily
    on Ms Guest's report was that the report was based on an  acceptance  of
    the Appellant's claim that she had  no  family  to  rely  upon  in  Iraq
    because of the family feud.


23. As a result, the Judge did not adequately explain how she got  from  the
    position that the Appellant's claim for  asylum  lacked  credibility  to
    establishing that the  Appellant  was  nevertheless  at  risk  generally
    because of the adverse country conditions. If  the  Appellant  could  be
    supported by her family that would as the Respondent pointed out make  a
    substantial difference to the assessment of  risk.  The  Judge  did  not
    factor that into her determination and as a result the losing party  (in
    this case the Respondent) was left in the situation where they  did  not
    understand why they had lost. That was a clear  material  error  of  law
    relating to the core of the claim and I  therefore  set  the  First-tier
    decision aside. I canvassed with the parties during the hearing that  if
    I was to find a material error of law whether it would be appropriate to
    proceed to remake the decision as there was no challenge to the findings
    of fact made by the Judge at first instance. There was  no  disagreement
    with that course of action and I am therefore in a position  to  proceed
    to remake the decision in this case.


Findings

24. The Judge cited the background material quite  extensively  at  [20]  of
    the determination including the most recent guidance given by the  Court
    of Appeal in AA Iraq. This noted that in Kirkuk  there  was  substantial
    grounds for believing that any civilian returned  there,  faced  a  real
    risk of being subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious
    harm within the scope of Article 15  (c)  solely  on  account  of  their
    presence   there.   Decision-makers   should   assess   the   individual
    characteristics of the person claiming humanitarian protection in  order
    to ascertain whether those characteristics were  such  as  to  put  that
    person at a real risk of harm under Article 15 (c). The return of former
    residents and all other Iraqis would be to Baghdad which was  where  the
    Appellant would be returned.


25. The Iraqi authorities would allow an Iraqi National to enter Iraqi  only
    if they were in possession of a current or  expired  Iraqi  passport  or
    laisser passer. This Appellant had that latter  document.  The  guidance
    continues that regardless of the feasibility of the  Appellant's  return
    it would be necessary to decide whether the Appellant had a CSID. Again,
    this Appellant has one. That document is required  in  order  to  access
    financial  assistance  from  the  authorities,  employment,   education,
    housing and medical treatment.  Where  an  Appellant  demonstrates  that
    there are no family or other members likely to be able to provide  means
    of support to them they were likely to face a real risk  of  destitution
    amounting to serious harm.


26. That was the basis of the expert's report in  this  case.  However,  the
    Judge found the Appellant did  have  family  and  other  member  members
    likely to provide her with means of support. They were in  fact  already
    doing so by assisting the Appellant by  looking  after  the  Appellant's
    daughter. The guidance goes on to deal with situations where  there  are
    problems obtaining a CS ID but this is not relevant to  this  Appellant.
    As a general matter it would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  a
    person from a contested area such as Kirkuk to relocate to Baghdad.  The
    factors to be considered in deciding whether relocation is unduly  harsh
    are whether the Appellant has a CSID which this Appellant  has,  whether
    she has family members or friends in Baghdad  able  to  accommodate  her
    (she has family in Kirkuk) and whether she is a lone female (she has  an
    Iraqi born husband).


27. The Judge's cogent findings very clearly established that the  Appellant
    was not a lone female and would not  be  returning  as  a  lone  female.
    Further the Appellant could be joined by her husband who  was  of  Iraqi
    heritage and would be able to assist her. The IKR was virtually violence
    free and there was no Article 15 (c) risk there.  An  Iraqi  citizen  of
    Kurdish ethnicity such as the Appellant would be able  to  obtain  entry
    for 10 days as a visitor and then could renew this entry permission  for
    a further 10 days. There  was  no  evidence  that  the  IKR  authorities
    proactively removed Kurds whose permits had come to an end.  Whether  an
    Appellant could reasonably be expected  to  avoid  any  potential  undue
    harshness in Baghdad by travelling to the IKR would be  fact  sensitive.
    It was likely to involve an assessment of  the  practicality  of  travel
    from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Erbil by air), the likelihood of the
    Appellant securing  employment  in  the  IKR  and  the  availability  of
    assistance from family and friends.  In  this  case  as  the  Respondent
    pointed out the Appellant would be able to travel to Erbil by air and as
    the Judge found there would be  assistance  available  from  family  and
    friends.


28. On the findings of the Judge it was clear that the Appellant  was  in  a
    much stronger position upon return to Iraq than  many  other  applicants
    for international protection of Kurdish ethnicity. It is not for  me  to
    speculate on whether that prompted the Appellant to put forward  a  weak
    claim for asylum that was disbelieved by the Judge  at  first  instance.
    There is no doubt that the Judge gave cogent reasons  for  her  findings
    that there was no family feud and that the Appellant faced no risk  from
    her father. It was also clear that the Judge  gave  cogent  reasons  for
    finding that the Appellant's daughter was being adequately cared for  by
    the Appellant's family.


29. In  those  circumstances  given  that  the  Appellant  had  the  correct
    documentation and could rely on family support upon return  supplemented
    by her husband accompanying her if he so wished, meant that there was no
    risk to the Appellant which engaged either  the  Refugee  Convention  or
    Article 15(c). The expert's report does not assist the Appellant in this
    case as she predicated that report on the assumption that the  Appellant
    was returning as a lone female. In the light of the country guidance  if
    that were the factual situation the Appellant would have a significantly
    stronger case but that is not the factual matrix in  this  case  and  it
    does not appear that the expert's report was written  on  an  "even  if"
    basis, that even if the Appellant could not make out the  facts  of  her
    case that nevertheless conditions in Iraq  were  so  bad  the  Appellant
    would still be  at  risk.  The  expert's  report  was  thus  of  limited
    assistance to the Tribunal.


30. The risk categories are  carefully  delineated  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    country guidance case and supplemented by the Court of Appeal  decision.
    This Appellant does not  come  within  those  risk  categories.  As  the
    guidance makes clear it is important to consider the personal profile of
    the applicant. The weaker the elements  of  the  personal  profile,  the
    stronger must be the risk from generalised violence. In  this  case  the
    Appellant has virtually no indicators of  risk  based  on  her  personal
    profile and she would be able to pass safely through Baghdad airport and
    from there to Erbil. In those circumstances I find  that  the  Appellant
    cannot establish a claim for international protection and I dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    claim.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I remake the decision  by  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse to grant
    international protection

Appellant's appeal dismissed


I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 31st of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 31st of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


