
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02579/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th October 2017                         |On 11th December 2017         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     PPN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mannan, Counsel instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                      (RESUMED HEARING-FINAL DECISION)

1.     An anonymity direction  has  previously  been  made  and  that  shall
    remain.

2.    On 8 September 2017, I had considered the appellant's application  for
    an appeal against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  had
    concluded there was a material error of law. I had ordered  that  there
    be a resumed hearing.  I had made directions to ensure that  this  case
    would be ready for hearing.  Those directions included the following:

   1) There should be a resumed hearing at the Upper Tribunal before me;


    (2)    The appellant shall file and serve a bundle of documents for use
         at the hearing that should include any background material which is
         relied upon and which must be highlighted,  either  in  a  separate
         document with page numbers or by way of underlining;


    (3)    The appellant shall file and serve a witness statement from each
         witness that he seeks to rely upon and which will witness statement
         shall then stand as the evidence-in-chief; and


    (4)    The appellant shall file and serve a skeleton argument.


    All of those documents were to be provided 21 days before the  hearing,
    and I had also ordered that the Secretary of State was  to  reply  with
    any background material highlighted in  the  same  way,  along  with  a
    skeleton argument, if relied upon, seven days before the  hearing.  The
    Appellant has not complied with those directions.

3.    Mr Walker, a Senior Presenting Officer, sent a letter to the  Tribunal
    under cover on 20 October 2017 stating that he had not received an  up-
    to-date bundle or skeleton argument in readiness for the  hearing  from
    the appellant. Then yesterday afternoon there was a fax  from  Linga  &
    Co, Legal Advisers, where it was said in part as follows:-

      "... we find it imperative to point out that our  client  has  not  at
         all been co-operative with  us  in  respect  of  the  hearing.   In
         addition, he has failed to put us in funds to deal with the  matter
         and represent him at tomorrow's  hearing.   Despite  this,  we  are
         still acting for him in the interest of justice.  Also, we  do  not
         wish to rely  on  any  additional  document.   We  place  our  sole
         reliance upon the trial bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.

       We  are  positively  certain  that  the  Respondent  has  always  had
         possession and sight of the  said  bundle,  as  we  had  previously
         posted the same to her.  As such, the  issue  of  preparing  a  new
         trial bundle does not even arise in the instant matter."

4.    I checked with Mr  Mannan  to  make  sure  that  the  documents  being
    referred to by the appellant's solicitors were the  ones  that  I  had.
    The documents include a bundle going from page 1 to page 166, with  the
    last item being a country report and a supplementary bundle going  from
    page 1 to page 42 which ends with a report as  well.   Mr  Mannan  said
    that insofar as the case is concerned in relation to the risk on return
    the appellant would be at risk  on  return  to  the  Philippines,  that
    although time  was  given  to  the  appellant's  solicitors  to  gather
    evidence the letter from the appellant's solicitors made it clear  that
    there was no such evidence.  Mr  Mannan  said  he  had  looked  at  the
    background material and that it had occurred to  him  that  insofar  as
    these issues are concerned the picture  was  sketchy  and  he  said  he
    appreciated there was no firm evidence from the appellant to  show  the
    appellant suffered persecution, but he  said  his  case  was  that  the
    position was that it was mixed.   He  said  the  appellant  may  suffer
    persecution but  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  pinpoint  anything
    specific, so all the material was in the public domain.  He said  there
    was discrimination in all  fields  and  that  there  are  a  number  of
    recommendations and he said he noted however that  there  were  various
    laws in place, and he said he  accepted  that  in  many  parts  of  the
    Philippines gay sex is an accepted part of life.  He said he will leave
    it to me to make the decision.

5.    He said in relation to the Secretary of State's application to  adduce
    new evidence in respect of an interview that the appellant had had,  he
    objected to that and I made it clear that I was not going to permit the
    new evidence provided by the Secretary of State in respect of what  may
    or may not have been said by the appellant sometime ago in relation  to
    his family in the Philippines.  In the end, Mr Mannan  said  it  was  a
    mixed picture,  but  whether  or  not  that  mixed  picture  meets  the
    threshold was the issue.  The picture was muddled and that was the best
    that could be said. He said with respect to his instructing solicitors,
    despite the failure to file any further  documentation  there  was  not
    much more that they would have been able to say, in any event, even  if
    they had complied with the directions.

6.    Ms Pettersen in her submissions  said  she  relied  on  the  US  State
    Department Report which had been highlighted.  She said the Philippines
    is not a country where everyone is at risk simply because they are  gay
    and she took me to various parts of the US State Department  Report  to
    show that the appellant would not be at risk.   She  also  referred  to
    parts of the appellant's bundle to show that those reports also  showed
    that there is no significant or sufficient risk.

7.    In reply Mr Mannan said  that  insofar  as  the  US  State  Department
    Report is concerned he said the position in relation to  discrimination
    was not so low that it could be  discounted.   It  was  very  close  to
    persecution itself.  There was an absence of applicable law and  policy
    in the Philippines.  There was  a  danger  of  allowing  the  state  to
    persecute individuals.  He said ultimately, he accepted the picture was
    not clear-cut.  He said however widespread discrimination  verged  onto
    persecution and said he appreciated that the appellant's side had  been
    given an opportunity to put the evidence in, but he invited me to  look
    at the wealth of reports and to come to my decision.

8.    I had reserved my decision and I  remind  myself  of  the  appropriate
    legal tests namely as this is a protection claim then it is  the  lower
    standard of proof which applies. The test is not a high one. The burden
    remains on the Appellant, but it is also for the Respondent  to  assist
    the Tribunal to ensure that  no  pertinent  matters  are  left  out  of
    consideration. There has to be the most  anxious  scrutiny  applied  to
    this case as it is a protection claim. For that reason, I  shall  refer
    in  some  detail  to  the  background  material,  despite  the  limited
    submissions made to me on behalf of the Appellant.

9.    Insofar as the findings are concerned I made it clear at  paragraph  1
    of my error of law decision that when Judge Ford had granted permission
    she had set out as follows:-

      "The Appellant's claim to be gay was accepted as was his claim  to  be
         at risk of violence from  members  of  a  gang  from  whom  he  had
         borrowed money.  It was accepted that gang members  had  sought  to
         extort monies from him by violence and that they may have  referred
         to his sexual orientation by way of a form of blackmail.   But  his
         appeal was ultimately dismissed because of a lack  of  evidence  to
         show the gang was operating countrywide in the Philippines and that
         the State was  unwilling  to  provide  him  with  protection.   The
         Tribunal found that  the  Appellant  had  not  previously  suffered
         persecution by reason of his sexual orientation.  It  was  accepted
         that he had previously had relationships  with  two  women  in  the
         Philippines for social and cultural reasons ..."

10.   It is necessary therefore for me to consider the background  material.
     Within the appellant's bundle of  66  pages  there  is  a  psychiatric
    report at pages 60 to 80 and I have considered that psychiatric  report
    as an aid to  considering  the  claim  as  a  whole  and  in  terms  of
    credibility and the functioning of the appellant.  I  have  made  every
    allowance for the Appellant's functioning and I am well  aware  of  the
    duties in respect of vulnerable witnesses. The report is by  Dr  Gupta,
    he is a consultant psychiatrist, and the  report  is  dated  21st  July
    2016.  It refers to  quite  a  significant  history  of  the  appellant
    including going back to the  appellant  recollecting  the  relationship
    with his grandparents when he was only just 12, the relationships  with
    his mother,  uncle  and  others.   It  deals  with  his  education  and
    training, and there is an important section at page 66 which deals with
    significant sexual relationships as a child.  Indeed,  it  goes  on  to
    explain what the appellant's travels had been, including when he  lived
    in Saudi Arabia for a couple of years.

11.   In the end it is said in the report that once  the  asylum  claim  was
    dismissed,  the  appellant  has  been  experiencing  an   increase   in
    perceptions of anxiety and it was said at page 75  that  the  appellant
    was suffering symptoms  of  a  mental  illness  related  to  a  chronic
    psychological stress with comorbid symptoms  of  a  mixed  anxiety  and
    depressive disorder trauma  related  to  experiences  he  has  endured,
    appears to result in a reduced resilience and the associated stress  of
    his asylum application being rejected may have precipitated his  mental
    health problems.  Recommendations are  then  made  within  that  report
    which I have taken into account.

12.   There is then a background report at page 84 of that  bundle  entitled
    "Being LGBT in Asia", a Philippines country report.  It is said that it
    is a participatory review and an  analysis  of  the  legal  and  social
    environment for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender individuals  and
    civil society.  It is from 2014.  The pages which are relied upon  have
    already been highlighted but I have taken the whole of that report into
    account including in respect of the  section  at  page  93  sub-heading
    "History and Overview of LGBT Rights in the Philippines" which says  in
    part as follows:-

      "Same-sex activity is  not  criminalised  and  sexual  orientation  is
         mentioned in various laws and the most important issue in terms  of
         law is considered the lack of an anti-discrimination bill"

    and then it says:-


         "Contrast social attitudes towards LGBT  people  are  complex  with
         signs of acceptance, particularly among the young but questions  of
         whether the acceptance is based on  LGBT  Filipinos  conforming  to
         stereotypes  and  occupational  niches.   At  the  same  time  LGBT
         Filipinos are still being murdered with 28 LGBT related killings in
         the first half of 2011.   There  is  some  LGBT  representation  on
         television and other electronic media.  Religion plays a major role
         in the lives of Filipinos with the strong influences of  the  Roman
         Catholic Church.  This affects LGBT people though a survey suggests
         Filipinos are generally accepting of LGBT people,  even  while  the
         church opposes anti-discrimination policies and sometimes seeks  to
         influence public policy in a negative way".

13.    At  page  94  under  the  sub-heading  of  "Current  Overview  -  the
    Protection of the Rights of LGBT People in the Philippines" it says:-

      "In educational institutions,  it  was  found  that  LGBT  people  are
         subject to discrimination, bullying and abuse under  the  guise  of
         academic freedom which allows educational  institutions  to  create
         their own policies.  Regarding health, HIV is the primary challenge
         that confronts gay men, other  MSM  and  transgender  women.   LGBT
         individuals face challenges in employment, both  on  an  individual
         level  and  as  members  of  a  community  that   is   subject   to
         discrimination and abuse.  Discussions of family  affairs  and  the
         dialogue relate to both LGBT persons of  family  members  and  LGBT
         persons with family, including partnerships and children.  Examples
         were given of the need to protect LGBT youths  from  discrimination
         and abuse and for different Philippine  institutions  to  be  SOGI-
         sensitive  in  order  to  support  LGBT  family  members.   In  the
         Philippines LGBT persons do not have the right to marry someone  of
         the same sex.  Adoption is allowed by a single LGBT person but  not
         by two people who identify as a  domestic  couple.   The  realm  of
         religion for LGBT people in the Philippines  was  discussed  above,
         noting the strong influence of the Roman Catholic Church which  can
         contribute  to  discrimination.   At   the   same   time   dialogue
         participants are heartened  by  the  growing  number  of  LGBT  led
         churches and case studies describe  the  gathering  of  faith-based
         organisations in June 2013 on HIV and  stigma  and  discrimination.
         Mainstream media is criticised in the way that it  stereotypes  gay
         men and limits representation of lesbians and  transgender  people.
         In the political realm, the LGBT political  party  Ang  Ladlad  has
         been unsuccessful to date in winning a seat in  congress.   Because
         of this  the  representation  of  LGBT  issues  is  often  made  by
         heterosexual  allies.    Some   local   successes   include   anti-
         discrimination  ordinances  and  a  gay  rights  desk  at  a  local
         Government unit".

14.   At page 1 of 3 under the sub-heading of "New Millennium" in the  2000s
    more LGBT organisations were formed to serve specific  needs  including
    sexual health, particularly HIV, psychological support,  representation
    at  sport  events,  religious  and  spiritual   needs   and   political
    representation.  However, the efforts of these organisations started to
    overlap each other.  Various forms of media for and by LGBT people  and
    programmes  from  mainstream  media  specifically  targeting  the  LGBT
    community also started service in  the  2000s.   A  major  organisation
    formed this century was the LGBT political party Ang Ladlad  which  was
    founded by Remoto (one of the editors of the Ladlad  anthology)  on  21
    September 2003.  He had intended to represent LGBT Filipinos by winning
    a seat in the Philippine congress through the party  list  system.   By
    mid 2013 the number of LGBT organisations from all over the Philippines
    and  included  human  rights  advocacy  in  their  platforms   numbered
    approximately 100.

15.   Then at page 106 under the sub-heading of "Overview of LGBT Rights  in
    the Philippines" it says under sub-heading of "Laws":-

      "Non-commercial private same-sex activity  between  consenting  adults
         is not criminalised in the Philippines.  The age of consent is  set
         at 18, although contact with minors not under 18 is  considered  an
         offence if the minor consents to the act for  money,  gain  or  any
         forms of remuneration".

16.   Then at page  108,  in  the  absence  of  national  legislation,  some
    ordinances in local Governments mandate protection from  discrimination
    on the basis of  SOGI;  and  at  page  110  under  the  sub-heading  of
    "Cultural and Social Attitudes" it is said:-

         "The Pure Research Centre conducted a survey from 2 March to 1  May
         2013 in 39 countries with 37,653 respondents.  This  survey  showed
         that 73% of the Filipino respondents said that homosexuality should
         be accepted by society with an  even  higher  percentage,  78%,  of
         younger respondents in the 18 to 29 age group".

      and then page 113 there are now  religious  denominations  established
    and/or headed by members of the LGBT community in the Philippines.

17.   In the supplementary bundle the report at page 17 from The World  Post
    with the headline "The dangers of being  LGBT  intolerant  Philippines"
    notes on page 19:-

       "Homosexuality  is  not  criminalised  and   a   handful   of   anti-
         discrimination ordinances both fall  specifically  protecting  LGBT
         persons and more broadly worded decrees have been  passed  in  some
         cities including Quezon City, Cebu City and  Davo  City  in  recent
         years.  In another win in 2009 the Philippines lifted  a  ban  that
         had prevented openly gay and bisexual men and women from serving in
         the military.  Without  the  right  to  marry  LGBT  Filipinos  are
         treated unequally  in  a  whole  host  of  ways  in  comparison  to
         heterosexual  married  couples  according  to  UNDBP/USAID  report.
         There remains no clear rights for either  spouse  and  same-sex  or
         transgender heterosexual partnerships regarding hospital and prison
         visitations, making medical and burial decisions, transfer of joint
         properties, custody  of  children,  insurance  benefits  and  other
         privileges according to married and unmarried opposite sex couples"

      The report continues.  In addition, while  a  single  LGBT  person  is
    allowed to adopt a child  in  the  Philippines,  two  LGBT  people  who
    identify as a domestic couple cannot.

18.   In  the  report  human  rights  violations  on  the  basis  of  sexual
    orientation submitted for consideration at the 106 session of the Human
    Rights Committee for the fourth periodic review of the  Philippines  of
    2012 it is noted that state acts of violence against LGBT Filipinos  is
    pervasive, police raids on LGBT  venues  occur  regularly  and  without
    warrants.   During  these  raids  police  regularly  illegally  detain,
    verbally abuse and  extort  money  from  clients.   There  are  glaring
    instances of discrimination, marginalisation and  exclusion  of  sexual
    orientation.   The  state  has  also  been  responsible  for   inciting
    homophobia.  At page 35 of that report homophobia towards LGBT  persons
    are very present within Filipino society creating a  dangerous  climate
    of hostility towards LGBT people.  LGBT youths are  often  targeted  by
    parents who upon discovering their child's  sexual  orientation  and/or
    gender identity feel compelled to inflict physical harm on them out  of
    frustration, or an attempt to prevent their child from expressing their
    sexuality.

19.   In the Philippines, Human Rights Report  provided  by  the  respondent
    which is from March 2017 and, therefore relatively recent, which I have
    taken into account in full, it is said in part as follows  at  page  34
    under the heading "Acts of Violence, Discrimination  and  Other  Abuses
    based on sexual orientation and gender identity":-

      "National laws neither criminalise consensual same-sexual contact  nor
         prohibit discrimination based  on  sexual  orientation  and  gender
         identity.  Nineteen cities or municipalities have some  version  of
         an  anti-discrimination  ordinance  that  protects  lesbian,   gay,
         bisexual  and  transgender  but  not  intersex  rights.   Officials
         prohibit transgender individuals from self-reporting  their  gender
         on passport applications.  Authorities print the  sex  assigned  at
         birth as reported on the certificate of birth in  the  individual's
         passport.  NGOs reported that the discrepancy between a transgender
         person's outward appearance and their identification documents  has
         led  to  difficulties  for  transgender  persons,  particularly  at
         airports.  Transgender travellers have been harassed and even  off-
         loaded for not appearing to match their official  gender  identity.
         NGOs seeking to protect lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender  and
         intersex individuals from discrimination and  abuse  criticise  the
         Government for the absence of  applicable  law  and  policy.   NGOs
         reported  instances  of  discrimination  and  abuse  including   in
         employment, education, healthcare, housing and social services. The
         Rainbow Rights Project, a group  of  lawyers  advocating  for  LGBT
         rights claim that LGBT  human  rights  defenders,  particularly  in
         Muslim areas, experience pressure  from  community  authorities  to
         conduct  their  activities  less  openly  because   of   increasing
         religious radicalisation.  It is said the law prohibits  discretion
         against persons with HIV, AIDS and provides for  basic  and  social
         services  for  them.   However,  there  is  anecdotal  evidence  of
         discrimination against HIV AIDS patients".

20.   At page 41 it was said  that  the  Government  had  limited  means  to
    assist persons with disabilities in finding employment and the cost  of
    filing a law suit or lack of effective administrative means of  redress
    limited the recourse of such persons were protective where  prospective
    employers violated their rights.  In February, an HIV  positive  worker
    won a case against his employer for having been fired as  a  result  of
    his HIV positive diagnosis.  The court ordered  the  individual  to  be
    reinstated and received  approximately  $12,774  in  damages  and  back
    wages.  Discrimination  in  employment  and  occupation  occurred  with
    respect to LGBTI persons.  A number of  LGBTI  organisations  submitted
    anecdotal  reports  of  discriminatory  practices  that  affected   the
    employment status of LGBTI individuals.  A 2014  UNDP  study  described
    cases of discrimination including the enforcement  of  rules,  policies
    and regulations that disadvantage LGBTI persons in the workplace.   For
    example, transgender women were told by recruitment officers that  they
    would only be hired if they presented themselves as  males  by  cutting
    their  hair  short,  dressing  in   men's   clothes   and   acting   in
    stereotypically masculine ways.  An LGBTI NGO also received reports  of
    other direct discrimination including denial of employment,  offers  of
    less favourable employment terms and conditions,  social  exclusion  in
    the workplace, denial of the same opportunities for  equally  qualified
    colleagues, harassment and abuse.

21.   I have also taken into account the appellant's witness statement,  his
    mother's witness statement and his  sister's  witness  statement.    To
    quote from his witness statement the appellant said as follows at  page
    9:-

         "57.     All Filipinos look down upon homosexuality.  They  see  it
             as a crime.  Someone once threatened me saying that I'd rather
             die than to live as  people  in  the  Filipinos  don't  accept
             people like me.  I've been threatened in a similar way several
             times.  We have a close-knit community.  Gossip spreads like a
             bushfire.  After my initial .... the fact that I was  gay  was
             exposed to an extent.


         58.      After all the years and past incidents I'm  sure  everyone
             knows my reality back home. Even if I am reluctant to admit it
             openly there are instances like in 1998/1999 that  I  admitted
             it grudgingly because people keep  badgering  and  teasing  me
             about it.  I don't remember how and to who, but I have to  get
             away from the nuisance.  Mostly with my lady friends  when  we
             gossip and chatter about our male friends, it just  slips  out
             at times."

22.   Mr Mannan explained in his submissions that this was a case  based  in
    relation to the protection claim only, no Article 8 issues were  relied
    upon and there were no separate humanitarian protection  or  Article  3
    aspects that were raised before me.  However, I bear in mind the manner
    in which I have to consider the appellant's case against the background
    to the expert report which had been provided.  Of course, I am aware of
    the medical cases and the way in which  the  House  of  Lords  and  the
    European Court dealt with the case of N and the way in which the  Court
    of Appeal dealt with medical cases in GJ.  As I say, Mr Mannan advanced
    no separate case based on such issues in any event.

23.   As indicated in my error of law decision, I am aware of the  important
    decision of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2010] UKSC 3. I have specifically taken  into  account
    the judgments of Lord Hope and Lord Rodger at paragraphs 35 and 82.

24.   In my judgment it is quite clear that there will be no reason for  the
    Appellant to live discreetly. The background material shows, like  many
    parts of the world including here in the United Kingdom. that there  is
    a level of discrimination against gay persons. The fact that  there  is
    discrimination  does  not  mean  that  there  is  persecution  or   ill
    treatment. I have cited the background material in some detail in  this
    decision. It is quite clear to me that there is a relatively good level
    of acceptance of gay persons and that the Appellant  will  be  able  to
    live his life in the Philippines without  any  real  risk  to  him.  As
    discussed during the hearing, there is the availability of  permit-free
    travel across the country and so internal relocation away from  any  of
    the risks from the gangs will not be a difficulty for  this  Appellant.
    That was the retained finding previously in any  event  and  I  see  no
    reason to go behind it. Indeed no evidence or  submission  was  adduced
    that I should.  Moving within the country is a reasonable  option.  The
    Appellant is a relatively fit young man. He has been  industrious  here
    in the United Kingdom and will in my judgment will be  able  to  be  as
    industrious in the Philippines. I have noted his psychiatric background
    but in my judgment the availability of treatment in the Philippines, if
    he requires further treatment,  coupled with support  from  his  family
    and friends will be sufficient in my judgment.

25.   Discrimination is not the equivalent of  persecution.  That  is  clear
    from the case law, but I have  looked  carefully  to  see  if  in  this
    particular case whether with the  Appellant's  psychiatric  background,
    the previous findings, his sexuality and the background material  might
    place the Appellant at risk to the lower standard of proof.

26.   In the end the Appellant decided  not  to  give  evidence  before  me.
    Doing the best, I can with the  written  evidence  and  have  carefully
    considered the case law and background material, I conclude that  there
    is no sufficient basis upon which  the  appeal  can  be  allowed.   The
    Appellant will always be at risk of discrimination  as  the  background
    material shows. That is not the same as persecution  or  ill-treatment.
    The case law makes it clear that there has to be  something  much  more
    than discrimination to enable his claim to succeed. The Appellant  will
    be able to live freely and openly in the  Philippines  as  a  gay  man,
    despite that discrimination. All of the material shows that he will  be
    able to do so. The Appellant did not present any sufficient evidence to
    show he would not. His decision not to give oral evidence or to  comply
    with the directions to show otherwise fortifies me in my view.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed. A Mahmood                            28 10 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood



