
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02838/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 November 2016                          | On 9 December 2016           |


                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)


                                   Between

                                     TQN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Record, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14:  The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted at an earlier stage of the  proceedings,  however,
we find it appropriate to grant  anonymity  given  that  the  case  involves
protection issues.  Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal by TQN, a Vietnamese national born 15 December  1966.



2.   On 1 October 2014, the appellant applied successfully for a  six  month
    visit visa, sponsored by her daughter, whom she said she  was  visiting
    for two weeks.  She arrived in the UK on  1  November  2014,  stayed  a
    short time with her daughter in Birmingham, then went to stay with  her
    husband in Greenock, whom she had married in  2013  during  an  earlier
    visit.  Her visa expired in April 2015 but she stayed  on  beyond  this
    date.  She was arrested in July 2015.  She gave a false name  and  date
    of birth to the police, but subsequently gave the correct  information.
    She claimed asylum on 22 July 2015.

3.   The background to her claim for asylum was this: the  appellant  on  30
    October 2014 was raped by the Chief of Police in  the  area  which  she
    lived.  This followed upon  his  attempting  through  the  use  of  his
    position in the police to coerce her into having  a  relationship  with
    him.  Following this incident three warrants were issued by the  police
    demanding that she attend at a police station.  She fled Vietnam.   She
    feared further such mistreatment if she returned to Vietnam.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

4.   Four grounds of appeal were advanced on behalf of the appellant.

5.   The first ground was this: at paragraph  110  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    held that Article 3 ECHR was not engaged, although  it  accepted:  that
    the appellant had been raped by a police officer and that he had sought
    to use his position as a police officer to coerce  her  into  having  a
    relationship with him.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  also  accepted  that
    three summonses (but not warrants) had been issued to the appellant  to
    attend at a police station following upon the incident of rape.

6.   Counsel submitted that in holding that Article 3 was  not  engaged  the
    First-tier Tribunal  had  materially  erred  in  law.   Rape  had  been
    recognised by the ECHR as being a breach  of  Article  3,  in  Aydin  v
    Turkey 57/1996/676/866.  The court stated:

         "(c) The Commission

             78.   The  Commission  concluded  that  the  deliberate   ill-
                  treatment inflicted on her by being beaten,  being  placed
                  in a tyre and hosed with pressurised water, combined  with
                  the humiliation of  being  stripped  naked,  fell  clearly
                  within the scope of the prohibition  of  Article  3.   The
                  Commission also found that rape committed by  an  official
                  or person in authority on a detainee must be  regarded  as
                  treatment or punishment  of  an  especially  severe  kind.
                  Such an offence  struck  at  the  heart  of  the  victim's
                  physical and moral integrity and had to  be  characterised
                  as a particularly cruel form  of  ill-treatment  involving
                  acute physical and psychological suffering.

             79.  The Commission found that  the  applicant  had  been  the
                  victim of torture at the hands of officials  in  violation
                  of Article 3."

7.   Counsel accepted that the rape in the case of Aydin was on  a  detainee
    and was more severe than the rape in the instant case, however, it  was
    her position that in the circumstances of this case, where the rape was
    by a senior police officer, who had sought to use his position as such,
    in order to obtain a sexual relationship with the appellant,  what  had
    been said in Aydin was applicable to the circumstances of this case and
    accordingly the First-tier Tribunal should have held that Article 3 was
    engaged.

8.   Counsel went on to submit that in addition to  the  above,  the  police
    officer had continued to show interest in the appellant following  upon
    the incident of rape.  In particular he had used his official  position
    in order to continue that interest by having the three summonses issued
    to the appellant.  It was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal that  the
    background evidence showed that the appellant  would  not  be  able  to
    obtain recourse against the officer by reporting him  through  official
    channels.  These further factors supported her contention that  Article
    3 was engaged.

9.   Her second ground  of  appeal  related  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    consideration of the issue of relocation.  The First-tier Tribunal  had
    considered this although it was not a matter referred to in the refusal
    letter.  It had held  that  the  appellant  could  relocate  to  Hanoi.
    However, the First-tier Tribunal she submitted had failed to take  into
    account the following evidence: the appellant could be traced in  Hanoi
    by this police officer; the  police  officer  had  shown  a  persistent
    interest in her; it was accordingly likely in  the  circumstances  that
    she would be found.

10.  Thirdly with respect to the Article 8  assessment  she  submitted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had failed to carry out  a  proper  assessment.
    In development of that submission she argued first that it  had  failed
    to recognise that there was very little public interest in  having  the
    appellant leave the country.  She was in a happy  and  secure  marriage
    and was supported by her husband.  Moreover,  secondly  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to have regard to the effect on the appellant of having
    to return to Vietnam as a victim of rape.  In particular she  submitted
    that she would lose the support, which she had in  this  country,  from
    her husband and daughter.  It was  submitted  that  she  required  this
    support in order to deal with  the  traumatic  physical  and  emotional
    effects of the rape.

11.  Fourthly Counsel submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in
    law by failing to find the appellant was part of a social group.

12.  The appellant claimed the protection of the 1951 Convention on  account
    of being part of a social group.  A social group is defined as follows:

         "A particular social group is a group of persons who share a common
         characteristic other than their risk of being  persecuted,  or  who
         are perceived as a group by society.  The characteristic will often
         be one  which  is  innate,  unchangeable,  or  which  is  otherwise
         fundamental to identity, conscience or the exercise of one's  human
         rights."

13.  In the case of In re Acosta 1985 19 I and N 211  it  was  said  that  a
    social group for the purposes of the Convention was  one  distinguished
    by:

         "an immutable characteristic ... [a characteristic] that either  is
         beyond the  power  of  an  individual  to  change  or  that  is  so
         fundamental to his identity or conscience that it ought not  to  be
         required to be changed."

14.  In the instant case the appellant  is  a  victim  of  sexual  violence,
    which has created a fundamental change  to  the  appellant's  identify.
    She thought, that she would not be believed  and  was  a  victim  of  a
    violation to her  welfare  and  integrity,  which  is  and  has  become
    fundamental to her identity.

15.  In Islam v Secretary of State for the Home  Department,  Ex-parte  Shah
    [1999] 2 AC 629, women of Pakistan were recognised as a social  group.
    The 1951 Convention was set up to provide  protection  for  victims  of
    persecution.  It was submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    finding that the  appellant  could  not  claim  such  protection.   She
    submitted it should have found that the fundamental changes to a sexual
    victim's identity can  engage  the  protection  of  the  Convention  on
    account of being part of a social group.

Reply on Behalf of the Secretary of State

16.  It was firstly argued by Mr Clarke that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    dealt with the case as it was put before them.  He submitted that  what
    was put before the First-tier Tribunal was  materially  different  from
    the way that the case has been presented today.  It had been  presented
    before the First-tier Tribunal as a fear on return  of  the  police  in
    general not a particular police officer.  Given that was  the  way  the
    matter had been argued before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  had  made
    findings to the effect that there were no  repercussions  arising  from
    the summonses which were issued and that having regard to the  evidence
    in the round there was no danger to the appellant arising from  general
    police attention should she return to Vietnam.  This  was  a  view  the
    First-tier Tribunal was entitled to reach.

17.  It was his position that looking to all of the findings that the First-
    tier Tribunal was entitled to find that  there  was  no  engagement  of
    Article 3.

18.  With respect to relocation Mr Clarke referred to paragraph 109  of  the
    determination and argued that the findings  there  were  sufficient  to
    justify the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion on relocation.

19.  With respect to Article 8 his position was this: the assessment of  the
    Article 8 position was  a  careful  consideration  of  the  issues  and
    findings.  A proper proportionality  assessment  had  been  undertaken.
    There was nothing  unlawful  about  how  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    carried this out.

20.  Lastly with respect to the issue of being part of a  social  group  his
    position  was  a  short  one  and  was  this:   paragraph 105  of  the
    determination analysed the position properly and made a proper  finding
    regarding this issue.

Error of Law

21.  The First-tier Tribunal accepted: the appellant had  been  raped  by  a
    senior police officer; that this  officer  had  used  his  position  to
    coerce her into a relationship and when that was not successful he  had
    raped her; the appellant had not reported the rape as  there  would  be
    little prospect of securing redress; the police officer  had  continued
    his interest in the appellant after the rape and in particular had used
    his position as a police officer to issue her with three  summonses  to
    attend at a police station; and that if she returned to her village she
    may face unwanted attention from the officer (see: paragraphs  91,  93,
    94, 98, 100, 107, and 110 of the determination).  It also accepted that
    the objective evidence supported  the  appellant's  evidence  that  she
    would not be able to obtain redress (see: paragraphs 93, 107 and  108).



22.  Having accepted the above I am clearly of the opinion that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law in not holding that Article 3 was
    engaged.

23.  The circumstances in Aydin were somewhat different from  those  in  the
    instant case.  However, the general observations on the crime  of  rape
    made by the commission are  of  general  application.   Applying  those
    observations to the circumstances of this case it appears  to  me  that
    where a police officer has used his position to seek to coerce  someone
    into a relationship, where this has been  unsuccessful  he  then  rapes
    her, in the knowledge that the appellant would  not  be  able  to  seek
    redress for his behaviour and follows up the rape by using his position
    as a police officer to issue summonses to the appellant to appear at  a
    police station, that engages Article 3.

24.  With respect to the submissions made by Mr Clarke that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had dealt with a different case from that  presented  to  this
    Tribunal  I  do  not  find  that  submission  well-founded.   Both   at
    paragraphs 109 and 110 it is clear that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    looking at the issue of risk arising from the specific  police  officer
    who carried out the rape and are not looking at the  position  of  risk
    arising from the police in general.

25.  Turning to the issue of relocation I am satisfied that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has also materially erred in law.   It  failed  to  take  into
    account: the persistence of  this  police  officer's  interest  in  the
    appellant.  The appellant suffered a period of sexual harassment  which
    culminated in her being raped.  Even after that the police officer  did
    not lose interest in her.  He issued three summonses for her to  attend
    at the police station.  Nor does  the  First-tier  Tribunal  take  into
    account his position and powers  as  a  police  officer  and  thus  his
    ability to find the appellant should  she  move  to  Hanoi,  given  the
    system of house registration in Vietnam.  For these reasons  I  believe
    that the decision with respect to relocation cannot be sustained.

26.  With respect to the Article 8 assessment I  am  not  persuaded  by  the
    arguments put forward by Counsel.  I am of the view  that  this  was  a
    proper consideration of the Article 8 issue.

27.  The first factor founded on by the appellant's Counsel which  was  said
    to have  not  been  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  the
    difficulty which would be occasioned on her return to  Vietnam  by  the
    loss of the support  of  her  husband  and  daughter.   This  would  be
    particularly serious it was submitted where she had been  a  victim  of
    rape and was seeking to recover from the effects thereof.  However, the
    First-tier  Tribunal  made  findings  which  were  not  challenged   at
    paragraphs 113 and 114 which very much tend to downplay the  importance
    of the family life which had been established.  In these  circumstances
    it seems to me that the particular factor relied on by the  appellant's
    Counsel is not material.  I cannot hold  that  the  failure  to  attach
    weight to that factor was a material error of law.

28.  I also believe there is no merit in the contention of Counsel  for  the
    appellant that the assessment of the public interest by the  First-tier
    Tribunal was inadequate.  The finding made by it at paragraph 116  that
    the appellant gave false information to the police and for the  purpose
    of obtaining a visa and  in  addition  was  in  the  country  illegally
    entitled the First-tier Tribunal  to  attach  material  weight  to  the
    public interest.  I do not believe that it is sustainable  that  little
    or no public interest arose in those circumstances as was urged upon me
    by Counsel for the appellant.

29.  Lastly, I believe the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of the issue  of
    whether the appellant formed part of a social group  at  paragraph  105
    was a proper  one.   I  can  identify  no  error  of  law  within  that
    consideration.  The lack of any  objective  evidence  that  in  Vietnam
    persons who have been the subject of sexual  assault  form  a  distinct
    social group or that the appellant  would  be  treated  differently  in
    Vietnam as a result of  her  sexual  assault  entitled  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to reach its conclusion with respect to this issue.

Decision

30.  For the above reasons I hold that there was a  material  error  of  law
    with respect to the Article  3  issue  and  the  relocation  issue.   I
    accordingly sustain the appeal and set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.  I remit the case to  a  differently  constituted  First-tier
    Tribunal in order that the matter can be reheard.


Signed                                  Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

