
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/02073/2015
                                                               PA/02074/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st November 2016                 |On 1st December 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     F A
                                     S H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan of Counsel instructed by ILC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Myers made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 15th August 2016.



Background

 2. The appellants are a father and daughter, citizens of  Pakistan.   They
    entered the UK as visitors on 22nd October 2014 and claimed  asylum  on
    1st April 2015.

 3. The appellant claimed that he was a successful businessman from Jhelum.
     He donated land for a mosque to be built and  it  was  constructed  in
    2010.  In February/March 2014 fundamentalists from Tabligh Jammat began
    to try to take over the mosque and threatened  the  appellant  and  his
    family.  He was informed by a  friend  that  he  had  been  accused  of
    blasphemy in an  FIR  which  was  lodged  on  5th  October  2014.   The
    appellant was told that his life was in danger and, because the  family
    already had visas for the UK they decided to come here for  a  time  in
    the hope that  the  situation  would  resolve  itself.   Shortly  after
    arrival, he consulted solicitors who told him that he needed to  submit
    evidence in support of his claim.  He obtained two further FIRs.

 4. In December 2014 the appellant sent his wife and son back  to  Pakistan
    to try and bring about a resolution  of  the  situation  but  this  was
    unsuccessful, and she returned to the  UK.   On  20th  January  2015  a
    warrant was issued for the appellant's arrest.

 5. The judge found the appellant and his wife to be wholly credible.   She
    said that any inconsistencies in the evidence were minor  and  did  not
    detract from the central core of their  account.   She  accepted  their
    explanation  as  to  why  they  did  not  claim  asylum  at  the  first
    opportunity and she rejected the submission by the  Presenting  Officer
    that there was some underlying  motive  for  their  doing  so  such  as
    business failure.  She  concluded  that  it  was  improbable  that  the
    appellant would risk losing all his assets to come to the UK and  noted
    that the family had  made  frequent  visits  here  and  had  impeccable
    immigration histories.

 6. She considered the three FIRs which had been submitted.  Two  had  been
    accepted as being genuine by the Secretary of  State,  but  the  third,
    accusing them of blasphemy, had been found  to  be  false  following  a
    document verification check.  This was following a phone  call  to  the
    police  at  Jhelum.   The  judge  said  that  there  could  be  several
    explanations  for  the  police's  response  to  the  enquiry   by   the
    Immigration Liaison Officer, who had not been identified, and there was
    no copy of the police records used to show that the details on the  FIR
    were inconsistent.  She concluded that the  respondent  had  not  shown
    that the appellants had submitted a false document.  She concluded that
    the appellants had given a credible account  and  that  they  had  been
    accused of blasphemy in Pakistan.

 7. The judge then wrote as follows,

         "On their  own  evidence  the  appellants  were  able  to  stay  in
         Islamabad and leave the country without  any  trouble  because  the
         allegations against them were local to  Jhelum  and  there  was  no
         interest in them out of the area.  Furthermore  it  was  considered
         safe for Mrs H to return to Pakistan in December  although  not  to
         return to Jhelum.  It is now nearly two years since  the  blasphemy
         accusation was made against the appellants and no  indication  that
         the FIR is being actively pursued.  On  the  contrary,  the  update
         from the police dated 29/03/2016 suggests that the complainant  was
         aggrieved because nothing had been done about the initial complaint
         and  although  the   police   minute   it   states   that   further
         investigations and proceedings will  follow  there  is  nothing  to
         suggest any further action.  Pakistan is a vast country with a huge
         population and whilst I accept that it may  not  be  safe  for  the
         appellants to return to their home area, I do not find that it will
         be unduly harsh for them to return as a family to another area such
         as Islamabad.  The appellants are affluent and  although  they  may
         have no close relatives in other areas their evidence was that they
         had cousins and  influential  connections.   There  is  nothing  to
         suggest that they would have a high profile in another  urban  area
         or that their  case  has  received  nationwide  publicity.   In  my
         judgment the blasphemy charge has come about because  of  localised
         jealousy and those who have adverse interest in the appellants will
         not have the inclination or the resources to pursue them out of the
         area."

 8. On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to make a finding on a material fact, namely the warrant  of
    arrest which had been issued in January 2015.  She made no reference to
    it in the determination at all, which  was  material  because  she  had
    failed to consider that the appellants were likely  to  be  treated  as
    absconders  and  listed  on  exit  control  lists  monitored   by   the
    immigration service at port.  Further, since they are persons for  whom
    criminal proceedings are extant, internal flight will not generally  be
    available for them.  (AK and SK (Christians: risk) Pakistan  CG  [2014]
    UKUT 569).

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pedro on 28th September  2016
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

The Hearing

11. Mr Diwncyz accepted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  not  making  any
    reference to the warrant but submitted that it was  immaterial  because
    even if she had considered it, she  would  have  dismissed  the  appeal
    since the warrant made no difference to the viability of relocation.

12. Mr O'Ryan submitted that the decision should be  remade  on  the  basis
    that the judge's credibility findings had  not  been  challenged.  They
    should stand. It followed that  there was  no reason not to accept that
    the arrest warrant was genuine.  If it was, the appellants would be  at
    risk on return to Pakistan as absconders, having not complied with  the
    requirements  of  the  warrant  and  would  be  subject   to   criminal
    prosecution  under  the  blasphemy  laws,  and  thereby  at   risk   of
    persecution (AK and SK).

Findings and Conclusions

13. Clearly, the judge ought to have referred to the  arrest  warrant.  The
    appellant  disclosed  its  existence  of  the  arrest  warrant  at  his
    screening interview.  He was asked whether he was subject to an  arrest
    warrant and he said that he was.  He said that he did not know the date
    but he found out in February or March 2015.  He submitted copies to the
    interviewing officer.  He also made a reference to the warrant  in  his
    witness statement and at question 199 of his SEF interview when he  was
    asked who he feared if he was to return to Pakistan.  He replied,

         "Police, because of the arrest warrant has been issued against  me.
         That warrant is a non-bail warrant.  After my arrival when we  came
         here we didn't have any intention to claim asylum, we  didn't  know
         about asylum, after a few days I sent my  wife  back  to  Pakistan,
         tried to settle the matter with the help of money, to use money  to
         settle this."

14. The omission could  only  be  immaterial  if  it  was  not  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal. In this  case  it  plainly  could.
    Accordingly the judge erred in  law  in  failing  to  have  reagard  to
    relevant evidence. Her decision is set aside.

15. The appellant, having given oral evidence before the Immigration Judge,
    was found to be entirely credible by her.  Those  credibility  findings
    are unchallenged both by way of appeal  and  again  not  challenged  in
    submissions today.

16. I accept that there is no basis for concluding that the arrest  warrant
    is not a reliable document. It  refers  to  PPC.295/13,  which  is  the
    reference to blasphemy in the Pakistan Penal Code.

17. At paragraph 62 of AK and SK the Tribunal wrote,

         "The filing of an FIR does not however necessarily lead to  arrest.
         A police investigation is then required  and  according  to  recent
         amendments in the procedures, a senior officer must assess  whether
         the  charges  have  any  substance.   Once  a  report  is  prepared
         confirming the charges trial proceedings ensue.  If the police  are
         unable to arrest the accused, they may apply to the  courts  for  a
         warrant.  Failure to respond to a  warrant  means  the  accused  is
         classed as an absconder and is likely to  be  listed  on  the  exit
         control list monitored by the immigration service at the airports."

18. In AK and SK the Tribunal held at 6,

         "Non-state agents who use blasphemy  laws  against  Christians  are
         often motivated by spite, personal or business disputes,  arguments
         over land and property.  Certain political events may also  trigger
         such accusations.  A blasphemy allegation, without more,  will  not
         generally  be  enough  to  make  out  a  claim  under  the  Refugee
         Convention.   It  has  to  be  actively  followed  either  by   the
         authorities in the form of charges being brought or by those making
         the complaint.  If it is, or will be,  actively  pursued,  then  an
         applicant may be able to establish a real risk of home in the  home
         area and an insufficiency of state protection."

19. The Tribunal held, additionally, that where an individual is accused of
    blasphemy which is being seriously pursued,  there  is  in  general  no
    internal relocation alternative. Whilst the warrant itself is now  some
    21 months old, in the appellant's documents there is  an  excerpt  from
    the daily diary at the police station  in  the  City  of  Jhelum  which
    records a written application made on 29th  March  2016  on  behalf  of
    individuals seeking to take action against the appellants.

20. The appellant, on the findings of the original judge, had established a
    risk in his home area.  The existence of the  warrant  renders  him  at
    risk on the point of return. He is at risk on the  basis  that  he  has
    been accused of blasphemy and the charge is  being  seriously  pursued.
    Accordingly, the appellant has made out his  case  to  be  entitled  to
    international protection.



Notice of Decision

21. The original judge erred in law.   Her  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    decision is remade.  The appellants' appeals are allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 26 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
