
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02778/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On August 24, 2017                    |On September 4, 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                    [S D]
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gainsford, Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is an Afghan national.  The appellant is a minor  and  he
    entered this country in August 2016 after a journey of sixteen  months.
    He applied for asylum on September 6, 2016

 3. The respondent refused his asylum claim on March 7,  2017  but  granted
    him leave to remain until September 7, 2019 on  the  basis  he  was  an
    unaccompanied minor with no reception facilities available upon return.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on March 20, 2017 under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His  appeal
    came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Greasley  (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on April 20, 2017 and in a decision promulgated  on
    April 25, 2017 the Judge refused his appeal on all grounds.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision on  May  8,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-
    Hutchinson on May 18, 2017 but when those grounds were renewed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Finch on July 5, 2017.

 6. The respondent lodged a Rule 24 response dated July 20, 2017  in  which
    she opposed all grounds of appeal save for the argument that the  Judge
    had failed to properly consider or  give  reasons  for  dismissing  the
    humanitarian protection claim.

 7. The matter came before me on the above date.  The appellant was present
    and represented as set out above.

    Submissions

 8. Mr Gainsford adopted his grounds of appeal and submitted that the Judge
    had erred in a number of errors. In particular, he submitted:

      a) The Judge had wrongly drawn an adverse inference from the appellant
         not giving evidence. The representatives at the First-tier  Hearing
         dealt with the case on the basis the appellant was not required  to
         give evidence and with the case proceeding only on submissions.

      b) At paragraph [53] of the Judge's decision  the  Judge  applied  the
         wrong standard of proof. The correct  standard  of  proof  was  the
         lower standard of proof but the Judge applied a standard of "likely
         to be at risk" due to an association with his father which was  too
         high a  test.  Whilst  the  respondent  in  her  Rule  24  response
         suggested the Judge was merely quoting the expert it was clear from
         the decision that the Judge was referring to the  respondent's  own
         evidence and not that of the expert witness. The Judge  also  erred
         when considering the expert evidence  by  dismissing  the  expert's
         reasoned conclusions without giving reasons. Alternatively, if  the
         Judge concluded the appellant's father was a low-ranking member  of
         the military the country evidence demonstrated that  the  appellant
         would still be at risk albeit the risk would be lower than  if  his
         father was a high-ranking member.

      c) The appellant is a minor and he had no  family  to  return  to.  He
         therefore remained at risk of being groomed or recruited.

      d) The Judge was wrong to suggest that  because  he  remained  in  the
         country for five or six months that it would be safe in return.

 9. Mr Whitwell adopted the Rule 24 and during his oral submissions he made
    the following concessions:

      a) The Judge had not properly addressed article 15(c) but the Tribunal
         can remake this decision on the evidence currently before it.

      b) The respondent accepted he was an Afghan national  and  his  father
         had been targeted as claimed.

10. Mr Whitwell submitted:

      a) The Judge  was  entitled  to  make  an  adverse  finding  over  the
         appellant failing to give evidence because there remained an  issue
         over whether the appellant was of interest to the Taliban.

      b) Mr Whitwell argued  the  Judge  was  fully  aware  of  the  correct
         standard of proof as he properly set this out  in  paragraphs  [9],
         [51] and [52] of his decision.

      c) The Judge's findings in paragraphs [55] and [59] were open to  him.
         The fact the appellant could have been at risk in the past did  not
         mean he would be at risk in the future.

11. Having heard submissions I indicated to Mr  Gainsford  that  if  I  set
    aside the refugee decision then on any remaking  of  the  decision  the
    respondent may not agree to the case being dealt  with  on  submissions
    whereas if the case proceeded solely on article  15(c)  then  the  case
    could properly be dealt with on submissions only.

12. Mr Gainsford questioned why further evidence would be  required  and  I
    indicated to him that if he asked me to set aside the decision then  we
    went back to square one whether that be in this Tribunal or back in the
    First-tier. It was clear from Mr Whitwell's  submissions  that  if  the
    appellant did not  give  evidence  he  would  be  inviting  an  adverse
    inference.

13. Mr Gainsford asked for a short recess  to  take  instructions  on  this
    issue and after taking  instructions  he  indicated  that  he  was  not
    instructed to concede the refugee issue and he would be  asking  me  to
    consider firstly  whether  the  appellant's  appeal  on  article  15(c)
    grounds succeeded and if I found it did  not  then  he  invited  me  to
    consider the refugee grounds of appeal.

14. In view of the time spent on the hearing I reserved my decision.




    FINDINGS

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch.  She
    found the grounds arguable and today  I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives.

16. This was a claim brought by a fifteen-year-old claimant  who  made  his
    way to the United  Kingdom  passing  through  Pakistan,  Iran,  Turkey,
    Bulgaria, Serbia, Hungary, Austria, Italy, Germany and France.

17. The respondent accepted he was a minor and in her  refusal  letter  the
    respondent also accepted he was an Afghan national, his father had been
    threatened, it had not been possible to trace his family due to a  lack
    of resources and there  was  no  evidence  of  any  adequate  reception
    arrangements.

18. The respondent granted him leave to remain as  an  unaccompanied  minor
    but refused his claims for  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection.  The
    Judge upheld those decisions and a challenge is brought  against  those
    findings.

19. Five grounds of appeal were raised.  One  of  those  grounds  has  been
    conceded  by  the  respondent  namely  it  is  accepted   the   Judge's
    consideration of article 15(c) was inadequate bearing in mind  the  age
    of the appellant and his circumstances. The  Judge's  consideration  of
    article 15(c) can be found in paragraphs [66] to [69]. No  reasons  are
    given for refusing the application and the Judge does not refer to  the
    country guidance decision on AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00163 (IAC).

20. This leaves the remaining four grounds up for argument.

21. Ground One  centres  around  the  Judge's  apparent  finding  that  the
    appellant's failure  to  give  evidence  undermined  his  evidence.  In
    paragraph [57] of the Judge's decision the Judge wrote, "The  appellant
    has not given oral evidence at his hearing, where he  could  have  been
    questioned  about  this."  The  Judge  was  considering   whether   the
    appellant's family was still in Afghanistan and  in  deciding  that  he
    placed weight on the fact the appellant  had  not  given  evidence  and
    therefore did not make  himself  available  for  cross-examination.  In
    normal circumstances that would be a finding open to the Judge.

22. In SM (Iraq) 2004 UKIAT 00279 the Tribunal said-

         "We entirely endorse the  view  that  merely  not  giving  evidence
         cannot of itself be a factor tending to show that a person  is  not
         to be believed.  It is also, however, and equally  clearly,  not  a
         factor tending to show that the  person  is  to  be  believed.   If
         doubts have been raised about the credibility  or  plausibility  of
         certain evidence, and the facts related by that  evidence  are  not
         supported by other evidence, the position  may  be  that  the  fact
         finder remains in doubt if an appellant does  not  attend  to  give
         evidence.  The consequence of a fact finder's doubt is  or  may  be
         that the burden of proof is not discharged and so the party who has
         the burden of proof loses his case."

23. However, the  Judge  recorded  at  paragraph  [26]  of  Mr  Gainsford's
    submissions that the appellant would not be giving  evidence  and  that
    both representatives agreed that the appellant could ask  the  Tribunal
    to consider his latest statement of April  13,  2017  and  two  earlier
    statements. In closing  submissions,  the  respondent's  representative
    took no issue with the appellant not giving oral evidence.

24. As the Judge found the failure by the appellant  a  factor  undermining
    his credibility I find I am left with no option but to find Ground  One
    of the grounds of appeal is made out. Having  found  the  first  ground
    made out I find that this error  must  be  material  to  the  issue  of
    credibility and I set aside the Judge's decision both  on  humanitarian
    protection (for the reasons given above) and asylum.

25. The remaining grounds also go to the issue  of  whether  there  was  an
    error in law in respect of the appellant's claim for asylum  but  as  I
    have already found an error I see no reason to deliberate overt this.

26. At the hearing, I discussed what should happen to this  appeal  in  the
    event that the refugee claim was set aside.  Mr  Gainsford  effectively
    wanted me to remake the whole decision without hearing further evidence
    on the basis he was an unaccompanied male.

27. However, having read the Judge's decision I am satisfied  this  is  not
    open to me. As I indicated to Mr Gainsford if the appellant pursued his
    asylum appeal before me and I found in his favour I  would  have  asked
    the parties what evidence would be needed to remake this  decision.  Mt
    Whitwell made it clear he would want to cross-examine the appellant and
    it would then be up to Mr Gainsford to  decide  whether  the  appellant
    gave evidence. However, whereas  the  respondent  may  have  previously
    agreed to no oral evidence being given that was  now  clearly  not  the
    case.

28. It seems a finding will have to  be  made  about  the  availability  of
    family in Afghanistan and there is also the unresolved issue of whether
    the Taliban have an interest in the appellant.

29. In light of Part 3, Section 7.1 to 7.3  of  the  Practice  Statement  I
    direct the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

30. I do not intend to preserve any findings and the hearing  should  be  a
    full de novo hearing  but  the  next  Tribunal  should  note  that  the
    respondent has accepted (a) the appellant is an Afghan National and (b)
    his father was threatened.  These  concessions  can  be  found  in  the
    decision letter and should form part of any future deliberation.

    DECISION

31. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error  on  a  point  of  law.   I  remit  the  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection issues back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing.

Signed                              Date     26.08.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made because no fee was paid.


Signed                              Date     26.08.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
