
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02285/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams                   |                              |
|On 8 July 2021                                |On 27 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     KTM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Anthony instructed by Braitch Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity who was born on
    5 January 1989.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 15  May  2018  and
    claimed asylum.  He claimed to be at risk on  return  to  Iraq  because
    both he and his father were supporters of the Goran Party and had  been
    detained and ill-treated by the KDP.

 3. On 25 February 2020, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 11 January 2021, Judge Row dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 5. First, the judge made an adverse credibility finding and  rejected  the
    appellant's account that he and his father had been detained by the KDP
    because they were supporters of the Goran Party.  Secondly,  the  judge
    found that the appellant would not face treatment contrary to Art 3  of
    the ECHR (or be entitled to humanitarian protection)  as  he  would  be
    able to obtain a CSID in order to safely travel within Iraq on  return.
    Thirdly, the judge  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  to  humanitarian
    protection based upon Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive (Council
    Directive  2004/83/EC).   Finally,  the  judge   concluded   that   the
    appellant's return to Iraq would not breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    three grounds.  First, the  judge's  adverse  credibility  finding  was
    unsustainable in that the judge had wrongly relied  on  inconsistencies
    in the appellant's account given in  his  screening  interview,  asylum
    interview and witness statement.  Secondly, the judge, in finding  that
    the appellant had not lost contact with his family in Iraq, had  failed
    to give adequate reasons.  Finally, the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    concluding that the appellant would be able to obtain  a  CSID  at  the
    Iraqi Embassy in the UK prior to returning to Iraq.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Scott-Baker) on 22 February 2021.  Judge Scott-Baker considered it  was
    arguable that the judge had failed to follow the  country  guidance  in
    SMO & Others (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT
    00400 (IAC) in assessing whether the appellant could obtain a  CSID  at
    the Iraqi Embassy in London.

 8. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing before  me  at  the  Cardiff
    Civil Justice Centre on 8 July 2021.  I was present in court whilst  Ms
    Anthony, who represented the appellant, and Ms Aboni,  who  represented
    the Secretary of State, joined the hearing remotely by Microsoft Teams.





Submissions

 9. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Anthony submitted  that  the  judge  had
    made a number of positive  findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    credibility as set out in para 5(i)-(viii) of the  grounds  of  appeal:
    including that, he had made a genuine effort to substantiate his claim,
    he had provided all material factors at his  disposal,  there  were  no
    inconsistencies in a number of aspects of his account; and there was no
    external inconsistency between the appellant's  account  that  the  KDP
    (whom he feared) operated in Nineveh province where he lived.

10. Ms Anthony submitted that the judge had erred in law in  paras  43,  45
    and 47 of his decision.

11. First, at para 43, Ms Anthony submitted that the judge had  been  wrong
    to  rely  upon  an  apparent  inconsistency  between  the   appellant's
    screening interview and his subsequent  asylum  interview  and  witness
    statement.  The judge had been wrong to  rely  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had failed to mention that he had been arrested and  detained
    by the KDP in his screening interview.   The  appellant  had  explained
    that he had understood the question to be referring to whether  he  had
    been detained elsewhere other than in Iraq.  Ms Anthony relied upon the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in JA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 450 where the Court of Appeal had cautioned reliance upon  apparent
    inconsistencies in an interview  when,  as  in  the  instant  case,  no
    recording of the interview was available to check the accuracy  of  the
    written record.

12. Secondly, Ms Anthony submitted that the judge had erred in para  45  of
    his  determination  when  he  stated  that   there   were   significant
    discrepancies in the appellant's answers in his  asylum  interview  and
    witness statement as to the date when he was arrested, whether  it  was
    in 2010 or 2012.  Some of the answers (for example, questions  108  and
    109) related to the appellant joining the Goran Party rather than  when
    he was arrested and question 119 related to when his  father  had  been
    taken referring to "10th February" without reference to any year.

13. Thirdly, Ms Anthony submitted that in para 47 the judge had been  wrong
    to rely upon answers in the appellant's asylum interview that  led  him
    to conclude that the appellant had inconsistently said that he had been
    arrested when he was 15 or 17 years old when, if  it  was  in  2010  he
    would have been 21 years old.

14. Finally, the judge erred by failing to have regard to the expert report
    which supported, as plausible, his account of the  KDP's  treatment  of
    supporters of the Goran Party.

15. In response, Ms Aboni, on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  accepted
    that the judge had misunderstood the appellant's  asylum  interview  in
    para 47 of his decision because at question 142, Ms Aboni accepted, the
    appellant was talking about how old he was when his father  had  talked
    to him about the Goran Party rather than when he had been arrested.

16. However, Ms Aboni submitted that the judge's  remaining  reasons  based
    upon inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence were  sustainable  and
    sufficient to support the judge's  adverse  credibility  finding.   She
    submitted that  the  judge  had  properly  considered  the  appellant's
    explanation as to why he had not mentioned that he  had  been  arrested
    and detained in his screening interview.  Further, read as a whole,  it
    was clear that in his asylum interview the appellant was saying that he
    had joined the Goran Party in 2010 and had supported it for 15-20  days
    (see questions 72 and 75) and that, therefore, all  the  references  to
    the dates for the arrest of both himself and his father were  in  2010.
    Yet, in his screening interview he had said  that  he  had  joined  the
    party in 2012 for four months.  Likewise, in his witness statement  the
    appellant had said that he had joined in 2010  but  that  his  problems
    occurred in 2012 (see para 17).  Those were inconsistencies  which  the
    judge was entitled to rely upon and sustained his  adverse  credibility
    finding.

17. Further, as regards Ms Anthony's submission that the  judge  failed  to
    take into account the expert report which identified examples of  Goran
    Party supporters being mistreated,  the  judge  had  referred  to  this
    report at para 30.  But, Ms Aboni submitted, simply because there  were
    examples of Goran Party supporters being mistreated did not  mean  that
    the appellant and his father had been mistreated.  The judge had  given
    adequate reasons why that was not so.

18. Finally, as regards the challenge to the judge's finding in relation to
    the appellant obtaining a CSID to return to  Iraq,  Ms  Aboni  accepted
    that this aspect of the judge's decision was legally flawed  and  could
    not be sustained in the light of the CPIN, "Iraq: Internal  Relocation,
    Civil Documentation and Returns"  (June  2020)  which  stated  at  para
    2.6.16 that it was "highly unlikely that an individual would be able to
    obtain a CSID from the Iraqi  Embassy  while  in  the  UK".   Ms  Aboni
    accepted that the decision in relation to  redocumentation  had  to  be
    remade in respect of Art 3 and humanitarian  protection  and  that  the
    findings relating to that in paras 53  and  54  of  the  determination,
    including that the appellant was in contact with  his  family  in  Iraq
    could not stand.

Discussion

19. It is accepted that the judge's reasoning in para 47, which was part of
    his  reasoning  leading  to  his  adverse   credibility   finding,   is
    unsustainable.  There, the judge relied upon an  inconsistency  between
    the appellant's asylum interview where, the judge considered  that  the
    appellant had said at question 142 that he was 15 or 17 years old, when
    he was involved with the Goran Party and was arrested and that this was
    in 2010 when in fact he would have been 21  years  old.   As  Ms  Aboni
    conceded, it is plain that  at  question  142  the  appellant  was  not
    talking about the time he joined  the  Goran  Party  and  when  he  was
    arrested but rather when his  father  (self-evidently  earlier  in  his
    life) had talked to him about politics.

20. Ms Anthony submitted  that  that  error  in  itself  was  material  and
    sufficient to undermine the judge's adverse credibility finding even if
    her remaining arguments in relation to paras 43 and 45  were  not  made
    good.

21. I do not accept that submission and for the following reasons I  reject
    Ms Anthony's submission that the judge was not entitled  to  rely  upon
    the inconsistencies that he identified at paras 43-46.

22. I will deal first with para 43.  There, the judge said this:

         "43. The appellant did  not  mention  in  the  screening  interview
             having been arrested or detained by the KDP.  His  explanation
             is that he thought that the question referred  to  his  having
             been  detained  elsewhere  than  Iraq.   The  context  of  the
             question  would  indicate  otherwise.    The   appellant   had
             volunteered that he had been a supporter of  the  Goran  Party
             and that his father was  against  this.   I  accept  that  the
             screening interview is not meant to be a complete statement of
             the appellant's case.  However the fact that  his  father  was
             arrested, the appellant was arrested, and that he was detained
             and mistreated is something which might have been expected  to
             have been mentioned as a reason for his fear of  return,  even
             in a screening interview".

23. Ms Anthony placed reliance upon  what  was  said  in  JA  (Afghanistan)
    concerning the need for caution in relying  upon  what  is  said  in  a
    screening interview.  In that case, the Court of Appeal concluded  that
    simply because no recording of an  interview  was  available,  did  not
    render that interview inadmissible or one which could not  be  accorded
    significant weight.  However, at [24] Moore-Bick LJ (with whom  Gloster
    and Vos LJJ agreed) said this:

         "[The Tribunal] does, however, have an obligation to consider  with
         care how much weight is to be attached to it, having regard to  the
         circumstances in which it came into existence. That is particularly
         important when considering  the  significance  to  be  attached  to
         answers given in the course of an interview and  recorded  only  by
         the person asking questions on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.
         Such evidence may be entirely reliable, but there is obviously room
         for mistakes and misunderstandings,  even  when  the  person  being
         questioned  speaks  English  fluently.  The  possibility  of  error
         becomes greater when the  person  being  interviewed  requires  the
         services of an interpreter, particularly if the interpreter is  not
         physically present. It becomes greater still if  the  person  being
         interviewed is vulnerable  by  reason  of  age  or  infirmity.  The
         written word acquires a degree of certainty which the  spoken  word
         may not command. The "anxious scrutiny"  which  all  claimants  for
         asylum are entitled to expect begins with a  careful  consideration
         of the weight that should properly be attached to answers given  in
         their interviews. In the present case the decision-maker would need
         to bear in mind the  age  and  background  of  the  applicant,  his
         limited command of English and the circumstances  under  which  the
         initial interview and screening interview took place."

24. Of course, here the  appellant  did  not  contend  that  the  screening
    interview misrecorded what he had said.

25. So far as relevant at para 5.5 the appellant had said that  he  "was  a
    supporter of Goran Party (The Change) political party" and  "from  2012
    for 4 months, my father was against it".  At para  4.1,  the  appellant
    was asked to state "briefly" "all the reasons why you cannot return  to
    your home".  In response to that the appellant said this:

         "    I cannot return  back  to  Iraq  as  I  left  because  of  the
             fighting.  I cannot go back due to the fighting.

          Q.  Can you not return to a different area?

          A.  When this happened I went to Turkey, because of the threat  of
             ISIS in Kurdistan.

          Q.  Why were you affected by the fighting in particular?

          A.  Our area Shingar was under the control of ISIS, who  ran  away
             towards the mountains, then I phoned my brother and uncle,  we
             came down and was arrested by ISIS.

          Q.  For how long?

          A.  1 to 2 hours.  We were 12 cars, taken to a mosque to  try  and
             get us to convert to become Muslims.  After that the area  was
             bombarded by planes and the ISIS ran away so we  ran  away  as
             well".

26. Of course, in his asylum interview, the appellant's claim was that  his
    father was an active supporter of the Goran  Party  and  that  he  (the
    appellant) had been arrested by the KDP and  tortured  because  he  was
    also a supporter of the Goran Party in 2010 for 15 to  20  days.   This
    was not a case, therefore, where the appellant claimed that what he had
    said in his screening interview was misrecorded.  The caution envisaged
    in JA (Afghanistan), based upon there being no recording and  therefore
    verifiable transcript of his screening interview, was not engaged.

27. However, I accept that in taking into account an  omission  to  mention
    something relevant to his  claim,  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  judge
    nevertheless to exercise  caution  as  a  screening  interview  is  not
    intended to be an opportunity for an individual to give all the details
    of his claim.  In YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKIAT  00145,  the  IAT
    set out (at [19]) the purpose of a screening interview and the need for
    caution when relying upon omissions or inconsistencies arising from it:
         "19. When a person seeks asylum in the United Kingdom he is usually
         made the subject of a 'screening interview' (called, perhaps rather
         confusingly a "Statement of Evidence Form -  SEF  Screening-).  The
         purpose  of  that  is  to  establish  the  general  nature  of  the
         claimant's case so that the Home Office  official  can  decide  how
         best to process it. It is concerned with  the  country  of  origin,
         means of travel, circumstances of arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,
         preferred language and other matters that might help the  Secretary
         of State understand the case. Asylum seekers are still expected  to
         tell the truth and answers given in  screening  interviews  can  be
         compared fairly with answers given later. However,  it  has  to  be
         remembered that a screening interview is not done to  establish  in
         detail the reasons a person gives to support her claim for  asylum.
         It would not normally be appropriate for the Secretary of State  to
         ask supplementary questions or to entertain elaborate  answers  and
         an inaccurate summary by an  interviewing  officer  at  that  stage
         would be excusable. Further the screening  interview  may  well  be
         conducted when the asylum seeker is tired  after  a  long  journey.
         These things have to be considered when any inconsistencies between
         the screening interview and the later case are evaluated."

28. Ms Anthony pointed out the entire screening interview lasted  for  only
    25 minutes.  However, the judge was  clearly  alive  to  the  need  for
    caution and specifically noted, in para 43 of his decision, that it was
    not "meant to  be  a  complete  statement  of  the  appellant's  case".
    However, equally, the core of the appellant's claim was  that  both  he
    and his father, as  Goran  Party  supporters,  had  been  arrested  and
    detained (probably in 2010) and yet when asked to give reasons,  albeit
    briefly, why he could not return to his home country at para  4.1,  the
    appellant made no reference to this but rather referred to threats from
    ISIS.  He did, of course,  in  para  5.5  state  that  he  had  been  a
    supporter of the Goran Party but still he did not  refer  to  the  core
    element of his claim concerned with his and  his  father's  arrest  and
    detention because  of  their  support  for  the  Goran  Party.   In  my
    judgment, the judge was reasonably and rationally entitled to take into
    account that the appellant had made no mention of that in his screening
    interview and that that was something which he might have been expected
    to have mentioned even in a screening interview if, indeed,  he  had  a
    genuine fear because of that involvement with the Goran Party.

29. Turning now to the other points made  by  Ms  Anthony  in  relation  to
    inconsistencies taken into account by the judge, it is helpful to  read
    paras 44, 45 and 46 together.  They are as follows:

         "44. There are significant differences  about  when  the  appellant
             became a supporter of  the  Goran  Party.   In  the  screening
             interview he said he joined in 2012 and was a member for  four
             months.  In the asylum interview he said  that  he  joined  in
             January 2010 and was involved for 15 to 20 days, questions 73,
             78, 109, in his witness statement  he  said  he  was  involved
             between 2010 and 2012, paragraph 17.

         45.  There are significant differences in  the  date  when  he  was
             arrested.  In the screening interview he said that he had  not
             been arrested.  In the asylum  interview  he  said  that  this
             occurred on 10th February 2010, questions  72,  73,  83,  108,
             109, and 119.  His witness statement says  that  this  was  in
             2012.

         46.  The appellant's explanation is that the interpreter must  have
             misinterpreted in the asylum interview.  I do not accept that.
              The appellant had indicated in the asylum interview  that  he
             and the interpreter had understood each other,  question  382.
             The appellant was clear  about  the  dates  given  because  he
             challenged the date given in the screening interview  of  when
             he joined the Goran Party, questions 72 and 73.  The dates  he
             was arrested and detention were referred to  at  a  number  of
             places in the asylum interview".

30. Ms Anthony's submission was that the judge had overread the appellant's
    asylum interview when some of the questions had not in fact related  to
    the date when he was,  for  example,  arrested.   Whilst  that  may  be
    literally true, the questions to which the appellant  gave  answers  in
    his asylum interview relate to an account that he  was  first  involved
    with the Goran Party in 2010 (question 72)  and  that  he  had  been  a
    supporter for 15-20 days (question 75).  During that time both  he  and
    his father had been arrested and detained.  He says that his father was
    arrested, and put in prison "about 10th February"  (questions  118  and
    119).  In the context of his account, that must mean 10 February  2010.
    Likewise, when the appellant describes attendance at  meetings  of  the
    Goran Party (question 101 onwards),  he  says  that  this  happened  in
    "2010" (question 108) and that it was "15th  January"  (question  109).
    The whole of his account relates to 2010 as  regards  involvement  with
    the Goran Party and his and his father's claimed arrest and  detention.
    By contrast, in his screening interview he said that  he  was  involved
    with the Goran Party "from 2012 for 4 months".   That  is  inconsistent
    with what he said in his asylum interview.   His  asylum  interview  is
    also inconsistent with what he said in his witness statement at para 17
    in relation to his arrest and detention when he stated:

         "I always stated I joined in 2010 and that my problems happened  in
         2012".

31. In paras 44 and 45, the judge was reasonably and rationally entitled to
    identify  inconsistencies   between   the   appellant's   account,   in
    particular, in his asylum interview and in  his  witness  statement  as
    well as, between what he had said there and what he had previously said
    in his screening interview.  The appellant  was  both  saying  that  he
    joined in 2010 (asylum interview and witness statement) or he joined in
    2012 (screening interview); and that the problems arose  in  2010  (his
    asylum interview) or in  2012  (his  witness  statement  and  screening
    interview).  The appellant's explanation was that there must have  been
    a misinterpretation at the asylum interview.  The judge rejected  that,
    in para 46 of his  decision,  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had
    indicated at question 382 that the interpreter and  he  had  understood
    each other but also because when  the  inconsistency  between  what  he
    appeared to be saying in his asylum interview about 2010 with  what  he
    had said in his screening interview - namely that  he  had  joined  the
    Goran Party in 2012 - was drawn to his  attention,  the  appellant  had
    said that  his  screening  interview  was  wrong  and  not  his  asylum
    interview (see questions 72 and 73).

32. In my judgment, the judge was entitled to rely upon inconsistencies  in
    the appellant's evidence as set out in paras 43-46 to conclude that  he
    did not accept that the appellant's account was credible.

33. As regards Ms Anthony further submission, I  do  not  accept  that  the
    judge failed to take into account the expert  report  which  identified
    that there were instances of Goran Party supporters  being  mistreated.
    The judge referred to that at para 30 even if he did  not  specifically
    refer to it later in his decision.   It,  nevertheless,  appears  in  a
    section of the decision concerned with "issues of credibility" and,  as
    Ms  Aboni  submitted,  merely  because  mistreatment  of  Goran   Party
    supporters  was  plausible,  did  not  mean  that  the  appellant   had
    established that he and his father were Goran Party  supporters who had
    been mistreated.

34. In seeking to sustain  the  adverse  credibility  finding  despite  the
    judge's error in para 47,  Ms  Aboni  also  placed  reliance  upon  the
    judge's  reasoning  at  paras  48-52,  where  he  took   into   account
    inconsistencies about when the appellant had said he had last  been  in
    contact with his family and also his failure to claim  asylum  in  safe
    European countries.

35. In para 48, the appellant gave different accounts of when he  had  last
    spoken to his parents.  In his asylum interview, which took place on 16
    July 2019, he said that he had last spoken to them  about  four  months
    before which would have been at the beginning of 2019  or  the  end  of
    2018 when he  was  in  the  UK.   In  cross-examination,  however,  the
    appellant said that he had last spoken to them when he  was  in  Turkey
    which he left in October 2016.  The judge said this:

         "Some inconsistency in dates is to be expected in someone recalling
         events.  It would be expected the appellant could remember when  it
         was that he last spoke to his parents and whether it was  from  the
         United Kingdom or when he was in a camp in Turkey".

36. Then, at para 49, the judge also noted that the appellant had said that
    he had not contacted them since because he  had  lost  their  telephone
    number when his mobile phone was stolen when he  was  in  Greece.   The
    judge noted:

         "This is inconsistent with his  account  in  the  asylum  interview
         which is that he  was  able  to  speak  to  them  from  the  United
         Kingdom".

37. At paras 50-51, applying s.8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
    of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, the judge took into account  as  damaging
    of his credibility that the appellant  failed  to  claim  asylum  in  a
    number of countries in Europe whilst travelling to the UK.

38. At para 52 the judge concluded as follows:

         "52. I take into account all these matters.  I  take  into  account
             that the standard of proof in an asylum case  is  a  low  one.
             Even taking these matters into account I do not  believe  what
             the  appellant  says  about  the  areas   in   dispute.    The
             significant inconsistencies in key parts of his  account,  the
             inconsistencies with background information, and  his  failure
             to claim asylum in safe European countries  over  an  extended
             period of time, all damages his credibility.  I find him to be
             an unreliable witness as to fact".

39. Whilst Ms Anthony relies upon a number of findings by  the  judge  that
    there were "no inconsistencies" in aspects of the appellant's  account,
    the absence of these inconsistencies did not itself add  positively  to
    reasons to believe the appellant.  The  judge  took  into  account  the
    consistency between the appellant's  account  that  as  a  Goran  Party
    supporter he and his father were mistreated and  the  expert  evidence.
    However,  the  judge  gave  a  number  of  reasons  why,   based   upon
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence, his account was not to  be
    believed.  In my judgment, even discounting the discrepancy  identified
    in para 47 of the judge's decision, these inconsistencies  set  out  in
    paras 43-46 and 48-49, together with the application of s.8 of the 2004
    Act, were sufficient to sustain the judge's adverse credibility finding
    even if his reasons in para 47 are unsustainable.

40. For these reasons, therefore, I reject Ms Anthony's submission that the
    judge's adverse credibility finding and, therefore,  his  dismissal  of
    the appellant's asylum claim involved the making of a material error of
    law.  That decision and the findings leading to it, stand.

41. However, as was accepted by Ms Aboni, the judge's  decision  concerning
    Art 3 and humanitarian protection based upon any risk to the  appellant
    of returning to Iraq without the appropriate documentation  is  legally
    unsustainable, should be set aside and  the  decision  remade  to  that
    extent.

42. In that regard, both representatives agreed that a face-to-face hearing
    was necessary as the appellant would wish to give evidence and does not
    have the facility to take part in a remote hearing.  It was agreed that
    the proper disposal, therefore, was to remit the appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in Birmingham  where  a  face-to-face  hearing  could  be
    listed in order to  remake  the  decision  in  respect  of  Art  3  and
    humanitarian protection in relation to the issue of documentation.

Decision

43. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material  error
    of law in respect of the decision to dismiss the appeal under Art 3 and
    on humanitarian protection grounds.

44. The findings and decision to dismiss the appellant's asylum appeal  did
    not involve any material error of law and those findings stand and  are
    preserved.

45. As the parties agreed, the appeal  is  appropriately  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a face-to-face hearing in order to  remake  the
    decision limited to Art 3 and humanitarian protection and the issue  of
    whether the appellant would have the necessary documentation to  safely
    return to Iraq (including what, if any, contact or ability  to  contact
    the appellant has with his family in Iraq).


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                13 July 2021

