
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: pa/02435/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th March 2018                            |On 19th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                    ms FB
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Fenney instructed by NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast born on [ ] 1965 and  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 14th April 2008  and  claimed  asylum.
    On 1st October 2010 the respondent refused her protection claim and the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal
    dismissed her appeal on all grounds.  That decision was  subject  to  a
    challenge and permission was granted to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 28th November 2011.  That decision was the subject of an
    application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal  which  was
    granted by Sir Stephen Sedley and resulted in a consent order  of  24th
    January  2013  remitting  the  matter  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.    The
    respondent accepted that the Upper Tribunal materially erred in law  in
    consideration of the country guidance determination in ND (Women) Ivory
    Coast CG [2010] UKUT 215 (IAC) by  finding  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    failure to recognise the Appellant as a member of a  particular  social
    group as immaterial to whether  the  appellant  could  safely  relocate
    within the Ivory Coast and without undue hardship having regard to  the
    appellant's particular circumstances and the conditions  prevailing  in
    the area to which relocation was proposed.

 2. When the matter was remitted it came before Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
    on 9th September  2013  and  at  paragraph  3  he  made  the  following
    findings.

         "Following discussion with the parties I ruled, with their consent,
         that given the terms on which the appeal had been remitted  to  the
         Upper Tribunal, my starting point should be  that  it  is  accepted
         that (1) the appellant experienced persecution in her home area  of
         Abidjan in July 2010 when she was the victim of an  attack  in  the
         course of which she was raped and her father killed; (2) she had  a
         well-founded fear of experiencing persecution again at the hands of
         the same perpetrators in her home area; and (3) she is a member  of
         a particular social group, namely women.  Mr Duncan submitted  that
         in the light of Sir Stephen Sedley's grant of permission  I  should
         also treat as a starting point that (4) the attack on the appellant
         in July 2010 was carried out by state actors,  namely  soldiers  of
         the government (members of the Forces of Cote d'Ivoire (FRCI)), and
         they should not be classified (as they had been by  Judge  Woolley)
         as rogue elements.  Mr Richards did not seek to argue against  that
         and accordingly I shall approach the appellant's case on the  basis
         of (1)-(4) above.  The essential question to be  asked  is  whether
         the appellant has a viable option of internal relocation."

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey heard various submissions and inter alia he
    recorded those at paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 of his determination.

 4. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey went on to consider whether  the  appellant
    was able to relocate and reasoned that it was a two-limbed test of  (a)
    safety and (b) reasonableness and that even if someone is considered to
    be safe in another part of the country they could still succeed  if  it
    will be unreasonable to expect them to stay there.  He also  considered
    whether that other part of the country would be accessible.

 5. Dr Storey found that the appellant was  no  longer  at  risk  from  the
    individual soldiers  who  had  raped  her  previously  or  anyone  else
    paragraph  11.   Her  own  party   the   Rally   of   the   Republicans
    (Rassemblement  des  Republicains),  RDR  is  presently  the  country's
    governing party.  He found that the soldiers who had  raped  her  would
    not have any interest in tracking down the appellant to ensure that she
    could not emerge as a witness against them for their  acts  (which  had
    been with impunity) against  her  in  2010.   He  added  "there  is  no
    evidence to indicate that these soldiers would come  to  learn  of  her
    return or, even if they did, that they  would  have  any  real  concern
    about her  being  a  potential  witness  against  them."   And  further
    "nothing in the background country evidence indicated that soldiers who
    had committed criminal  acts  against  women  or  low  level  political
    opportunists in 2010 would now face being  prosecuted".   Indeed  Judge
    Storey found that the climate of impunity remained and that no  members
    of the former Force Nouvelles or any military  officials  or  civilians
    responsible  for  serious  human  rights  abuses  supporting  President
    Ouattara had been brought to account.

 6. Judge Storey found that in the Ivory Coast women as  a  whole  faced  a
    range of discriminations and harassment was widespread but the evidence
    did not indicate that such difficulties  were  sufficiently  severe  to
    mean women per se faced a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment.

 7. It is important to  set  out  the  full  findings  of  Dr  Storey  from
    paragraphs 13 to 19.

         "13.     As regards  the  'reasonableness'  limb  of  the  internal
             relocation test,  I  do  not  consider  that  the  appellant's
             circumstances, even when  viewed  cumulatively  in  conformity
             with Article 8(2), would give rise to undue hardship.  Indeed,
             it would appear that in certain respects her circumstances  in
             Bouake would be more amenable to her than those she  faced  in
             the capital.  Bouake was the area where she had grown  up  and
             had her family origins.  It  was  where  one  of  her  sisters
             lived; it was in the North of the country  so  she  would  not
             face any ant-Northern sentiment; it was  an  area  where  many
             Muslims lived (although Muslims only comprise 2% of the  total
             population the main base  of  the  Muslim  majority  from  the
             Dioula people is Bouake; Bouake is an area where she had lived
             without any significant problems and so it  would  not  remind
             her of the trauma of her past experiences as might a return to
             live in the capital.  For the avoidance  of  doubt  I  do  not
             accept that the appellant would not be able to receive  family
             support  in  Bouake.   The  appellant  has  been  involved  in
             employment previously and has a university  degree,  so  would
             not be confined (in the longer term) to obtaining work in  the
             low-paid sector of the economy.

         14.      Mr Duncan has submitted that the  appellant's  ability  to
             live reasonably in Bouake would be  significantly  impeded  by
             her health problems.  So far as concerns her medical  problems
             arising from the 2010 incident, she was found by Dr Gibson  in
             his medico-legal report of July 2010  to  suffer  from  severe
             back pain, difficulties in walking, problems with  eating  and
             chewing,  lower  abdominal  pain,  sleeplessness,  flashbacks,
             depression, symptoms of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and
             depression.  It was also noted she had considered suicide.

         15.      However the same report also noted that she  was  able  to
             walk with crutches and her  GP  had  already  started  her  on
             appropriate  medication  and  referred  her  for  counselling.
             Despite the Tribunal giving directions requesting any  further
             evidence relied on to be produced, there has been  no  further
             medical report nor country information  evidence  relating  to
             access to medical facilities in the Ivory Coast.  There was no
             evidence before  the  Tribunal  previously  nor  presently  to
             suggest that in respect of her medical condition she would not
             be any less able to manage in  Bouake  than  in  the  UK  and,
             indeed, one of  her  psychological  symptoms  noted  in  2010,
             alienation from the rest of (UK) society (see page 36  of  the
             report), would clearly not apply in the  area  where  she  had
             family and grown up.

         16.      Mr Duncan has adduced further evidence in connection  with
             an  application  for  an  adjournment  (which  was  previously
             rejected and not renewed before me).  Albeit late, I  take  it
             into account.  It shows  that  the  appellant  had  a  traffic
             accident in  late  2012  which  has  compounded  her  previous
             problems.   It  also  establishes  that  she  has   continuing
             psychological difficulties.  However,  it  does  not  indicate
             that her physical and psychological difficulties would prevent
             her from being able  to  live  in  Bouake  where  (unlike  her
             situation in the UK) she would have family to help  her.    So
             far as concerns her psychological problems none  of  this  new
             evidence indicates that there are likely to be  aggravated  by
             return to an area of Ivory Coast away from any danger.  Indeed
             the evidence indicates that return to an area  where  she  has
             family ties would mean she would no longer feel  isolated  and
             alienated from surrounding society.

         17.      Given the high threshold set by established cases relating
             to ill-health cases, it is plain that the  appellant's  health
             circumstances come nowhere near establishing any real risk  of
             ill-treatment - or indeed of any violation of  her  Article  8
             right to physical and moral  integrity.   I  should  emphasise
             that in reaching my decision I bear in mind that the appellant
             currently requires a Zimmer frame and/or crutches to walk  and
             that she needs help from others to travel.  In my judgment she
             would be able to arrange for such  help  to  be  available  to
             assist her journey to Bouake and once there, the state of  the
             evidence satisfies  me  should  be  able  to  rely  on  family
             support.

         18.      The background evidence continues to indicate that in  the
             Ivory Coast women face discrimination and a background risk of
             sexual violence, but the appellant's  own  circumstances,  the
             fact that she has a university education and a history of work
             in large companies, indicates that she is used  to  engagement
             with the outside world would be able to live in Bouake without
             such  discrimination  and  background  risk  causing  her  any
             significant detriment.

         19.      Whilst the appellant's medical problems may make  it  more
             difficult than when she was in the Ivory Coast  previously  to
             find employment  -  and  in  the  short-term  because  of  her
             accident employment is not a realistic option - the fact  that
             she has family roots (and at  least  one  sister)  in  Bouake,
             means that  there  is  no  reason  to  think  she  would  face
             destitution."

 8. Those findings  were  not  effectively  challenged  and  the  appellant
    submitted further submissions on 22nd July  2014  and  which  were  the
    subject to a consent order issued  on  29th  September  2016  following
    judicial review proceedings.  On 23rd February 2017  the  Secretary  of
    State considered the Appellant's submissions  and  again  rejected  her
    protection claim.  The appellant appealed and the  matter  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lebasci  on  7th  April  2017  who  issued  a
    decision on 15th May 2017 dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

 9. The grounds for application for permission to appeal set out  that  the
    factors for consideration on internal relocation involved consideration
    of  the  risk  of  destitution,  availability  of  family  support  and
    availability of medical care.  It was asserted that the evidence before
    the Tribunal was that the disabled,  without  the  support  of  family,
    would face a serious risk  of  destitution.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge acknowledged that the appellant would be unable to find  work  to
    support herself.  The judge also accepted the Appellant's evidence that
    since her initial asylum claim a  number  of  her  family  members  had
    passed away including her sister in  Bouake  where  it  was  previously
    considered  the  appellant  could  internally  relocate.    The   judge
    proceeded to find that the appellant has other family members  in  Cote
    D'Ivoire with whom she could reside.  The conclusion  that  this  would
    not place the family members at risk was one  which  went  against  the
    evidence.  It was the appellant's evidence  that  she  only  maintained
    contact with her son and her son no longer resided in the Cote D'Ivoire
    and that she had not had contact with him since  2017.   The  appellant
    gave evidence to the extent that all other family members she had  lost
    contact with in 2010.

10. It was submitted therefore that the appellant could have  no  knowledge
    of the whereabouts of these extended family members with whom  she  was
    reluctant to make contact and whom she said she would not  support  her
    and were not available to the appellant.  It followed the  judge  erred
    in making a presumption that they were.

11. It was also submitted that with regard the family  member  "the  judge"
    mentioned by the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal,  their  last  known
    address was in Abidjan where the appellant could not reside safely.

12. There had been no consideration  in  the  determination  of  the  third
    aspect that of the availability of  medical  care  for  the  appellant.
    This was not medical care of the standard in  the  United  Kingdom  but
    medical care of any form.  The expert report was that suitable care was
    not available to the appellant in the Cote D'Ivoire.  This evidence was
    supported by the WHO Report which reported the focus  of  medical  care
    was on preventable disease.  The respondent's  own  guidance  confirmed
    that medical care outside Abidjan was extremely limited.

13. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  leaving  aside  the  matter  of  the
    appellant's safety, failed to consider how, even  if  appropriate  care
    were available in Abidjan, the appellant would make the journey bearing
    in mind her use of an electric wheelchair and her specialist  transport
    to attend the hearing neither of which would be available to her in the
    Cote D'Ivoire.

14. At the hearing before  me,  Ms  Fenney  submitted  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant could reside with her sister.  She  had  no
    contact with her since 2010 and if she could not live  in  Abidjan  she
    could not live with her.  Even if  she  was  outside  Abidjan  and  was
    willing to take her in there was no explanation of  how  the  appellant
    could access the medical care that she needed.

15. Mr Richards submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's  conclusions  were
    properly open to the judge and adequately reasoned.  The judge noted at
    paragraph 33, the appellant's evidence where she  had  maintained  that
    she still had a sister Miriam in the Ivory Coast, but had rejected that
    contacting her would place the family  member  at  risk.   It  was  not
    necessary to show that the appellant would have to live with the family
    member and at [32] the judge had stated destitution would be avoided if
    she was able to rely on family support.  Judge Storey  had  found  that
    the appellant had the benefit of family support and that  continued  to
    be the case.

16. In terms of medical care available the medical evidence  was  dated  to
    2014.  The judge  dealt  with  the  "expert  evidence"  from  Professor
    Aguilar and found that  the  evidence  did  not  assist  her.   It  was
    conceded that health care was available and there was no reason why the
    family could not assist  the  appellant  in  obtaining  medicine.   Any
    challenge in relation to travel on to Bouake was not canvassed  in  the
    grounds and indeed it had its own airport.

17. Ms Fenney submitted that it was not just a question of monetary support
    but how the appellant could cope in her daily life.  She had  a  number
    of aids in Cardiff which would not be available to  her  in  the  Ivory
    Coast.

Analysis

18. The judge was clear at paragraph 17 onwards that the starting point was
    the determination of Judge Storey and she  applied  the  principles  in
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 .  The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted
    the terms on which the appeal had been remitted to the  Upper  Tribunal
    such that the appellant had experienced persecution in her home area of
    Abidjan and she had a well-founded  fear  of  experiencing  persecution
    again in that specific area, was a member of a particular social  group
    and the perpetrators of the 2010 attack were government soldiers.   The
    judge set out the relevant additional findings made by Judge Storey  at
    paragraph 19 onwards.  It was Judge Storey's position that there was no
    evidence that the soldiers who had assaulted her previously would  come
    to learn of her return or would have any real concern about her being a
    potential  witness  against  them  or  indeed  that  they  would   face
    prosecution.  Judge Storey accepted that Bouake was an area  where  she
    had previously lived without significant problems and he did not accept
    that the appellant would not be  able  to  receive  family  support  in
    Bouake.  At paragraph 19.8 the judge recorded

         "indeed the evidence indicates that return to an area where she has
         family ties would mean  she  would  no  longer  feel  isolated  and
         alienated from surrounding society".

19. Judge Storey found that given the high threshold established  by  cases
    relating to ill-health  her  health  circumstances  came  nowhere  near
    establishing any risk of ill-treatment or indeed a violation of Article
    8.  Judge Storey found that the appellant currently required  a  Zimmer
    frame and that she needed help to travel but that she would be able  to
    arrange for such help to assist her in her in her journey.   Given  the
    findings of Judge Lebasci regarding her family there is  no  reason  to
    conclude that this finding does not still apply.  Clearly  it  was  put
    forward at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Storey  that  the  appellant's
    mobility was as restricted.  Even at that date the appellant had had an
    accident and Judge Storey had accepted that  because  of  her  accident
    employment was not a realistic option but

         "the fact that she has family roots (and at least  one  sister)  in
         Bouake means that there is  no  reason  to  think  she  would  face
         destitution" paragraph (19.11).

20. It was open to Judge Lebasci to rely on  those  findings.  The  medical
    evidence before her was either somewhat  dated,  relied  on  an  expert
    without expertise or indicated the  ability  of  the  appellant  to  be
    independent in daily living tasks.

21. With regards to her health, Judge Lebasci made  a  finding  that  Judge
    Storey had had regard to  the  appellant's  sleeplessness,  flashbacks,
    depression symptoms and post-traumatic stress disorder and  depression.
    Judge Lebasci referred to the copy of the  Social  Services  assessment
    carried out in March 2014 which does postdate Judge  Storey's  decision
    but remarked that her most recent hospital admission was  in  2010  and
    that although it was at paragraph 22

         "recorded the appellant described severe pain when  mobilising  and
         great difficulty carrying out all activities of daily living,"

    nonetheless

         "she was independently undertaking personal  care,  medication  and
         preparing meals".

22. The judge was entitled to rely on the  later  Social  Services  report.
    Indeed  in  September  2013  when  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey   had
    reconsidered the appeal, the First-tier Tribunal Judge Lebasci noted

         "the appellant was assessed by an Occupational Therapist and issued
         with a number of aids.  It considered she had sufficient  equipment
         to allow her to be independent in daily living activities"

    and that she was

         "supported by friends and neighbours to undertake shopping  tasks".



    However, essentially with regard the Occupational Therapist  assessment
    (of which there appeared to be no later report)

         "the outcome of the assessment  was  that  no  further  action  was
         required" and that "the appellant did not give evidence to say this
         was no longer an accurate description of her position".

23. As Judge Lebasci recorded Judge Storey had specifically referred to the
    medical  evidence  that  the  appellant  suffered  low  back  pain  and
    difficulties with walking, problems with eating and chewing  and  lower
    abdominal pain.  He nonetheless found her capable  of  travel.    Judge
    Lebasci also identified at paragraph 23 that the appellant's up to date
    witness statement had limited detail regarding  her  health,  and  that
    although she referred to complex physical and mental health needs  that
    she could not travel she indeed attended the hearing  in  a  wheelchair
    but that the medical evidence "is silent in relation to the appellant's
    ability to travel".  The judge clearly found the  appellant's  evidence
    contrary to the facts - she had stated at the hearing  that  she  could
    not travel in a car but had attended the hearing itself by transport.

24. The expert report produced by Professor Aguilar of 2014 was  considered
    at length by the judge who found that the Professor Aguilar specialised
    in religion and politics and his expertise did not lie in the study  of
    women or those with physical and mental disabilities returning  to  the
    Ivory Coast.  Indeed the judge gave a series of reasons  for  rejecting
    his evidence not least that his report was based on limited or no clear
    objective or recent evidence to support his findings.  He was in fact a
    Director of the Centre for the  Study  of  Religion  and  Politics  and
    Director of Research of the School of Divinity.

25.  The  judge  clearly  at  paragraph  25  rejected  Professor  Aguilar's
    expertise finding it was not clear, bearing in mind his experience  and
    expertise, on what basis he was able to offer  expert  opinion  on  the
    provision of health care in the Ivory Coast.  He did  not  say  he  had
    visited the Ivory Coast and there was no clear basis of how he  reached
    the opinion that there  were  no  facilities  for  people  with  severe
    mobility.  He referred to news reports dated March 2012 but  the  judge
    quite clearly found those to be dated (see paragraph  26).   The  judge
    found there had been a number of years since  the  civil  war  and  the
    report stated the new  government  was  making  public  health  care  a
    priority.  Indeed in his addendum the professor  accepted  he  was  not
    involved in health care or within research in health care in the  Ivory
    Coast.

26. At paragraph 28 the judge referred to the reliance by Professor Aguilar
    regarding the healthcare system and that

         "there is limited additional evidence in the form of a  psychiatric
         letter and Social Services assessment dated 2014"

    The judge cannot be criticised for her  observations  on  the  lack  of
    evidence and importantly

         "based on this evidence I  found  the  appellant  is  independently
         undertaking personal care, medication and preparing meals".

27. At paragraph 29, with regards the background material,  the  judge  had
    this to say.

         "29.     The Appellant relies on Country Guidance dated 13 February
             2009 and in particular on paragraph 4.4 of that guidance where
             it states "medical care in Ivory Coast outside of  Abidjan  is
             extremely limited...  According to Medecins  Sans  Frontieres,
             most people cannot afford healthcare under the  current  cost-
             recovery system.  Mental Health is part of the primary  health
             care system.  Actual treatment of severe mental  disorders  is
             available at primary level."  It appears Judge Storey was  not
             referred to this guidance.  He  found  "Despite  the  Tribunal
             giving directions requesting any further evidence relied on to
             be produced, there has been  no  further  medical  report  nor
             country information evidence relating to the access to medical
             facilities in the Ivory Coast.  There was no  evidence  before
             the Tribunal previously  nor  presently  to  suggest  that  in
             respect of her medical condition she would  not  be  any  less
             able to manage in Bouake than in the UK and,  indeed,  one  of
             her psychological symptoms noted in 2010, alienation from  the
             rest of (UK) society... would clearly not apply  in  the  area
             where she had family and grown up"  the Country  Guidance  was
             not challenged by  the  Respondent,  I  find  what  stated  in
             relation to the medical treatment available in the Ivory Coast
             should be regarded as being correct and relevant to this case.

         30.      The Appellant relies on the US Department of  State,  2016
             Country Reports on  Human  Rights  Practices:  Cote  d'Ivoire,
             03/03/2017.  In relation  to  persons  with  disabilities  the
             report   states   "persons   with   disabilities    reportedly
             encountered   serious   discrimination   in   employment   and
             education...The  government  financially   supported   special
             schools,  training  programmes,  associations,  and  artisans'
             cooperatives for persons with disabilities, but  many  persons
             with disabilities begged on urban streets in commercial  zones
             for lack of other economic opportunities...Persons with mental
             disabilities often lived on the street."   This  evidence  was
             not challenged and I accept this part of the  content  of  the
             report should be regarded as correct and relevant to this."

28. The crucial point, however, is the support available from  her  family.
    It is for the appellant to  satisfy  the  judge  that  the  appellant's
    relatives were no longer in the Cote D'Ivoire or she could not  contact
    them.  The judge found at paragraph 32 that given the health care which
    would be available to her in the event of her return,  there  was  very
    limited prospect of her health improving and that as a  disabled  woman
    she was at increased risk of discrimination.   This,  however,  is  not
    necessarily persecution.

29.  Judge Lebasci, as indeed did Judge Storey found that she is  "unlikely
    to be able to secure employment and  that  destitution  would  only  be
    avoided if she was able to rely on family support.  This is  where  the
    key challenge rests.  The appellant accepted at paragraph 33  that  she
    has one sister Miriam who lives in the Ivory Coast but  she  maintained
    that she had no contact with her and contacting  her  would  place  the
    sister at risk.  The fact that the appellant stated that she could  not
    reveal where she was for safety reasons  thus  could  not  provide  the
    death certificate for her sister clearly indicated that  she  did  know
    where she was.  The appellant also gave evidence and  it  was  recorded
    that

         "the only reason given by the appellant for being able to  ask  her
         extended family (aunties and cousins) for help was that  she  would
         be putting them at risk by doing so".

      Thus on the appellant's own evidence she accepted that  she  did  have
      family in the Ivory Coast and indeed the judge recorded  at  paragraph
      33

         "the appellant acknowledged during cross-examination  that  one  of
         her relations is a judge but said this person would not be able  to
         help her.  Again the only reason given was because she is a witness
         to the crimes committed against her".

30. As the judge pointed out and in reliance  on  Judge  Storey's  findings
    there was nothing in the background country evidence to show those  who
    had  committed  previous  criminal  acts  in  2010  would  face   being
    prosecuted now and the judge considered the totality  of  the  evidence
    available and reached the same  conclusion  such  that  contacting  her
    family would not place them at risk.  The judge states, and  for  sound
    reasons

         "I find contrary to the appellant's expressed concerns  about  this
         she would not be putting any members of her extended family outside
         Abidjan at risk by contacting them or  by  receiving  support  from
         them".

31. As the judge found, although she accepted  that  some  members  of  the
    family had died on the appellant's own evidence,

         "she has other family members living in the Ivory Coast one  member
         of her family is a judge".

32. The witness statement of the appellant was remarkably  brief.   It  was
    open to the judge to find that the appellant had not demonstrated  that
    she would be unable to rely on some family support, including financial
    support, in the event of her return to the Ivory Coast.  There  was  no
    expectation by the judge that she would necessarily have to reside with
    that family member and the Judge Lebasci evidently concurred with Judge
    Storey's findings that the appellant would benefit from family  support
    but, that there was no reason to  think  she  would  face  destitution,
    continued to be the case.   Contrary  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  the
    appellant did not give evidence to the extent that she had lost contact
    with all other family members or had no means of contacting them.   She
    stated that the only reason given by the appellant for being unable  to
    ask her extended family was that she would be  putting  them  at  risk.
    The evidence was not that she had no knowledge  of  their  whereabouts.
    She says that as recorded by the judge at 33

         "she has no contact with Miriam and contacting her would place  her
         at risk." and further "because for safety reasons she cannot reveal
         where she is now".

33. As Mr  Richardson  pointed  out  there  was  no  expectation  that  the
    appellant would have to live or reside with any of her  family  members
    and indeed the judge found that she was able to cope herself.   Medical
    care outside Abidjan is "extremely limited" but it  was  not  the  case
    that there was absolutely no medical care and further the  judge  found
    that  the  appellant  was  independently  undertaking  personal   care,
    medication and preparing meals. In these circumstances, it was open  to
    the family to assist in providing such medical aids and medicine.  This
    was embedded in the judge's findings.  The grounds  failed  to  address
    the significant issues identified with the expert report  and  seek  to
    reargue matters that were indeed dealt with.

34. The appellant relied on the Country Guidance and this evidence recorded
    that mental health was in fact part of the primary health  care  system
    and that "actual treatment of severe mental disorders is  available  at
    the primary level" and that there were community  care  facilities  for
    patients with mental disorders and regular  training  of  primary  care
    professionals.  The evidence was that most people in Ivory Coast  could
    not afford health care under current cost recovery  system  but,  as  I
    indicate above, it was not accepted that the appellant could  not  turn
    to her family.

35. The decision contains no material error of law and will stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed           Helen Rimington                   Date 17th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
