
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02548/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|Given extempore on 7th August, 2019  |On 19th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  Fazi [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Georgette Thomas, a Solicitor with Compass
Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 22nd  February  1999
    and who appealed against the respondent's decision taken on  1st  March
    2019, to refuse to recognise him as a refugee.  The appellant  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Siddiqi at Manchester on 23rd April, 2019.

2.   The judge dismissed the appeal, but  in  doing  so  has  made  material
    errors of law.

3.   There were three challenges to the judge's  determination.   The  first
    alleges a failure to  consider  material  evidence,  namely  the  UNHCR
    eligibility guidelines from August, 2018, The second alleges  that  the
    judge applied too high a standard of proof and  the  third  erroneously
    applying country guidance which has been found to be legally flawed  by
    the Court of Appeal, namely AS Afghanistan v the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 873.

4.   On reading the determination it is clear that the judge gave a  correct
    self-direction at paragraph 7 as to  the  standard  of  proof,  however
    throughout the determination the  judge  uses  the  words  "I  was  not
    persuaded" in finding against the appellant.  For example:

         -    at paragraph 23(b) he  says  "I  am  not  persuaded  that  his
             brother's death is linked to his father's  work,  particularly
             taking into account there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
             Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack";

         -    at paragraph 27 where he says "nevertheless, I'm not persuaded
             that the appellant and his family have been threatened":

           - 28 where he says "although the appellant  claims  his  brother
             was killed by the Taliban, ........., I am not persuaded  that
             this is the case.";  and "however, his account of  his  family
             being threatened is vague and I am not persuaded that this  is
             due to his age, given that he is in contact  with  his  family
             and could have clarified any  details  he  was  struggling  to
             recall";

           - paragraph 30,      "He claims his brother was killed  but  his
             brother appeared to be working as a police officer at the time
             which in itself carries risks and I am therefore not persuaded
             that this shows  the  Afghan  authorities  have  not  provided
             sufficient state protection to the appellant and his family";

           - and "as such, I am not persuaded that the appellant  would  be
             at  risk  on  return  as  there  would   be   sufficiency   of
             protection"; and

           - paragraph 35 "however, I am not persuaded that there has  been
             a significant increase in these security incidents in Kabul";

           - and "I am not persuaded that the objective evidence, including
             the UNHCR Report,  establishes  that  there  are  very  strong
             grounds to depart from AS"; and

           - paragraph 37 "it is the appellant's  father  rather  than  the
             appellant who is of interest to the Taliban and therefore I am
             not persuaded that he would be at risk from the Taliban if  he
             relocated";

           - and paragraph 38 "I am not persuaded that he would be at  risk
             on the basis of ethnicity".

5.    The  words  "I  am  not  persuaded"  have  no  place  in  any   asylum
    determination.

6.   A judge does not need to be persuaded  of  anything;  the  standard  of
    proof is low because of the difficulty for an asylum seeker in  proving
    events that have taken place in a  foreign  country  in  the  past  and
    because often the asylum seeker has had to flee for his or her life and
    has not had time to collect evidence.

7.   The standard is "a real risk" or "a reasonable degree  of  likelihood".
    By using the words "I am not persuaded" the judge has demonstrated that
    he has applied the wrong standard and a much higher standard of  proof.
    It has not been necessary for me to consider the other two challenges.

8.   The appellant has therefore been denied a fair  hearing.  I  set  aside
    the determination and I remit the appeal for hearing afresh for a judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Siddiqi.  A Dari interpreter  will
    be required and two hours should be allowed  for  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
15th August 2019

