
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02220/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2020                              |On 15 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    S B B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph, instructed by NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court orders otherwise, the appellant is
    granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant or any member of their family.   This
    order applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo  ("DRC")
    who was born on 18 June 1980.  He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  14
    October 2018 and claimed asylum.  The basis of his claim was that he is
    a supporter of the opposition leader, Moise Katumbi and a member of the
    Platform Assembly Together for Change Party in  the  DRC.   He  claimed
    that as a result of his political activities he was detained on two or,
    on another version of his account, three occasions and  ill-treated  by
    the DRC authorities because of his politics.

 3. On 22 February 2019, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

The Appeal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 14 October 2019, Judge Davidge dismissed the appellant's claim
    on all grounds.  The judge made  an  adverse  credibility  finding  and
    rejected the appellant's account that he had been detained  and  was  a
    political activist at risk on return to the DRC.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  on
    12 December 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Scott-Baker)  granted
    the appellant a permission to appeal.  The respondent did  not  file  a
    Rule 24 response.

The Submissions

 6. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Joseph made two principal submissions.

 7. First, he submitted that the judge had failed to apply,  and  determine
    an issue raised by, the country guidance  decision  in  BM  and  Others
    (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00293 (IAC).
     He submitted that the judge had found that the appellant had left  the
    DRC on his own passport but with a forged visit visa vignette  for  the
    UK contained within it.  Relying on [119(iv)]  of  BM  and  Others,  Mr
    Joseph submitted that the judge had failed  to  determine  whether  the
    appellant was at risk on return of treatment proscribed by Art 3 of the
    ECHR (and entitled to humanitarian protection by virtue of Art 15(b) of
    the Qualification  Directive)  as  he  would  be  suspected  of  having
    "committed an offence, such as document  fraud,  when  departing  [the]
    DRC".  Mr  Joseph  submitted  that  the  appellant's  passport  with  a
    tampered UK vignette in it potentially fell within this risk  category.



 8. Secondly, Mr Joseph submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    reaching the adverse credibility finding.  First,  he  submitted  there
    was an inconsistency between the judge's findings at para 33  and  para
    48.  At para 33, Mr Joseph submitted the judge had found on  the  basis
    of the background evidence that the use of cable ties as handcuffs  was
    widespread in the DRC.  She accepted  the  medical  evidence  that  the
    injuries to the appellant's right wrist was "highly consistent" with an
    injury caused by a cable tie.  In those circumstances, at para  33  she
    had found that "on this evidence the appellant establishes  to  a  real
    likelihood that he has been arrested."  Nevertheless, at  para  48  the
    judge, Mr Joseph submitted, reached a contrary finding.  There she said
    that the country evidence undermines the appellant's  account  that  he
    had been arrested because there was no real likelihood that if  he  had
    been he would have been given back his passport, as he claims, so as to
    allow him to leave the country.  That,  Mr  Joseph  submitted,  was  an
    inconsistency and a material error of law.  Secondly, he submitted that
    the judge had failed to engage with the appellant's  evidence  that  he
    had been, in fact, arrested on three  occasions.   Thirdly,  Mr  Joseph
    submitted that the judge had fallen  into  error  in  para  46  of  her
    determination when she had doubted the appellant's claim to have joined
    the Platform Assembly Together for Change in Congo Party in March  2018
    when, she said, that was undermined by the  country  information  which
    showed that it did not come into existence in the DRC until June  2018.
    Mr Joseph submitted that the only source for this was a BBC News Report
    on the internet referred to, and relied upon, by the Secretary of State
    in para 31 of the decision letter.  Having accessed that  document,  he
    submitted that the point relied upon, namely that  the  party  did  not
    come into existence until June 2018 in the DRC, was not to be found  in
    the article.  Finally, Mr Joseph drew my attention to para  37  of  the
    judge's determination  in  which  she  dealt  with  the  expert  report
    concerning  the  genuineness  of  the  documents  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant.  Although the ground challenged the  judge's  reasoning,  he
    accepted that, unlike the assertion in the grounds, the expert had  not
    said that the documents were authentic but simply that they appeared to
    be authentic.  In the result, he placed little weight on this ground.

 9. In response, Mr Howells submitted that on the BM and Others point,  the
    issue of whether the appellant would be at risk as a result of the  use
    of a "false document" on exit within [119(iv)] of BM and Others had  to
    be read in the light of the further decision in that appeal, BM  (false
    passport) DRC [2015] UKUT 467 (IAC) that the issue was  fact-sensitive.
    He submitted that the appellant had exited with a valid passport in his
    name but with a false vignette and that this did not  fall  within  the
    risk category in BM and Others at [119(iv)].

10. In relation to  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  finding,  first  Mr
    Howells submitted that there was nothing inconsistent  in  the  judge's
    finding in paras 33 and 48.  He drew my attention to para 34 where  the
    judge had concluded that it was plausible "subject to his  credibility"
    that the appellant may have been arrested in the context of  opposition
    to the Kabila government  and  suffered  ill-treatment  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason.  Mr Howells submitted that what the judge had  found
    in paras 33 and 34 was that there was a real  likelihood  that  he  had
    been arrested but whether he had been arrested and ill-treated  because
    of his  political  activity  depended  upon  whether  his  account  was
    credible.  At paras 35-50, Mr Howells submitted  that  the  judge  gave
    detailed reasons why she did not accept his account.  That included  at
    para 48 where, in effect, the judge rejected his account  that  he  had
    been arrested for the reasons that he had claimed.

11. Secondly, in relation to the judge's reasoning in  para  46  concerning
    when the party to which the appellant claimed to be a member  had  come
    into existence in the DRC, Mr  Howells  accepted,  on  seeing  the  BBC
    Report produced electronically by Mr Joseph, that it did not  refer  to
    the party as having come into existence in the DRC in  June  2018.   He
    accepted that the judge may well, therefore, have made a  mistake  but,
    he submitted, that mistake was not material to her adverse  credibility
    finding given the overall reasons she had given for not  accepting  his
    claim.

12. Finally, in relation to the point raised in the grounds in  respect  of
    para 37 and the expert's report in respect of the documents, Mr Howells
    pointed out that this had not been raised in the original grounds  and,
    in the light of Mr Joseph's position,  he  was  content  to  leave  the
    matter to me.

13. In reply, Mr Joseph submitted that the second BM decision did not  vary
    the country guidance in [119(iv)] of the first BM decision because  the
    Tribunal found that the appellant in that case had in fact not  used  a
    false passport.

Discussion

14. For convenience, I will consider first the issues arising  out  of  the
    judge's adverse credibility finding.

15. The first point  relied  upon  is  that  the  judge  made  inconsistent
    findings in para 33 (and 34) and in para 48.  At para 33-34  the  judge
    said this:

         "33. I am satisfied that the use of  cable  ties  as  handcuffs  is
             widespread and so  there  is  a  real  likelihood  that,  were
             someone to be arrested in the DRC, cable ties might  be  used.
             I am satisfied that on this evidence the appellant establishes
             to a real likelihood that he has been arrested.

         34.  In the context of the country information about the extent  of
             the opposition to the Kabila government  and  the  volumes  of
             demonstrators, it is plausible, subject  to  his  credibility,
             that the appellant may have been arrested in that context  and
             suffered ill-treatment for a refugee convention reason."

16. Then at para 48 the judge, towards the end of her  reasons  leading  to
    her adverse credibility finding, said this:

         "48. The country information  undermines  the  appellant's  account
             that had he been arrested there is any real likelihood that he
             would have been given back his passport as he claims, so as to
             be able to leave the country in the manner he  describes.  The
             explanation that the  authorities  did  so  because  they  had
             removed the vignette does not bear scrutiny."

17. In my judgment, Mr Howells' submission  is  correct.   Based  upon  the
    medical evidence concerning  the  "highly  consistent"  nature  of  the
    appellant's injuries to his right  wrist,  taken  with  the  background
    evidence of the widespread use of cable ties as  handcuffs,  the  judge
    found in paras 33 and  34  there  was  a  "real  likelihood  that  [the
    appellant] has been arrested."

18. However, as the judge made clear in para 34 the reason why he had  been
    arrested although plausibly, on the basis of the  country  information,
    could arise from political opposition whether in fact it did and he had
    suffered ill-treatment for a Refugee Convention  was  "subject  to  his
    credibility".  Thereafter, at paras 35-50, the  judge  dealt  with  the
    appellant's credibility.  Her finding in para 48 was  simply  that  his
    arrest for political reasons followed by  release  and  return  of  his
    passport so that he was able to leave the country was undermined by the
    country information.  That reasoning was not challenged in the  grounds
    and was not challenged by Mr Joseph before  me.   Likewise,  the  judge
    gave detailed reasons at paras  37-47  and  49  why  she  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence and account and  found  it  not  to  be  credible.
    Consequently,  true  to  her  observation  in  para  34,  the   claimed
    underlying reason for his arrests (which she accepted at paras  33  and
    34) was dependent on the credibility of his account and she  found  him
    not to be credible.  Consequently, I reject Mr Joseph's submission that
    there is any inconsistency in the  judge's  finding  and  reasoning  in
    paras 33 and 34 on the one hand and para 48 on the other.

19. Secondly, Mr Joseph submitted that the judge had not engaged  with  the
    evidence concerning the number of arrests by the appellant.  The  judge
    was clearly aware of the appellant's account that he had been  arrested
    and detained on more than one occasion.  At para 3 she  refers  to  his
    release "from his most recent detention in 2018".   The  focus  of  the
    case was, however, on his most recent release from  detention  and  his
    departure from the DRC on his own passport which  included  a  vignette
    which had been tampered with.  It is difficult  to  see  what  material
    error the judge could have fallen into by  not  explicitly  dealing  in
    more detail with  the  evidence  concerning  his  claim  to  have  been
    arrested on a number of  occasions.   That  evidence  was,  in  itself,
    inconsistent in that he had said he had been arrested on both  two  and
    three occasions (see paras 13-16 of the refusal letter).  The judge, of
    course, as I have already noted, accepted that  he  had  been  arrested
    and, in truth, the credibility issues flowed from his claim based  upon
    his most recent arrest, release and journey to the UK.  There is,  with
    respect to Mr Joseph, nothing in this point.

20. Thirdly, but without any vigorous pursuit, Mr Joseph drew my  attention
    to the ground which submitted that the judge  had  failed  properly  to
    take into account the expert evidence dealing with the genuineness  and
    authenticity of a number of  documents,  namely  summonses,  an  arrest
    warrant, a search warrant and two death certificates in relation to his
    mother and sister, which were relied upon.  The judge  dealt  with  the
    expert report and the documents at paras 37-39 as follows:

         "37. I have looked at the DRC documents provided by  the  appellant
             as guided by the case of Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439.
             The  expert  report  does  not  provide  me  with  significant
             assistance. The expert does not confirm that the documents are
             genuine or authentic. The expert refers on many  occasions  to
             the documents being similar to or  following  the  format  and
             content of other documents that he had been able to verify  in
             the DRC by "checking and double checking with various sources"
             elsewhere described as "including  policemen,  civil  servants
             and human rights activists".  However, even  though  it  would
             therefore appear to be the case that verification is a  viable
             option, he has not actually  verified  any  of  the  documents
             provided by the appellant. The expert does not  deal  directly
             with the criticisms of the respondent. For example,  the  made
             no comment on the  similarity  of  handwriting  over  extended
             periods of time in the  summons  and  warrants;  there  is  no
             consideration of whether or not  summons,  arrest  and  search
             warrants might originate from  the  same  personnel;  nor  any
             consideration of different coloured inks, or the  inconsistent
             completion of the death  certificates.  The  expert  makes  no
             comment on matters such as corruption or forgery, and  whether
             or  not  in  verified  documents  there   are   any   features
             determinative of the authenticity. Although the expert  refers
             to the warrants having been served, he does not  set  out  the
             relevant processes, including to whom  they  would  be  served
             and, in the event that the appellant has the original, how the
             documents might remain available to others to act upon.

         38.  Mr Joseph acknowledged there was no evidence of provenance  to
             support the authenticity of the  documents  and  that  it  was
             unclear as to why the documents had not been verified.

         39.  I find that the points made by the respondent in  the  reasons
             for refusal in respect of the  documents  are  well  made  and
             raise doubts about the reliability of the documentation albeit
             none of the matters is determinative."

21. In my judgment, Mr Joseph was right not to pursue this point  with  any
    vigour.  The judge clearly had regard to the  expert's  view  that  the
    documents appeared to be genuine or authentic.  She also, in  para  37,
    noted that the expert had failed to deal with a  number  of  criticisms
    raised by the respondent in relation to  the  documents  including  the
    "similarity of handwriting over extended periods of time in the summons
    and  warrant";  whether  the  summons,  arrest  and   search   warrants
    originated from the same personnel; the use of different coloured  ink;
    and the inconsistent completion of the death  certificates.   She  also
    noted that the expert made no comment on matters such as corruption  or
    forgery in relation to documents.  The judge, applying  Tanveer  Ahmed,
    considered the documents and their reliability in the  context  of  all
    the evidence.  She was entitled to reach a finding, entirely within the
    range of reasonable conclusions, that the documents were  not  reliable
    for the reasons she gives in paras 37-39.

22. Finally, there is the issue concerning the judge's reasoning in para 46
    which was as follows:

         "46. In respect of the criticism  of  the  appellant's  account  of
             having become a member of a  political  party  in  March  2018
             called "the Platform Assembly Together for  Change  in  Congo"
             being undermined by the country information which showed  that
             the party did not come into existence in the Congo until  June
             2018.  The  appellant  says  that   this   was   an   umbrella
             organisation or coalition party and that he was a member of  a
             party that united under the umbrella. The difficulty with this
             explanation is that he did not offer it at the time."

23. Mr Howells accepted that there was no background  evidence  to  support
    this  finding  which  appeared  to  be  based  upon  the   respondent's
    conclusion in para 31 of the refusal  decision.   The  only  background
    evidence relied upon, namely the BBC News Report, did  not  state  that
    the party to which the appellant claimed to have joined in  March  2018
    only came into existence in June 2018 in the DRC.  However, I accept Mr
    Howells' submission that that mistake was not material to  the  judge's
    adverse credibility  finding.   First,  she  had  documents  which  she
    reasonably concluded  were  unreliable.   Secondly,  she  rejected  the
    appellant's claim that the doctored vignette had been inserted  by  the
    DRC authorities and instead found that it had been  the  appellant  who
    had doctored his passport.  Her reasons are at paras 40-44 as  follows:



         "40. I turn to the evidence about the appellant's  passport.  I  am
             satisfied  that  the  respondent  has  established  that   the
             appellant has perpetrated a fraud in respect of  the  vignette
             in his passport.

         41.  The respondent has shown me the record of the  multiple  entry
             visit visa issued to the appellant on  24  January  2018.  The
             appellant provided a copy of the same vignette  endorsed  with
             his arrival in the United Kingdom on 4 April 2018. However, in
             the passport presented on arrival in October  2018,  the  2018
             vignette  is  entirely  missing.   The  4  April  2018   entry
             endorsement appears on an entirely  different  vignette.  This
             vignette appears to  be,  but  is  not,  a  previously  issued
             vignette dated 4 September 2017 on which the appellant entered
             the UK in November 2017. It is quite clear that it is not that
             2017 vignette: the validity of the vignette being extended  to
             4 September 2019 when in fact it expired in 2018, and  because
             it has the 4  April  2018  entry  endorsement  which  properly
             belongs on the vignette issued in January 2018. The  appellant
             accepted he has been issued two entry clearances and can offer
             no  credible  explanation  for  the  obvious  fraud.  In   his
             interview, he explained that the 2018 vignette was removed  by
             the authorities in the DRC, as a way of  preventing  him  from
             being able to leave the country and enter the UK following his
             arrest and detention in 2018. The appellant's  explanation  is
             plainly not true for all the reasons above. As well as all  of
             those difficulties, the passport he  presented  had  an  entry
             clearance  valid  until  2020  because   of   the   fraudulent
             alteration of the 2017 vignette to extend its  validity.  That
             is something that, even on his own chronology, only he can  be
             responsible for.

         42.  I do not accept that his 2018  vignette  was  removed  by  the
             authorities in the DRC, as he said, in an  effort  to  prevent
             him from leaving.

         43.  The appellant told me that he did not know that his 2018 entry
             clearance had  been  cancelled  because  of  issues  of  fraud
             discovered  in  his  wife's  application  at  the  same  time.
             Although the respondent produced a copy of a  letter  said  to
             have been sent to him in June year? he says he never  received
             it. I am satisfied that in fact he removed the  2018  vignette
             and replaced it with the fraudulent 2017 vignette.

         44.  I am satisfied that he made that  forgery  to  circumvent  the
             cancellation of the 2018 entry clearance. That  the  appellant
             has not told me the truth about this course of  fraud  fatally
             undermines his credibility and establishes his willingness and
             ability to obtain and use false documents and to lie. "

24. No challenge is made to the judge's reasoning or finding on this issue.
     On that basis, the appellant had been  found  to  have  used  a  false
    document and to lie as the  judge  stated  in  para  44.   That  was  a
    relevant matter, indeed the judge  was  entitled  to  regard  it  as  a
    significant  matter,  in  assessing  the  appellant's  credibility  and
    veracity as a witness.  At para 45 the judge correctly reminded herself
    that: "the core of an appellant's account may be true  even  if  he  is
    found to have lied or acted fraudulently in respect of matters  outside
    or peripheral to that claim."    That is a proper self-direction on the
    relevance  of  a  'lie'  or  'dishonesty'  to  the  overall  issue   of
    credibility (see the recent decision in Uddin v SSHD  [2020]  EWCA  Civ
    338 at [11]). The judge's finding in relation to the doctoring  of  the
    vignette was, in my judgment, a significant matter that could  properly
    be taken into account in assessing whether credit should  be  given  to
    his account and in assessing his truthfulness.

25. In addition in para 49, the judge took into account under  s.8  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 that the
    appellant  had  delayed   in   claiming   asylum   without   reasonable
    explanation.  That finding is also not challenged by the appellant.

26. Finally, as I noted earlier, in  para  48  the  judge  found  that  the
    country information undermined the appellant's account that if  he  had
    been arrested for political reasons there was no real  likelihood  that
    he would have been given back  his  passport  in  order  to  leave  the
    country.

27. Overall, I am persuaded that the mistake which the judge made, in  that
    there was no supporting evidence to show that the party had  only  come
    into existence in the DRC in June 2018, was not material to her adverse
    credibility finding.  Her other reasons would,  in  my  judgment,  have
    inevitably led her to the same conclusion  and  to  have  rejected  the
    appellant's account and therefore the basis of his asylum claim, namely
    that he was an opposition political activist in the DRC  who  had  been
    detained and would be at risk on return.

28. Consequently, the judge did not materially err in law in rejecting  the
    appellant's asylum claim based upon his political activism.

29. I turn now to deal with Mr Joseph's alternative ground that  the  judge
    failed to engage with the point in [119(iv)] of BM and  Others,  namely
    that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of  arrest   and   detention,   in
    circumstances which would breach Art 3 of the  ECHR,  as  a  result  of
    committing an offence of document fraud on leaving the DRC.

30. Reduced to its relevant parts, [119(iv)] of BM  and  Others  as  relied
    upon by the appellant is as follows:

         "the DRC authorities have an  interest  in  certain  types  of  ...
         suspected offenders, namely those ... who supposedly  committed  an
         offence, such as document fraud, when departing DRC."

31. In that case, the issue arose in relation to the appellant BM  and  his
    claim that he had left the DRC on a false  passport.   That  issue  was
    addressed in the second case BM [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC).  In  fact,  in
    that case the Upper Tribunal did not accept that BM had left the DRC on
    a false passport.  That was, therefore, the end of his claim based upon
    [119(iv)] of  BM  and  Others.   In  the  second  decision,  the  Upper
    Tribunal, nevertheless, dealt  with  what  it  described  as  the  "out
    workings" of that in [16] of its decision as follows:

         "At the hearing we suggested to both parties that in cases where it
         is established - whether by proof to the requisite standard  or  by
         concession - that the asylum claimant utilised a false passport  or
         kindred document in departing DRC  this  will  not,  without  more,
         trigger [119(iv)] of the Country Guidance Decision.  This analysis,
         we suggested, is clear from the  words  "suspected  offenders"  and
         "who supposedly committed an offence, such as document fraud,  when
         departing  DRC".   Neither  representative  dissented   from   this
         analysis.  The country guidance  on  this  discrete  issue  is,  of
         necessity, broad and general in nature, having regard  particularly
         to the evidence upon which it is based.  Its application to a given
         asylum claimant will be dependent upon  fact-sensitive  context  of
         their individual case.  Predictably, one of the inquiries  for  the
         primary decision maker and, on appeal, the FtT, in every case, will
         be the likely state of knowledge of the DRC authorities  pertaining
         to the person in question.  All necessary findings of  fact  and/or
         evaluative assessments and/or predictions relating  to  this  issue
         will be made on the basis  of  primary  evidence  that  sustainable
         inference is from primary evidence or concessions.   Fundamentally,
         a person claiming to belong to any of the risk categories will  not
         be at risk of persecution unless he or she is likely to come to the
         attention of the DRC authorities upon return.  Thus in  every  case
         where there will be an intense focus on matters such as  publicity,
         individual prominence, possession of a passport, the  standard  ETD
         arrangements where they apply and how these matters impact upon the
         individual claimant.  We emphasise that this  is  not  intended  to
         operate as an exhaustive list."

32. There are, in my judgment, two significant difficulties  in  Mr  Joseph
    establishing an error of law in this appeal.

33. First, it does not appear to have been any part of the appellant's case
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the  country  guidance  in  BM  and
    Others at [119(iv)] applied to him.  His claim  was  that  he  had  not
    doctored the vignette in his passport.   Not  surprisingly,  therefore,
    his case was not put in the alternative that  he  had  been  guilty  of
    producing a false vignette within his valid passport which would become
    apparent to the DRC authorities and would lead him to  being  suspected
    of committing an offence of document fraud in the DRC.

34. I would, however, not rest my decision on that point.  It may  well  be
    that, given the judge's findings, of her own  motion  she  should  have
    considered, if it were relevant, the country guidance issue  raised  by
    her findings  (but  not  it  would  appear  by  the  appellant  or  his
    representatives at the hearing) based on [119(iv)].

35. Secondly, however, had the judge considered this issue I am left in  no
    doubt that she would have rejected any claim  by  the  appellant  based
    upon it.  There was some discussion before me, based upon  Mr  Howells'
    submission that  the  judge's  error  was  not  material,  as  to  what
    information the judge had that could have led her to conclude that  the
    valid passport containing a false vignette fell within [119(iv)] of  BM
    and Others.  Both representatives accepted that there was  no  evidence
    on that issue either before the judge or, indeed, before me.  Mr Joseph
    relied upon that as indicating that,  whatever  might  be  the  outcome
    based upon evidence at a hearing to remake the decision on this  issue,
    it could not now be said that any error by the judge in not considering
    this issue was immaterial.

36. At first blush, I  was  attracted  to  that  submission.   However,  on
    reflection the submission is  not  well-founded.   Accepting  that  the
    judge erred in law by not considering the issue raised by her  findings
    and [119(iv)], any error could only be material if there  was  evidence
    before her that the appellant's circumstances potentially  fell  within
    [119(iv)].  There was no such evidence.  There was no evidence  whether
    the use of a valid passport with a false UK entry clearance vignette in
    it constituted the offence of document fraud under the domestic laws of
    the DRC.  Without  that  evidence,  the  appellant's  case  relying  on
    [119(iv)] could not get off the ground.  The Upper Tribunal  (McCloskey
    and UTJ Jordan) made a similar point in the second BM case at [3] where
    that appellant had claimed to use a false passport.  The UT said this:

         "it is this appellant's case that he  travelled  from  DRC  to  the
         United Kingdom using a false passport.  There is no  evidence  that
         conduct of this kind constitutes the offence of a  document  fraud,
         or something kindred, under the domestic laws of DRC."

37. In fact, the only reason why the UT did not dismiss the appeal  in  the
    absence of that evidence, but conducted it "on an assumption"  that  it
    was an offence, was that, on the evidence, it made an  adverse  factual
    finding determinative of the appeal that in any event BM had not used a
    false passport.

38. The point, however, that an appellant must establish by  evidence  that
    his use of a "false" document on exit put him at risk of prosecution of
    an offence under the DRC's domestic laws, nevertheless,  is  well  made
    and I accept it.  Here, there was no such  evidence  and  so,  even  if
    Judge Davidge, had considered the application of  [119(iv)]  she  would
    inevitably have rejected the appellant's claim on this basis  since  he
    had led no evidence, and there was no other evidence in  the  case,  to
    show that by leaving the DRC on a valid passport in his name but with a
    false UK visit visa vignette he  was  at  risk  of  prosecution  for  a
    criminal offence  in  the  DRC  and,  as  a  consequence,  at  risk  of
    conviction and imprisonment in circumstances which breached  Art  3  of
    the ECHR.

39. Consequently, any  error  by  Judge  Davidge  in  not  considering  the
    application of [119(iv)] of BM and  Others  was  not  material  to  her
    decision which would inevitably have been to dismiss his appeal also on
    this basis.

Decision

40. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal did not involve the making of a  material  error  of
    law such that the decision should be set aside.  The  judge's  decision
    to dismiss the appellant's appeal on all grounds stands.

41. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               18 March 2020
