
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02593/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 September 2017                 | On 2 November 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                  USHA RAJU
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                    Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Malhotra, of Counsel, instructed by Kulendran
                 Immigration Law Chambers
For the Respondent: Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW
Anonymity

  1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.  I  have  not
     been invited to order anonymity. I see no reason to do so, so none  is
     made.





Background

2.          This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
     S Turquet (hereafter "the Judge") promulgated on 4 May  2017,  whereby
     she dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
     Secretary of State to refuse to recognise her as a refugee,  or  as  a
     person otherwise requiring international protection.

3.    The Appellant is a citizen of India, born on 21 March 1968. I  do  not
     propose to rehearse her immigration history or the  substance  of  her
     asylum claim bearing in  mind  that  the  substantive  nature  of  the
     challenge before the Upper Tribunal is essentially one  of  procedural
     fairness. While there are other grounds of challenge, it  is  accepted
     that if the fairness ground succeeds, then all  that  follows  in  the
     Judge's Decision must be flawed.

4.    The Appellant's appeal was listed for hearing before the Judge  on  12
     April 2017. Prior  to  the  hearing  namely  on  10  April  2017,  the
     Appellant's representative applied for an adjournment to obtain medico-
     legal evidence. The application was refused by the First-tier Tribunal
     on 11 April 2017, essentially on  the  grounds  that  there  had  been
     sufficient time to obtain such evidence and the appeal could otherwise
     be justly determined. Before the Judge the Appellant  was  represented
     by Ms Miskiel of  Counsel.  Ms  Miskiel  renewed  the  application  to
     adjourn. The fact that she did so is supported by a witness  statement
     from Ms Miskiel and her instructing solicitor (Mr Kulendran)  who  was
     also present at the hearing. Ms Miskiel's  witness  statement  deposes
     evidence to the effect that the Judge refused the application for  the
     same reasons given by the Tribunal on 11 April 2017.

5.    The Judge, as is apparent from the foregoing,  proceeded  and  in  due
     course dismissed the appeal for  reasons  set  out  in  her  Decision.
     Essentially, the Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
     "provided a credible basis for challenging  the  assertions,  analyses
     and conclusions in the Respondent's refusal letter."

6.    The Respondent's representative before the First-tier  Tribunal  noted
    a minute on the file that Mr Staunton has been able to provide  details
    to the Tribunal today. It records that an adjournment  application  was
    made to the  Judge  and  refused.  In  the  circumstances  Mr  Staunton
    withdrew the Respondent's  rule  24  response  and  conceded  that  the
    Decision was infected by a procedural unfairness and could not stand. I
    consider he was right to do so.

7.    It is a troubling feature of this case that the  Judge's  Decision  is
    entirely silent on any of these circumstances.

8.    The applicable law in respect of adjournments  is  helpfully  explored
    in the decision of Nwaigwe (adjournment - fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418
    (IAC). I have considered what is set out at paragraphs [7]-[9]:

         "7.      If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request,
             such decision could, in principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
             several respects: these include a failure to take into account
             all    material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
             considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair
             hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
             irrationally. In practice, in most cases the question will  be
             whether the refusal deprived the affected party of  his  right
             to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged
             on fairness grounds, it is important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness:  was there any deprivation of the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing? Any temptation to review the  conduct
             and decision of the FtT through  the  lens  of  reasonableness
             must be firmly resisted, in order to avoid a  misdirection  in
             law.  In a nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion.

         8. The cardinal rule rehearsed above is expressed in uncompromising
             language in  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SH
             (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2011] EWCA Civ 1284, at [13]:

                  'First, when considering  whether  the  immigration  Judge
                  ought to have granted an adjournment,  the  test  was  not
                  irrationality.  The test was not whether his decision  was
                  properly open to him or  was  Wednesbury  unreasonable  or
                  perverse.  The test and  sole  test  was  whether  it  was
                  unfair'.


             Alertness to this test by Tribunals at both tiers  will  serve
             to prevent  judicial  error.  Regrettably,  in  the  real  and
             imperfect world of contemporary litigation,  the  question  of
             adjourning a case not  infrequently  arises  on  the  date  of
             hearing, at the doors of the court. I am conscious, of course,
             that in the typical case the Judge  will  have  invested  much
             time and effort in preparation, is understandably  anxious  to
             complete the day's list of cases for hearing and may well feel
             frustrated  by  the  (usually)   unexpected   advent   of   an
             adjournment request. Both the FtT and the Upper Tribunal  have
             demanding   workloads.   Parties   and    stakeholders    have
             expectations, typically elevated  and  sometimes  unrealistic,
             relating to the throughput and output of cases in the  system.
             In the present era, the spotlight on  the  judiciary  is  more
             acute than ever before. Moreover, Tribunals must  consistently
             give effect  to  the  overriding  objective.  Notwithstanding,
             sensations of frustration and  inconvenience,  no  matter  how
             legitimate, must always yield to the parties' right to a  fair
             hearing.  In determining applications for adjournments, Judges
             will also be guided by focussing on the overarching  criterion
             enshrined in  the  overriding  objective,  which  is  that  of
             fairness.

         9. In passing, I am conscious that the  FtT  procedural  rules  are
             scheduled to be replaced by a new code which  is  expected  to
             come into  operation  on  20  October  2014.   The  provisions
             relating to adjournments, previously enshrined in rules 19 and
             21 have been substantially simplified.  Within the  new  code,
             the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)   Rules  2014,
             Rule 4(3)(h),  under  the  rubric  'Case  Management  Powers',
             provides that the FtT -

                       'may ...  adjourn or postpone a hearing'.

             This substantially less prescriptive  formula  reinforces  the
             necessity of giving full effect, in every case, to the  common
             law right  and  principles  discussed  above.  The  overriding
             objective remains unchanged: see Rule 2.  FtT  Judges  dealing
             with  adjournment  issues  should  continue   to   apply   the
             principles rehearsed above and the decision of  the  Court  of
             Appeal in SH (Afghanistan), giving primacy to the criterion of
             fairness."

9.    In my judgement it is apparent that  the  Judge  singularly  fails  to
    demonstrate that she  gave  consideration  and/or  had  regard  to  the
    Appellant's common law right to a fair hearing, in circumstances  where
    her Decision does not address any of the events  that  it  is  accepted
    occurred at that hearing. The Judge  has  not  given  reasons  for  her
    decision to proceed with the hearing and thus has not demonstrated  why
    in her view she considered it fair  to  proceed.  The  absence  of  any
    consideration of an adjournment or an explanation for the  decision  to
    proceed, constitute an error of law, which in this case  is  compounded
    by the Judge's adverse findings for want of medical evidence, the  very
    same evidence that formed the subject matter of the request to adjourn.



10.   In those circumstances I  find  the  Judge  erred  in  law.  The  only
    outcome must be that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Turquet
    is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing.

11.   I make one further observation should this become an issue before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. At the hearing, the original  divorce  certificate
    on file was returned to Ms Malhotra at her request (there is a  legible
    copy contained in the Appellant's bundle).

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  material  errors  of  law,
such that it shall be set aside.

The decision in the appeal is to be remade before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet  with  all  issues
at large.





Signed           Date        27 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral





