

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/02734/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                     |Promulgated                          |
|On Tuesday 24 April 2018             |             On Friday 27 April 2018 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                    M M N
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Kesar and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Although  the
Appellant no longer appeals on protection grounds, there was no  application
to discharge the order made.  It is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Nightingale promulgated on  11  April  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing his appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  4
       November 2015 refusing his protection and human rights claims.   The
       Appellant no longer appeals on protection grounds.  He relies on his
       family life, in particular as the stepfather/father of four  British
       citizen children, K (his stepdaughter, born 9 October 2007), R (born
       7 January 2014) and M (born 7 February  2016)  and  H  (born  on  16
       October 2017).


    2. Permission to appeal the Decision was granted on 5 May 2016.   By  a
       decision promulgated on 13 September  2016,  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Murray found there to be no error of law in the  Decision  and
       upheld the dismissal of  the  Appellant's  appeal.    Permission  to
       appeal that decision to the Court of Appeal  was  refused  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Gill on 13 December 2016 but was granted by the Court
       of Appeal (Rafferty LJ) on 3 November 2017.


    3. The appeal was remitted by consent  between  the  parties  by  Order
       dated 26 February 2018.  That order provided that  the  decision  of
       DUTJ Murray should be set aside and  the  appeal  be  re-determined.
       That would leave the procedural position  before  me  as  a  further
       error of law hearing.  However, the underlying statement of  reasons
       agreed between the parties recognises that there is an error of  law
       identified in  the  Decision.   The  agreed  error  relates  to  the
       Appellant's second ground of  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  as
       follows:

           "The FTT erred by failing to  properly  consider  whether  there
           were sufficiently strong reasons to render it reasonable for the
           British national children to leave the UK, having regard  to  MA
           (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
           EWCA Civ 705..."



    4. The procedural position therefore is that the  grounds  disclose  an
       error of law in the Decision which I therefore formally  set  aside.
       It is agreed that it is appropriate for this Tribunal to re-make the
       decision.


    5. The relevant factual background to this case  is  as  follows.   The
       Appellant is a national of Somalia.  He claims to have left  Somalia
       in 2008 for fear of being recruited by Al Shabaab.  He relocated  to
       South Africa where he lived from 2008 to 2014.   He  claims  he  was
       recognised as a refugee in that country.


    6. The Appellant married his wife in South  Africa  in  February  2013.
       She is a British citizen.  She has a child from a previous marriage,
       K.  The couple's first child, R, was born in the UK in January 2014.




    7. The Appellant left South Africa, he  says  because  of  a  spate  of
       violent attacks against migrants.   He  claimed  asylum  in  the  UK
       following his arrival in May 2015.   As  already  noted,  since  the
       Appellant's arrival in the UK, the couple have  had  a  further  two
       children. It is accepted that the children are British and that  the
       Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the
       children and his wife.


    Discussion and Conclusions


    8. Judge Nightingale found that  family  life  could  be  continued  in
       either Somalia or South Africa and that it would  be  reasonable  to
       expect the Appellant's wife and children to relocate  to  either  of
       those countries.


    9. The Appellant relies  on  the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  MA
       (Pakistan) and others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
       [2016] EWCA Civ 705 ("MA (Pakistan)".


   10. The Respondent's current position  appears  from  the  statement  of
       reasons to be that the children would not be compelled to leave  the
       UK as they could remain here with the Appellant's wife and therefore
       it cannot be said that it is not reasonable to expect them to  leave
       because they would not be required to do so. The  Respondent  relies
       in that regard on the Court of  Appeal  judgments  in  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department v VM (Jamaica)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  255
       ("VM") and Patel v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
       EWCA Civ 2028 ("Patel"). She relies also  on  her  recently  revised
       policy guidance entitled  "Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM  Section
       1.0b" published on 22 February 2018 ("the Guidance").


   11. I can deal quite shortly with the cases of VM and Patel which can be
       distinguished from the present appeal on the basis that both concern
       derivative  rights  of  residence  under  EU  law   (the   so-called
       "Zambrano" issue) and not the question of whether it  is  reasonable
       to expect a British Citizen child to leave the UK  when  considering
       Article 8 ECHR.  In addition,  VM  is  a  case  concerning  criminal
       deportation and therefore the  test  is  whether  deportation  of  a
       parent would have an "unduly harsh" effect  on  the  child.   It  is
       evident from the judgments that where the Court of Appeal  is  there
       dealing with the issue of whether the children could  reasonably  be
       expected to accompany the parent being removed/deported, that is  by
       contrast with whether the child is required to leave and not by  way
       of any comment on the provisions of any of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
       of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules"), EX.1(a) of  Appendix  FM  to
       the Rules or section 117B(6) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
       2002 ("the 2002 Act").


   12. In this case, the Appellant places reliance on section 117B  (6)  of
       the 2002 Act ("section 117B (6)").  That provides:

            "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal  where
           -

                  a) the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                     relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  b) it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
                     leave the United Kingdom"
       It is not  disputed  that,  as  British  citizens,  the  Appellant's
       children are "qualifying children".   Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  does
       not apply in this case as the children are  not  foreign  nationals.
       Paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix FM to the Rules is in essentially  the
       same form  as  section  117B  (6)  and  does  not  require  separate
       consideration.


   13. As the Appellant points out, in MA (Pakistan), the Court  of  Appeal
       was concerned only with children who have lived in the UK for  seven
       years or more.  None of those  cases  dealt  with  the  position  of
       British  Citizen  children.   That  is  not  though  a   reason   to
       distinguish the case; if anything, the position of a British Citizen
       child is likely to be stronger than that of a foreign national child
       who has lived here for only part of their lives (and  see  [102]  of
       the judgment in MA (Pakistan).


   14. Although it is a conclusion which the Court of Appeal  reached  with
       some reticence, it was accepted in MA (Pakistan) that  the  question
       whether it is "reasonable  to  expect"  a  child  to  leave  the  UK
       incorporates consideration of other public interest  factors.   That
       appears from [45] of the judgment as follows:

            "[45]      However, the approach I favour is inconsistent  with
           the very recent decision of the Court of Appeal in  MM  (Uganda)
           where the court came down firmly in favour of the approach urged
           upon us by Ms Giovannetti, and I do not think we  should  depart
           from it.  In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the
           conduct of the applicant and any other matters relevant  to  the
           public interest when applying the "unduly harsh"  concept  under
           section 117C (5), so should it when considering the question  of
           reasonableness under section 117B (6) ....... the critical point
           is that  section  117C  (5)  is  in  substance  a  free-standing
           provision in the same way as section 117B (6), and even  so  the
           court  in  MM  (Uganda)  held   that   wider   public   interest
           considerations must be taken  into  account  when  applying  the
           "unduly harsh" criterion.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  must  be
           equally so with  respect  to  the  reasonableness  criterion  in
           section 117B (6).  It would not be  appropriate  to  distinguish
           that decision simply because I have reservations whether  it  is
           correct.  Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case, I
           will analyse the appeals on the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of
           State's submission on this point is correct and  that  the  only
           significance of section 117B (6) is that where  the  seven  year
           rule is satisfied, it is a factor  of  some  weight  leaning  in
           favour of leave to remain being granted."



   15. The submission of the Respondent in those cases with which the Court
       of Appeal there agreed is set out at [28] to [29] of the judgment as
       follows:

           "[28] ...The focus is not simply on the child but  must  embrace
           all aspects  of  the  public  interest.   She  submits  that  in
           substance the approach envisaged in  section  117B  (6)  is  not
           materially different to that which a court  will  adopt  in  any
           other article 8 exercise.  The decision maker must ask  whether,
           paying proper regard to the best interests of the child and  all
           other relevant considerations bearing upon the public  interest,
           including the conduct and immigration history of  the  applicant
           parent or parents, it is not reasonable to expect the  child  to
           leave.  The fact that the child  has  been  resident  for  seven
           years will be a factor which must be given significant weight in
           the balancing exercise, but it  does  not  otherwise  modify  or
           distort the usual article 8  proportionality  assessment.   That
           test requires that where the parents have no right to be in  the
           UK that is the basis on  which  the  article  8  proportionality
           assessment must be made...


            [29] Ms Giovannetti submits that essentially the same  approach
           should be adopted when  applying  the  reasonableness  test;  in
           essence, it is the usual proportionality test save that the fact
           that the child has resided in the UK for seven years will  be  a
           significant factor weighing in favour of the conclusion that  it
           would not be reasonable to require the child to leave."



   16. The Court of Appeal dealt with the weight which attaches to be given
       to the factors in section 117B (6) in the public interest balance at
       [46] of the judgment as follows:

            "[46]      Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the
           fact that a child has been here for seven years  must  be  given
           significant  weight  when  carrying  out   the   proportionality
           exercise.  Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance  in
           August 2015 in the form of Immigration Directorate  Instructions
           entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life:
           10 Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated  that  once  the
           seven years' residence requirement is satisfied, there  need  to
           be "strong reasons" for refusing leave  (para.  11.2.4).   These
           instructions were not in force when the  cases  now  subject  to
           appeal were determined, but in my view, they merely confirm what
           is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature.  After  such  a
           period of time the child will have put down roots and  developed
           social, cultural and educational links in the UK such that it is
           likely to be highly disruptive if the child is required to leave
           the UK.  That may be less so when the children  are  very  young
           because the focus of their lives will be on their families,  but
           the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they   get   older.
           Moreover, in these cases there must be a very strong expectation
           that the child's best interests will be to remain in the UK with
           his parents as part of a family unit, and that must  rank  as  a
           primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."


   17. The Court reinforced that  position  at  [49]  of  the  judgment  as
       follows:

           "[49] ...the fact that the child has been in the  UK  for  seven
           years  would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in   the
           proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because
           of its relevance to determining the nature and strength  of  the
           child's best interests; and second, because it establishes as  a
           starting point that leave should be  granted  unless  there  are
           powerful reasons to the contrary."



   18. That then brings me on to the Guidance to which  Mr  Duffy  drew  my
       attention in oral submissions.  I  was  directed  to  the  analogous
       considerations of reasonableness in the section headed "EX.1. (a)  -
       Reasonable to expect (page 35 of the  Guidance)  which  it  is  said
       applies equally to the position under Section 117B (6).  That  reads
       as follows:

           "First, the decision maker must assess whether  refusal  of  the
           application will mean that the child will have to leave  the  UK
           or is likely to have to do so.  Where the decision maker decides
           that the answer to this first stage is yes, then they must go on
           to consider secondly, whether, taking into  account  their  best
           interests as a primary consideration, it is reasonable to expect
           the child to leave the UK..."



   19. That interpretation of the provision whether  it  is  reasonable  to
       expect the child to  leave  also  appears  in  the  section  of  the
       Guidance which is headed "Reasonable to expect a child to leave  the
       UK?" and which appears at page 74  onwards.  That  begins  with  the
       following statement :

           "If the effect of the refusal of the application would be, or is
           likely to be, that the child would have to  leave  the  UK,  the
           decision maker must go  on  to  consider  whether  it  would  be
           reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK."


   20. The Guidance then goes on to say this ([p76]):

           "Where the child is a British citizen


           Where the child is a British citizen, it will not be  reasonable
           to expect them to leave the UK  with  the  applicant  parent  or
           primary carer facing removal.   Accordingly,  where  this  means
           that the child would  have  to  leave  to  the  UK  because,  in
           practice, the child will not, or is not likely  to  continue  to
           live in the UK with another parent or primary carer, EX.1(a)  is
           likely to apply.


           In particular circumstances it may be appropriate to  refuse  to
           grant leave to a parent or primary  carer  where  their  conduct
           gives rise to public interest considerations of such  weight  as
           to justify their removal, where the British citizen child  could
           remain in the UK with  another  parent  or  alternative  primary
           carer, who is a British citizen or settled in the UK or who  has
           or  is  being  granted  leave  to  remain.   The   circumstances
           envisaged include those in which to grant leave could  undermine
           our  immigration  controls,  for  example  the   applicant   has
           committed significant or persistent  criminal  offences  falling
           below the thresholds for deportation set out in paragraph 398 of
           the Immigration Rules or has a very  poor  immigration  history,
           having repeatedly  and  deliberately  breached  the  Immigration
           Rules."


   21. The Guidance appears to reflect in large part the Court of  Appeal's
       guidance in MA (Pakistan).  It accepts that  the  usual  presumption
       where a British Citizen child's rights are at issue is  that  it  is
       not reasonable to expect that child to leave and it  is  only  where
       there are strong reasons of  public  interest  for  removal  that  a
       parent in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  such  a  child
       should be removed.  It may be suggested by the Respondent that  this
       appeal is to be distinguished from the  position  in  MA  (Pakistan)
       because, in accordance with what is said in the Guidance (which  was
       not in force at the time of the Court of Appeal's judgment in  those
       cases), I am required first  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant's
       children will or are likely to be required to leave the UK with  the
       Appellant and their mother or whether it is more  likely  that  they
       will remain here with their mother.  If that is  the  submission,  I
       disagree that this is what is required by Section 117B (6).  Section
       117B (6) on its face requires only  that  there  be  a  genuine  and
       subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child  (which  I
       have  accepted  applies  here)  and  an  assessment  whether  it  is
       reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

   22. By contrast, the consideration under section  117C  (5)  is  whether
       "the effect of [the parent's] deportation" is  unduly  harsh  which,
       read together with the relevant paragraph of  the  Rules  entails  a
       Judge considering whether it would be unduly harsh for  a  child  to
       leave with a foreign criminal parent or for the child to  remain  in
       the UK without that parent.  The consideration  under  Section  117B
       (6) is only whether it is reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
       the UK and not whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
       remain in the UK without one parent.  If the latter were the wording
       of the legislation, then I can  see  the  relevance  of  determining
       whether the child would in fact leave before one goes on to consider
       the effect on that child.  However, that is not what the legislation
       says.  As such, in my judgement, the Guidance in this regard imports
       words into the sub-section which do not there appear and/or puts  an
       impermissible gloss  on  the  statutory  language  (if  indeed  that
       section of the Guidance is intended to apply to  the  interpretation
       of Section 117B (6) at all).

   23. Starting then with the best interests  of  the  children,  they  are
       British citizens, born and raised in this country.  True it is  that
       they are still relatively young and may well be capable of  adapting
       to life in another country.  Save for K who is aged ten  years,  the
       remaining children are aged four  years  and  under.   There  is  an
       additional reason why K cannot leave  the  UK  as  she  is  not  the
       biological child of the Appellant.  She has a father in the  UK  and
       he would not allow K to leave ([7] of the Appellant's wife's witness
       statement).

   24. I have  little  if  any  evidence  from  the  Appellant  as  to  the
       children's best interests.  There is no suggestion that any of  them
       have health issues or that there are other considerations which mean
       that their best interests are inevitably to remain in the  UK  (save
       as mentioned above in relation to K).

   25. The fact of their British citizenship is however a  factor  of  some
       significance.  The importance of British citizenship was  underlined
       in the speech of Lady Hale (as she then  was)  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
       Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2011]  UKSC  4  ("ZH
       (Tanzania)") in the following terms :-

               "30.    Although nationality is not a "trump card" it is  of
                 particular importance in assessing the  best  interests  of
                 any child .....


             31. ..... all of these considerations apply to the children  in
                 this case. They are British children; they are British, not
                 just through the "accident" of  being  born  here,  but  by
                 descent from a British parent;  they  have  an  unqualified
                 right of abode here; they have lived here all their  lives;
                 they are being educated here; they have other social  links
                 with the community here; they have a good relationship with
                 their father here. It is not enough to  say  that  a  young
                 child may readily adapt to life in  another  country.  That
                 may well be so, particularly if she  moves  with  both  her
                 parents to a country which they know well  and  where  they
                 can easily re-integrate in their own community .... But  it
                 is very different in the case of children  who  have  lived
                 here all their lives and are being expected to  move  to  a
                 country which they do not know and will be separated from a
                 parent whom they also know well.


             32. Nor should  the  intrinsic  importance  of  citizenship  be
                 played down. As citizens these children have  rights  which
                 they will not be able to exercise if they move  to  another
                 country. They will lose the advantages of  growing  up  and
                 being educated in their own country, their own culture  and
                 their own language. They will have lost all this when  they
                 come back as adults. ...."


   26. Based on their citizenship, and notwithstanding their young  age,  I
       am satisfied that it is in the best interests of the Appellant's own
       three children to remain in the UK.  It is also very clearly in  the
       best interests of K to remain in the UK, both because she  is  older
       and therefore more accustomed to the British way of life  and  is  a
       British Citizen but also because she has another parent  in  the  UK
       from whom she would be separated if the family moved to  Somalia  or
       South Africa.

   27. I also have no  difficulty  in  finding  that  it  is  in  the  best
       interests of the children to continue to  live  with  both  parents.
       Although the Appellant did not come to the  UK  until  over  a  year
       after R was born here, the family have apparently lived  as  a  unit
       since he arrived.  It is accepted that the Appellant has  a  genuine
       and subsisting relationship with his wife and children.

   28. The starting point for consideration whether  it  is  reasonable  to
       expect the Appellant's children to leave the UK is therefore that it
       is in their best interests to remain in  the  UK  living  with  both
       parents.

   29. Returning then to what is said in MA  (Pakistan),  when  considering
       the reasonableness of  expecting  the  children  to  leave  the  UK,
       particularly strong reasons are required to refuse leave to a parent
       to whom section 117B (6) potentially applies.  Here, as Mr Mackenzie
       points out, the factors  weighing  against  the  Appellant  are  not
       strong.  He does not have a particularly poor  immigration  history.
       Although it appears that the Appellant did enter the  UK  illegally,
       he claimed asylum very shortly after he claims to  have  arrived  in
       the UK.  Although that claim was refused and dismissed on appeal and
       he no longer pursues the protection claim, it is not suggested  that
       the claim was fabricated. The Judge found that the  Appellant  would
       no longer be at risk from Al Shabaab in Somalia because  of  changed
       country conditions and could return to Mogadishu.  The  Judge  found
       that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection  in  South  Africa  in
       relation to the claimed risk  of  attacks  there.   The  Appellant's
       claim was found not to be credible in minor regards  but  the  Judge
       did not go so far as to find the whole claim to have been invented.

   30. There is, though,  also  a  finding  by  Judge  Nightingale  in  her
       decision that the Appellant entered  illegally  and  claimed  asylum
       with a view to circumventing the Rules in  relation  to  maintenance
       which the family were unable to meet.  As the Judge also found,  the
       family were living on public  funds,  the  Appellant's  wife  having
       given up her education to look after the  family.   The  Judge  also
       found that the Appellant speaks  limited  English  although  he  has
       passed the IELTS test. Those are all factors  weighing  against  the
       Appellant and in favour of the  public  interest,  applying  section
       117B of the 2002 Act.

   31. I take into account all of the above factors and in particular those
       which  suggest  that  the  Appellant  has  contrived  to  circumvent
       immigration controls.   However,  particularly  strong  reasons  are
       required to refuse leave when the best  interests  of  four  British
       Citizen children are for them to remain living with both parents  in
       the  UK.   In  this  case,  the  countervailing  reasons   are   not
       sufficiently strong to outweigh those best interests.  They are not,
       as the Respondent's Guidance puts it "public interest considerations
       of such  weight  as  to  justify  [the  Appellant's]  removal".   On
       balance, I am satisfied that removal of the  Appellant  would  be  a
       disproportionate interference with human rights, particularly  those
       of his children.

   32. In light of those  conclusions,  I  do  not  need  to  consider  the
       Appellant's alternative argument based on EU law and the  "Zambrano"
       issue.

   33. For the above reasons, I conclude that the Respondent's decision  is
       unlawful under section 6 Human Rights Act 1998 as being in breach of
       Article 8 ECHR.

DECISION


    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Nightingale  promulgated  on  11
    April 2016 is set aside.
    I re-make the decision.  I allow the Appellant's appeal.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  26 April 2018
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
