


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: PA/02595/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 December 2017                  |On 20 February 2018             |
|                                     |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    M. M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya  who  travelled  to  the  UK
           using his own passport, lawfully endorsed with a  Tier  4  visa,
           but was then refused entry because whilst he was outside the  UK
           the licence granted to his college had  been  revoked.  He  then
           claimed asylum. That claim was refused  on  1  March  2016.  His
           appeal against the decision to refuse him protection status  was
           then dismissed on all grounds by decision of First tier Tribunal
           Judge SPJ Buchanan, promulgated on 16 January 2017.
        2. The Appellant was granted permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal by decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Frances of 8 August
           2017 on the sole ground that since the Judge's decision had been
           promulgated on 28 June 2017 new country guidance  on  Libya  had
           been published; ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG  [2017]  UKUT  263.
           Arguably, although the Judge did not have the  benefit  of  that
           guidance, his  decision  was  therefore  inconsistent  with  the
           assessment of the  Upper  Tribunal,  so  that  the  humanitarian
           protection ground of appeal should be allowed.
        3. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Error of law?
        4. When the matter was called on for hearing Mr Diwnycz  on  behalf
           of the Respondent conceded that the Judge had, through no  fault
           of his own (since the requisite evidence  had  not  been  placed
           before him), erred in his assessment  of  the  situation  within
           Libya at the date of  the  hearing.  In  the  light  of  ZMM  he
           conceded on behalf of the Respondent that the  situation  within
           Libya at the date of  the  hearing  before  the  Judge  was  not
           materially different from the situation as it was assessed to be
           by the Upper Tribunal. Thus, it was conceded that at the date of
           the hearing before the Judge the violence in Libya  had  reached
           such a high level that a returning  civilian  would,  solely  on
           account of his presence in Libya, face  a  real  risk  of  being
           subject to a threat to his life or person.  No  such  concession
           was made by the Respondent before the Judge,  and  the  evidence
           placed before the Upper Tribunal on  this  issue  was  not  made
           available to him. Nevertheless it is accepted that his  decision
           upon this ground of appeal cannot stand.
        5. Ms Brakaj accepted that this was  the  sole  ground  upon  which
           permission to appeal had been granted to the Appellant.
        6. With the agreement of both parties I was  therefore  invited  to
           set  aside  only  the  decision  to  dismiss   the   appeal   on
           humanitarian protection grounds, and to remake the decision upon
           that ground, so as to allow the appeal  on  that  ground  alone.
           Thus the decision to dismiss the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
           rights grounds is confirmed.





   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  16
      January 2017 did involve the making of an error of law  that  requires
      the decision upon the humanitarian protection appeal to be  set  aside
      and remade.


      The appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.


      The decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds
      is confirmed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 13 December 2017
Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

      Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellants  are
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 13 December 2017
