
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02687/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons      |
|                                       |Promulgated               |
|On 21st July 2017                      |On 3rd August 2017        |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               Mr Mashud Rana
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gaffari, instructed by Londinium Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  11th August 1988.  He
    entered the  United Kingdom as a Tier 4 student  migrant  on  28th  May
    2014 with leave valid to 15th September 2015.  On 18th  September  2015
    he made an application for further leave to remain which  was  refused.
    On 25th January 2016 he made a further application for leave to  remain
    which was also refused on 31st March 2016 and he was served with a  one
    stop notice.  On 16th September 2016 he clamed asylum.  That claim  was
    refused by the Secretary of  State  on  9th  March  2017.   His  appeal
    against that refusal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith  on
    18th April 2017 and on 8th May 2017 the judge dismissed the  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed on the basis that the hearing proceeded  without
    the presence of the appellant.  The Tribunal 'failed  to  inform  their
    decision taken at the  CMR  on  4th  April  2017  in  response  to  the
    Appellant's request for a paper based hearing'.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge recorded that the appellant's  solicitors
    had requested a paper based hearing and recorded his response that  the
    Tribunal found that the appeal was not suitable to be  decided  on  the
    papers in view of  the  protection  issue  raised[22].  The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not communicate the decision - that there could not be   a
    paper based hearing to  the  appellant  or  his  representatives.   The
    appellant maintained that had he been informed of the decision taken at
    the CMR he would have made arrangements to  make  himself  present  and
    also would  have  arranged  his  legal  representatives  to  be  there.
    Although  the  judge  stated  that  the  appellant  was   afforded   an
    opportunity to be present and failed to do so, the Tribunal  failed  to
    communicate its decision taken at the CMR to the appellant and  he  was
    therefore unfairly denied a hearing.

 4. Further the judge erred in his  approach  to  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant. He had disregarded material facts and there was only a short
    delay between the appellant arriving in  the  UK  and  claiming  asylum
    which was only for five months.  Further, the appellant  only  advanced
    the asylum claim when necessary as previously he had a right to  be  in
    the UK.

 5. Permission was granted seemingly in relation to the procedural issue on
    the basis that the solicitors were not informed.

 6. At the hearing before me  the  appellant's  representative  produced  a
    bundle of documents with a letter attached  from  Londinium  Solicitors
    dated 27th February 2017.  This, it was asserted had been sent  to  the
    Secretary of State.  There was no indication  that  this  evidence  had
    been forwarded to the Tribunal.

 7. Mr Wilding submitted that there the solicitors had merely acted on  the
    assumption that the matter would  proceed  on  the  basis  of  a  paper
    hearing because of their request. Unless it was adjourned  they  should
    assume that the hearing would proceed.

 8. On inspection of the file it appears that the solicitors  were  advised
    in a Notice from the Tribunal dated 17th March 2017 that there  was  to
    be a pre hearing review and a full hearing on  4th  April  2017.   That
    notice also advised that the reply notice was to be submitted  by  31st
    March 2017 and failure to do  so  may  mean  that  the  Tribunal  would
    determine the appeal.  The Reply Notice was indeed sent to the Tribunal
    on 3rd April 2017 (out of time) indicating that the appellant wished to
    have a paper hearing.

 9. It should be noted the Notice from the Tribunal sent on 17th March 2017
    advised that

      'if the appeal proceeds to a Full hearing,  the  hearing  will  be  on
      Tuesday April 18th  2017' .

10. There was in fact a pre-hearing review on 4th  April  2017  before  DIJ
    Campbell who identified that the Appellant's solicitors had  asked  for
    the appeal to be decided without a  hearing.   Judge  Campbell  decided
    this was not appropriate  and  the  appeal  remained  listed  for  oral
    hearing. It was also noted that the Appellant was unlikely to attend.

11. Nothing sent by the Tribunal unsettled the previous direction that  the
    full hearing would take place on 18th April 2017.  The  solicitors  had
    already, prior to their request, received notice that the hearing would
    take place on that day.

12. Also sent out to the solicitors on 17th March 2017 were directions that
    the appellant should send to  the  Tribunal  a  witness  statement  and
    paginated and indexed bundle of 'all the documents to be relied  on  at
    the hearing'.  There was a direction that these documents  were  to  be
    sent to the Tribunal and the respondent to arrive no later than 5  days
    before the date of the Full Hearing.  Clearly the Tribunal had sent out
    a Notice of  the  hearing  and  notice  that  documentation  should  be
    provided.

13. In essence both the solicitors and appellant were notified of the  full
    hearing date on 18th April 2017 and it was not disputed that  this  had
    been received. I established that the solicitors had in  fact  sent  no
    paperwork to the Tribunal  in  response  to  the  direction  Notice  to
    provide evidence. Nothing had been received by the Tribunal.

14.  The appellant had also been advised to submit paperwork prior  to  the
    hearing. It  was  clear  that  the  Tribunal  gave  the  appellant  the
    opportunity to attend and that he and his solicitors  were  advised  of
    the date.  I find that there was in fact no  procedural  unfairness  to
    the appellant. He had indicated that he  did  not  wish  to  attend.  A
    further notice of hearing was sent out to both the  appellant  and  his
    solicitors dated 4th April 2017 but this merely reiterated the date  of
    the hearing which had already been transmitted to the parties.

15. I am not persuaded that there was, on careful analysis, an error in the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's approach. The  appellant  accepted  himself
    that even though he wished to have the matter dealt with on the  papers
    he had submitted nothing. That was noted by the judge at [30].

16. He did not, as the grounds  assert,  fail  to  claim  asylum  for  five
    months.  He failed to claim asylum for two years  and  despite  on  two
    occasions previously being served with a one stop notice.  That too the
    judge rightly points out at [31].  Nonetheless the judge considered the
    appellant's statement in his interview and considered that he  was  not
    specifically targeted.

17. In essence the judge found the  appellant  had  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student and having failed on two occasions to  extend  his  leave,  had
    embellished and fabricated an  asylum  claim  in  order  to  delay  his
    removal from the UK.  The judge did not accept he was ever a member  of
    the BNP or the events of which he complained in Bangladesh,  and  which
    occurred prior to his entry to the UK.

18. I find no procedural errors which affected the  judge's  decision  such
    that it contained an error of law and the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision shall stand.


Signed           Helen Rimington             Date  21st July     2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
