
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02590/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th March 2019                    |On 01st April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                   M S K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Rylatt, Counsel, instructed by Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan, appealed to the First-tier
Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 8th February
2018 to refuse his application for asylum, humanitarian protection and
leave to remain on the basis of his private and family life under Article 8
of the ECHR.  First-tier Tribunal E M M Smith dismissed the appeal in a
decision promulgated on 3rd January 2019.  The Appellant appeals against
that decision with permission granted by Judge M Haria on 29th January
2019.

The Background to this Appeal

The Appellant claims that he lived in Afghanistan with his parents and two
younger siblings, that the Taliban came to his home in June or July 2011
and took his father away and that he later heard that his father had been
killed by the Taliban and that the Appellant's life was in danger as the
eldest child.  The Appellant entered the UK on 12th October 2011, when he
was aged 11.  The Appellant was placed with a foster family. His
application for asylum was refused but he was granted discretionary leave
to remain valid until 1st July 2017.  He did not appeal against the
decision to refuse asylum.  On 29th June 2017 he applied for further leave
to remain. The refusal of that application is the subject of this appeal.

He has been in a relationship with a British citizen, for a number of
years.  They claim that they conducted an Islamic marriage in November
2018.  The Appellant claims that his wife's family opposed the relationship
and assaulted the Appellant and that he and his wife were under police
protection and had moved to London from the Midlands for safety reasons.

The judge considered the Appellant's asylum claim but found that he was not
credible and did not accept that the Appellant was or is of any interest to
the Taliban and did not accept his account of events in Afghanistan to be
reliable.  The judge considered the issue of internal relocation and
concluded that the Appellant could return to Kabul. The judge went on to
find that the Appellant had not established that he was at risk of serious
harm under Article 15(c).  The judge considered Article 8 and found that
the Appellant could not satisfy the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
of the Immigration Rules, nor could he establish that his removal would
breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

That decision is challenged on the basis of three grounds.

It is contended in the first ground that the judge erred in failing to
account all relevant considerations in addressing the Appellant's asylum
claim, namely the impact of his wife's proposed relocation to Afghanistan.
It is set out in the grounds and is not in dispute that at the hearing
during cross-examination the Appellant's wife said that she would go to
Afghanistan with the Appellant if he were returned there.  It is contended
in the grounds that the judge erred in failing to recognise the possible
risks to the Appellant that arise from returning to Afghanistan with her,
given that she would be identified as a Westerner.

In his submissions, Mr Rylatt contended that the mere fact of being a
Westerner gives rise to a wholly separate risk.  I pointed out to Mr Rylatt
that any risk arising from the Appellant's wife being a British citizen was
not put to the First-tier Tribunal.  He referred to his skeleton argument
before the First-tier Tribunal and I pointed out that this issue was not
raised there.  He submitted that he had only found out on the day of the
hearing that the Appellant was married to a British citizen and it was only
in cross-examination that it became apparent that she would return to
Afghanistan with him but it is clear that this was a key factor in the
judge's decision.

The issue of Westernisation is dealt with in the case of AS (Safety of
Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) as follows:

         "Risk due to westernisation


          1. The EASO Country of Origin Information Report  "Afghanistan  -
             Individuals targeted under societal and legal norms" (December
             2017) includes a  specific  section  on  targeting  of  Afghan
             returnees on the  basis  of  'Westernisation'  following  time
             spent in Europe or Western countries.  Their broad  conclusion
             on this is as follows:


                    "Documented  instances  of   individual   targeting   of
                  returning Afghans on the basis of 'Westernisation' due  to
                  having travelled in or lived in Europe, holding Western ID
                  documents, or adopting ideas that seem to be  'un-Afghan',
                  'Western'  or  'European'  following  time  spent  outside
                  Afghanistan were scarce.  Varying descriptions by  sources
                  indicated that there were 'occasional reports' of  alleged
                  kidnapping and targeting, or,  that  not  everyone  is  at
                  risk,  but  it  'does  happen,'  though  the   scale   and
                  prevalence is 'difficult to quantify', or, that  targeting
                  does not  specifically  occur  because  of  having  sought
                  asylum or having travelled to Western countries."


          2. Dr Schuster, in oral evidence stated that after a  person  has
             been out of Afghanistan it would be relatively easy  for  them
             on return to change their physical appearance  so  as  not  to
             stand out. However, it  would  be  more  difficult  to  change
             values and attitudes  that  have  been  learnt  and  developed
             whilst away from Afghanistan.  A person would have to  monitor
             and self-censor their behaviour on  return.   An  individual's
             capacity to self-censor  would  depend  upon  their  maturity,
             their mental health and their ability to be astute  about  the
             social surroundings in Afghanistan, being able to pick  up  on
             what it is inappropriate to say and to do.


          3. Dr Schuster also referred to the assumptions that people  make
             about those who have been away from  Afghanistan  about  their
             lifestyle, and  question  whether  they  have  retained  their
             Islamic faith, drink alcohol, or have relationships with women
             for example.   The  EASO  report  "Afghanistan  -  Individuals
             targeted under  societal  and  legal  norms"  also  refers  to
             perceptions  of  those  on  return,  including  concern   that
             returnees fear being labelled by insurgents  as  spies  and  a
             perception by others  that  an  individual  would  be  wealthy
             having accumulated funds abroad with the  consequent  fear  of
             kidnapping for ransom for this reason.  There is however  very
             limited evidence of kidnapping other than isolated cases.


          4. The EASO report  "Afghanistan  -  Individuals  targeted  under
             societal and legal norms" does not find any agreement from its
             sources  of  a  collective  or  consistent   attitude   toward
             'Westernisation' in Afghan society.  There are  references  to
             broader Western influence on Afghan society in recent  decades
             due to the international military presence and the  increasing
             popularity,  particularly  amongst  young   Afghans,   towards
             Western trends and influences (such as fashion,  entertainment
             and tattoos).  There are  however  strong  conservative  views
             held amongst individuals, family groups and wider communities.


          5.  Both  Dr  Schuster  and  the  EASO  report   "Afghanistan   -
             Individuals targeted under societal and legal norms" refer  to
             the risk of someone saying the wrong thing at the wrong  time,
             even in Kabul (which generally  has  a  higher  tolerance  for
             westernisation than rural areas) which would not  necessarily,
             but may, cause difficulties and because a person has  returned
             from the West could be  used  against  them  with  accusations
             made.  Further,  the  sources  both  refer  to  the  need  for
             guidance on Afghan cultural  norms  to  those  who  have  been
             absent from the country and the importance of family,  friends
             or connections to support their understanding  of  the  limits
             and   boundaries   of   societal   norms    and    behavioural
             expectations."


It is clear to me in this case that the issue raised in the Grounds of
Appeal was not put to the judge in the way expressed in the grounds.  It
was not put to the judge that there would be any specific additional risk
on internal relocation based on the fact that the Appellant's wife is a
British citizen.  In any event the judge considered the matter of
Westernisation as covered in the expert report at paragraph 28 and found
that it had not been established that there was an objective fear based on
Westernisation. Further, it is very clear, reading the asylum section as a
whole, that the judge did not accept the Appellant's claim to be credible
and therefore did not accept that the Appellant is at risk in his home
area.  Therefore, any assessment of internal relocation was an alternative
finding. Even if the judge made an error in relation to internal
relocation, which I do not accept, this is not material and does not
undermine the judge's findings in relation to the asylum aspect of the
claim.

I note that the judge's findings in relation to asylum outside of the
internal relocation issue have not been challenged.  In these
circumstances, there is no material error in relation to the approach to
internal relocation.

It is contended in the second ground that the judge failed to take into
account all relevant considerations in assessing the Appellant's claim
under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and/or failing to provide adequate reasons
for the refusal of his claim.  The judge considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
at paragraph 44 of the decision where he said: "However, having concluded
that the Appellant can internally relocate to Kabul I am satisfied he
cannot satisfy the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)."

Mr Rylatt contended that that test in relation to internal relocation,
which is whether it would be unduly harsh to relocate, is different from
the test in 276ADE(1)(vi), which is whether there would be very significant
obstacles to reintegration.  In his submission, the issue of Westernisation
would be relevant to reintegration as would the Appellant's mental health
and the fact that he has no contact with his family.

I accept that the judge's consideration of this issue was brief. However,
in my view, it is sufficiently clear that he had all relevant matters in
mind when considering whether there would be very significant obstacles to
the Appellant's integration in Afghanistan. At paragraph 11 he set out the
evidence as to the relationship which he clearly had in mind. At paragraph
29 he set out the evidence of the Appellant's wife that she would return to
Afghanistan with him. At paragraph 30 the judge listed factors related to
the Appellant in terms of his presence and progress in the UK which would
serve him well in the future.  At paragraph 32 the judge considered the
factors as to risks in Afghanistan and the fact that the Appellant would be
returning there with his wife and concluded that the Appellant could return
to Afghanistan.

I accept that the judge appears to have been mistaken at paragraph 32 where
he said that the Appellant indicated a desire to trace his family through
the Red Cross but there was no evidence that the trace was actually
undertaken. In fact, at pages 16 to 18 of the supplementary bundle there is
a letter from the Red Cross (undated) which states that with the details
given the Red Cross had been unable to obtain any information from any of
the sources given regarding the present location of his relatives.
However, I note that the letter from the Red Cross clarifies that, even
though they had been unable to find the person sought, it did not mean that
the relative could not be traced through other channels.

Mr Rylatt further contended that the judge failed to take into account the
Appellant's mental health in relation to 276ADE (1)(vi).  However, in my
view, there was limited evidence before the judge of the Appellant's mental
health.

Mr Rylatt also referred to the Appellant's supplementary witness statement
where he described the dispute with his wife's family and stated that his
foster mother had to resign as his carer for his and her own safety and
protection and said that this had caused him a lot of distress and
heartache.  He also referred to the Appellant's second witness statement in
the first bundle where he said at paragraph 29 that he was depressed and
worried about his future and was losing sleep and having nightmares and had
been prescribed medication from his GP to help him relax and sleep
(statement of 22nd May 2018).  He also pointed to a photocopy of medication
at pages 85 to 86 of the Appellant's bundle. However the Appellant's own
assertion and a list of medication is not adequate evidence on which to
make sustainable findings as to the Appellant's mental health. In these
circumstances, I do not see how the judge could have attached any
significant weight to this matter.

Mr Rylatt relied on the case of IA (Somalia) v Secretary of State [2007]
EWCA Civ 323 and submitted that it could not be said that consideration of
these issues would not have made a difference to the judge's conclusions in
the case.  In any event, he submitted that the judge had failed to give
adequate reasons for his conclusion in relation to 276ADE(1)(vi).

In my view, the judge's consideration of this issue was adequate on the
basis of the evidence before him and the case put to him.  The specific
issue of risks arising from Westernisation in relation to the Appellant's
wife was not put to the judge and Mr Rylatt did not highlight any evidence
before the judge which could have led him to any other conclusion on this
matter. In these circumstances, the judge was entitled to reach the
conclusions raised at paragraph 44.

It is contended in the third ground that the judge failed to apply a
structured analysis in relation to Article 8.  I accept that the judge's
analysis of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules at paragraph 45 is
brief.  However, the judge accepted that there is family life between the
Appellant and his wife but took into account the very significant evidence
from her that she will go to Afghanistan with the Appellant if he is
returned there.  The judge noted that the Appellant has no other family
life over and above that with his wife.  In my view, this was a conclusion
open to the judge on the basis of the evidence.

It appears from the decision that the evidence before the judge at that
time was that the Appellant and his wife were living in London, away from
his foster family and her family because of the dispute with her family as
to their relationship. Mr Rylatt referred to the factors set out in
paragraph 35 of his skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal.
However, these include the family bonds with the foster mother and he
accepted that at the time of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the
Appellant had moved away from his foster family.  The skeleton argument
highlights the Appellant's relationship with his wife, which was taken into
account by the judge.  The other factors highlighted are factors under
Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  However, these too were taken into account
by the judge. The list also identified the Appellant's friendships with
friends from school.  However, I note that the evidence before the judge
was that, at the time of the hearing, a number of the Appellant's friends
had turned against him and started harassing and causing problems for him
as a result of his relationship (the Appellant's witness statement of 29th
November 2018 and that of his wife of the same date).

Mr Rylatt submitted that there was evidence before the judge that there
were cultural and ethnical difficulties between the couple which had caused
tension in the UK (Appellant's wife's statement of 29th November 2018) and
that it could be extrapolated that there would be cultural and ethnical
difficulties in Afghanistan.  However, this was not the evidence before the
judge and I do not agree that it could be extrapolated from the evidence
before him.

Accordingly, in my view, the judge's conclusions in relation to Article 8
were open to him on the basis of the evidence.

In my view, the grounds amount to disagreement with the judge's conclusions
on the case as put to him.  The judge considered all of the evidence and
reached findings open to him in relation to the asylum claim.  In fact,
these have not been challenged.  The judge did not have to go on to
consider internal relocation but did so. However the factors considered in
that assessment were factors which fed into the assessment of paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) and Article 8 and I find that it was clear that the judge had
those factors in mind in reaching those conclusions.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 27th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed.  Therefore, there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 27th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes







