
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02546/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 May 2018                                |On 8 January 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                              ELANCHELIYAN [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Gherman of Counsel instructed by Nag Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa promulgated on 28 November 2017 dismissing the Appellant's
    appeal on protection grounds against a decision of the Respondent dated
    28 February 2017 to refuse asylum.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  29  June  1985.  His
    immigration history is helpfully summarised at paragraphs  2-4  of  the
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal: it is  unnecessary  to  repeat  it
    again in its  entirety.  However,  for  present  purposes  I  note  the
    following salient features: the  Appellant  first  entered  the  UK  in
    February  2011  further  to  entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  4  student;
    applications for further leave to  remain  were  refused;  following  a
    refusal with no right of appeal on 18 March 2013 the Appellant  claimed
    asylum on 6 April 2013; his application was refused  and  a  subsequent
    appeal dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 July  2013  (ref  AA/04590/2013);  the  Appellant  was
    refused permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  became  'appeal
    rights exhausted' on 2 September 2013; the Appellant was detained on 14
    February 2014 and on 25 February 2014 made further submissions  to  the
    Respondent in respect of his asylum claim: the further submissions were
    rejected with no right of  appeal;  the  Appellant  commenced  judicial
    review proceedings on 18 October 2016 which in due course were  settled
    on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent  would  withdraw  the   decision;
    thereafter, on 28 February 2017 the Respondent made the  decision  that
    is the subject of these proceedings.


3.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


4.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the Decision  of  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa.


6.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 17 January 2018.


7.   To understand the bases of the challenge before the Upper  Tribunal  it
    is necessary to have regard to the following contextual matters.

     (i) The Appellant's narrative account  of  events  in  Sri  Lanka  that
    informed his claim for asylum  included  in  particular  the  following
    points: since the age of 12 (1997)  he  resided  in  Colombo  with  his
    family where he was educated to degree level; his brother was a  member
    of the LTTE; in March 2008 the Appellant was arrested and  interrogated
    about his brother; during his  interrogation  he  confessed  to  having
    helped to obtain ID cards for two friends of his brother which  enabled
    them  to  travel  to  and  reside  in  Colombo;   the   Appellant   was
    fingerprinted during his detention; he was ill-treated; he was held for
    three  weeks;  after  his  release  he  continued  in  his   university
    education;  in  2009  his  brother  surrendered  to  the   Sri   Lankan
    authorities and entered the government 'rehabilitation'  programme;  on
    15 September 2010 the Appellant was arrested again; the  basis  of  his
    arrest was that he had previously  housed  his  brother,  had  obtained
    identity cards for friends of his brother, and had  supplied  the  LTTE
    with medicines; the Appellant was held until 10 December 2010  when  he
    was freed after the intervention of the  EPDP;  his  national  identity
    card was retained by the authorities; after his release he stayed  with
    an  aunt  in  Vavuniya  until  arrangements  could  be  made  with  the
    assistance of the EPDP to leave Sri Lanka; to this end entry  clearance
    was obtained as a student further to an application made on 21  January
    2011.

    (ii) In refusing the Appellant's appeal  Judge  Blundell  rejected  the
    credibility of the Appellant's narrative account: "... I  do  not  find
    the appellant to be a credible witness. I do not  accept  that  he  has
    rendered assistance the LTTE, that his brother was  a  member  of  that
    organisation, or that he has ever been  detained  by  the  authorities"
    (paragraph 40). See also at paragraph 62 - "I am left in no doubt  that
    the appellant's account is a fabrication designed to ensure that he can
    remain in the United Kingdom for economic reasons".

     (iii)    Before Judge  Blundell  the  Appellant  relied  upon,  amongst
    other  things,  items  of  documentary  evidence  that  were  said   to
    corroborate his account: see decision of Judge Blundell at paragraph 9.
    The documents included a letter  from  a  Sri  Lankan  attorney.  Judge
    Blundell found that the Appellant's account was inconsistent  with  the
    contents of this letter, and this was a  significant  factor  in  Judge
    Blundell's overall evaluation of the Appellant's credibility:  "...what
    I considered to be serious inconsistencies between the account advanced
    by the appellant and that which is recounted in the  letter  from  [G],
    the Sri Lankan attorney who supposedly assisted him in 2008  and  2010"
    (paragraph 44). (See further at paragraphs 53-59 for  Judge  Blundell's
    evaluation of the supporting documentary materials.)

     (iv)     Before Judge Blundell  the  Appellant  also  sought  to  place
    reliance  upon  a  scar  on  his  left  foot  which  he   claimed   was
    corroborative  of  his  account  of  having  been  ill-treated   whilst
    detained: see  paragraphs  22  and  34.  Judge  Blundell  rejected  the
    Appellant's evidence in this regard in the following terms:

         "I turn finally to consider the appellant's left foot. I have  been
         provided with some photos which are said to show a scar  which  was
         sutured following the appellant's torture in 2008. I can attach  no
         weight to these photographs. The scar is not even clearly a scar as
         opposed to a naturally occurring crease in  the  underside  of  the
         appellant's  foot.  In  any  event,  [the  Home  Office  Presenting
         Officer]  was  entirely  correct  to  submit  that  it   would   be
         inappropriate to  conclude  that  such  a  scar  provided  material
         support for  the  appellant's  account  without  a  medical  report
         confirming (at least) that it is a scar and, preferably, performing
         an Istanbul Protocol  compliant  assessment  of  the  mark  itself.
         Considering  it  in  the  round,  I  find  it  of  no  assistance."
         (paragraph 61).

     (v) When the Appellant presented his further submissions in support  of
    a purported fresh claim he relied upon the same  narrative  account  as
    had been rejected by Judge Blundell, but sought to support it by way of
    'new' evidence being a corrected  translation  of  a  letter  from  his
    mother dated 5 June 2013 (which had been previously before the Tribunal
    with a different  translation):  see  letter  from  Nag  Law  dated  25
    February 2014. The pertinent correction in the translation  appears  to
    have been the addition of the word 'again' to denote  that  the  lawyer
    had been involved in respect of the detention in March 2008 as well  as
    2010 - cf. paragraph 56 of  Judge  Blundell's  decision.  It  was  also
    pleaded that the Appellant had been  involved  in  'diaspora  activity'
    whilst in the UK respect of "the humanitarian crisis and  human  rights
    conditions Sri Lankan Tamils in Sri  Lanka".  The  further  submissions
    otherwise sought to rely upon changes in the country guidance decisions
    in respect of Sri Lanka, and other matters in respect of the background
    country situation rather than advancing anything new  or  different  in
    respect of the Appellant's personal circumstances and history.

     (vi)      Before  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  the  Appellant  resubmitted  his
    appeal bundle that had been before  Judge  Blundell,  together  with  a
    supplementary bundle. The supplementary bundle included photographs  of
    the Aappellant attending demonstrations in the UK, a further  statement
    from his mother, a further letter from the Sri Lankan  attorney  (dated
    15 November 2016), and a medical report dated  30  April  2017  from  a
    specialist in accident and emergency medicine. (See decision  of  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa at paragraphs 51-52.)

     (vii)    The medical report referred to the  scar  on  the  Appellant's
    foot, but also additionally referred to scars on his forearm.


8.   Judge Gurung-Thapa concluded that there was no  basis  to  differ  from
    the  findings  of  Judge  Blundell  (paragraph  60).  As  regards   the
    correction to the translation of the Appellant's mother's  letter,  the
    Judge observed that there were nonetheless other discrepancies  between
    the mother's account and the Appellant's narrative (paragraph  65).  In
    respect of the further evidence from the attorney, the  Judge  did  not
    accept that the attorney had previously made a mistake (paragraphs  66-
    69). The Judge considered the medical evidence now  provided,  and  the
    Appellant's account in  respect  of  how  he  had  sustained  scarring;
    however the Judge concluded "I reject his claim that the scars on which
    he relies were caused in the manner claimed" (paragraph 86)  -  noting,
    amongst other things, that the Appellant had not related the  cause  of
    the scarring during his previous appeal in the manner now claimed:  see
    paragraphs 72-86. The Judge noted the Appellant's diaspora activities -
    accepting that he "has attended various  demonstrations/protests",  but
    that "his role appears at its highest to be a very low level  activity"
    (paragraph 97), and ultimately concluded that such activity  would  not
    put him at risk upon return to Sri Lanka (paragraphs 91 - 100).


9.    In  my  judgement  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's   findings   and
    conclusions have been made pursuant to a full and careful  analysis  of
    the evidence and arguments in the appeal, such analysis being  set  out
    with sustainable and adequately clear reasoning  in  the  body  of  the
    decision. Ultimately I find no substance in the Appellant's challenge.




10.  The Appellant seeks to challenge the Judge's approach  to  the  medical
    evidence provided in support of his claim to be a  victim  of  torture.
    Necessarily this evidence was relied upon in support of the Appellant's
    account to have been detained by the Sri Lankan authorities - a  matter
    previously rejected by Judge Blundell.


11.  The grounds of appeal  plead  that  the  Judge  did  not  give  "proper
    weight" to  the  medical  evidence  (grounds  at  paragraph  19a).  The
    substance of this challenge is set  out  at  paragraphs  21-26  of  the
    Grounds. In large part these paragraphs read as a disagreement with the
    weight accorded by  the  Judge  to  the  medical  report,  rather  than
    specifically identifying any error of law in the Judge's approach: they
    present more as a dispute with  the  outcome,  and  conclude  with  the
    pleading that "the report should have  been  given  substantially  more
    weight  in  rebutting  the  adverse  credibility  findings  from  Judge
    Blundell...".


12.  However, in granting permission to appeal, Judge Keane's attention  was
    caught by an apparent error at paragraph 83 of the decision.


13.  In this context the grounds of appeal argue that the  Judge  fell  into
    error in  stating  that  the  medical  report  concluded  that  it  was
    'extremely likely' that the Appellant's injuries had been  caused  from
    self-infliction: "He also asserts that it is in his  opinion  extremely
    likely that the scars described above result from wounds that were self-
    inflicted or inflicted on the appellant with  his  consent"  (paragraph
    83). The opinion expressed in the report was that this  was  'extremely
    unlikely'.


14.  I agree with the  contention  advanced  in  the  Respondent's  Rule  24
    response dated 13 February 2018 to the effect that  in  context  it  is
    clear that the Judge understood that the medical report opined that  it
    was unlikely that the scars were caused by self-infliction.  The  Judge
    immediately goes on at paragraph 83 to note that the doctor  recognised
    that "these possibilities cannot be entirely eliminated", before adding
    that "the doctor does not explain why he  discounted  that  the  wounds
    were self-inflicted or inflicted on the appellant  with  his  consent":
    these observations make no sense unless the Judge understood the doctor
    to be opining that it was 'unlikely' (rather than 'likely').


15.  Moreover the Judge accurately records  the  doctor's  opinion  in  this
    regard at paragraph 79.


16.  As such in context it seems to me that the  word  'likely'  appears  at
    paragraph 83 as a mere slip or typographical error.  Indeed  when  this
    was suggested as a possibility to Ms Gherman she did not seriously seek
    to dispute it, but rather suggested that it was an example  of  one  of
    many slips or irregularities such as perhaps  to  render  the  decision
    unsafe. I do not accept this more  general  criticism  of  the  Judge's
    decision; in any event as regards the particular allegation, I  do  not
    accept the use of 'likely' instead of 'unlikely'  at  paragraph  83  is
    demonstrative of  a  general  misreading  or  misunderstanding  of  the
    medical report.


17.  As indicated above, it seems to me that the grounds of appeal  in  this
    regard are otherwise essentially an expression of disagreement with the
    Judge's evaluation of this aspect of the Appellant's case.


18.  Even if it might be said  that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  identify  a
    discrepancy  between  the  doctor's  opinion  that  the  scar  on   the
    Appellant's left foot would result from skin being split by a blow with
    a stick, and his earlier opinion that such a scar would result  from  a
    wound caused by contact with a hard or thin  edged  object  such  as  a
    whip, knife, shard of glass, or stone  -  this  does  not  in  any  way
    significantly increase the probative value of the scar in circumstances
    where the doctor recognised that scars on the soles of  feet  were  not
    uncommon and frequently resulted from accidental lacerations caused  by
    walking barefoot over rough ground. Nor does any of  this  address  the
    real difficulty in respect of the Appellant's account  of  having  been
    injured during torture: specifically that he made  no  mention  in  the
    earlier proceedings that, as he now claimed, he had  been  deliberately
    burnt by cigarettes during his detention. In the circumstances it seems
    to me that it can have been of little or no surprise to  the  Appellant
    and his advisers that this aspect of his claim met with  a  finding  of
    incredulity - and certainly not something in respect  of  which  it  is
    possible to identify any error of approach in the overall evaluation of
    the Judge. In this context it must have been obvious to  the  Appellant
    and his advisers that he would need to  address  the  apparent  earlier
    omission to refer to such specific ill-treatment and  the  presence  of
    supposedly corroborative scarring: accordingly I do not accept that the
    Judge could be considered to be at fault, as is suggested at  paragraph
    24  of  the  grounds,  for  not  directly  inviting   the   Appellant's
    explanation in this regard. (Even now, as Ms Gherman acknowledged,  the
    Appellant has not filed anything  by  way  of  explanation  as  to  his
    omission of such matters in the previous proceedings.)


19.  I consider the Judge to have fully explored the relevant issues in  the
    round, in particular at paragraph 84. Therein  it  is  noted  that  the
    Appellant relied in the previous proceedings only on the  scar  on  his
    left foot and made no mention of supposed cigarette burns on  his  left
    forearm resulting  from  torture.  This  was  notwithstanding  that  he
    "provided a detailed account of how he was  treated  during  his  first
    detention", and thereafter made no reference to having been ill-treated
    during his second detention. Ms  Gherman  accepted  that  the  doctor's
    opinion did not appear to have been expressed with any  knowledge  that
    the Appellant had not  at  any  point  hitherto  alleged  that  he  had
    sustained injuries during detention by being burnt with cigarettes.


20.  I find no merit in the  line  of  challenge  premised  on  the  Judge's
    supposed failure to give adequate weight to the medical evidence.


21.  Challenge was also made to the  Judge's  approach  to  the  documentary
    evidence from the Appellant's mother and the Sri Lankan attorney.


22.  I can see no substance in the submission set  out  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal pursuant  to  PJ  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1011.  The  fact  that  the
    Respondent did not conduct an evaluation of the  Appellant's  documents
    by way of making enquiries in Sri Lanka does not mean that the Tribunal
    was bound to accept the documents as reliable evidence of the truth  of
    their contents, and/or was not  otherwise  required  to  make  its  own
    evaluation in all of the circumstances of the appeal.


23.  Nor can I see that the Appellant's case is advanced in  any  meaningful
    way by seeking to make a distinction between the attorney's letters and
    other documents said to relate to his arrest - an 'arrest  receipt',  a
    cash receipt, and an extract from a police book. These latter documents
    were included in the Appellant's bundle before Judge  Blundell  and  as
    such were not new documents. I fail to see how they could have  assumed
    any more significance in the Appellant's appeal in light of the  second
    letter from the attorney in  circumstances  where  the  Judge  did  not
    accept the claim that the attorney had made an  error  in  his  earlier
    letter. To this extent the absence of any  more  detailed  analysis  of
    these documents in the decision of Judge Gurung-Thapa does  not  amount
    to a material omission, and does not constitute an error of law.


24.  The Appellant seeks to challenge the Judge's  characterisation  of  the
    most recent letter from his mother as "a self-serving document in order
    to support the Appellant's claim" (paragraph 70), with reference to the
    case of SS ('self-serving' statements) [2017] UKUT 164 (IAC).


25.  I acknowledge  that  considerable  caution  requires  to  be  exercised
    before characterising a document or statement as 'self-serving'  -  and
    that it will be rare, if ever, appropriate  merely  to  characterise  a
    supporting statement as 'self-serving' without  more.  However,  in  my
    judgement that was plainly not the case here. The  Judge's  observation
    at paragraph 70 must  be  seen  in  context:  it  comes  after  careful
    analysis of the other documents relied upon by the Appellant, including
    from his mother. In such  circumstances  it  is,  in  my  judgement,  a
    sustainable observation. I detect no error of law in this regard.


26.  I note that in granting permission to  appeal  Judge  Keane  considered
    that it was arguable  that  the  Judge  had  misdirected  herself  when
    considering the weight to be attached to the decision of Judge Blundell
    by reason of having "advanced as  a  reason  for  concluding  that  the
    Appellant had not given a credible account that  he  had  not  made  an
    attempt to deal with the  findings  made  by  [Judge  Blundell]".  This
    appears to be a reference to paragraph 18 of the grounds  of  challenge
    which, in context, appears to  criticise  the  Judge's  observation  at
    paragraph 59. However, what Judge Gurung-Thapa  said  at  paragraph  59
    was, in part, this: "The appellant has made no  attempt  whatsoever  to
    deal with the findings made by Judge Blundell and  the  assertions  set
    out in the reasons  for  refusal  letter  by  the  respondent,  in  his
    supplementary witness statement. The statement merely  deals  with  the
    demonstrations/protest he is attended in the UK". That is  an  accurate
    statement. It cannot possibly be implied  from  such  a  statement,  or
    otherwise from the decision, that the Judge did not have regard to  all
    of the materials and arguments advanced by the Appellant  in  which  he
    sought to address the adverse assessment previously made in his earlier
    appeal. Indeed such matters were at the core of the case  as  presented
    before Judge Gurung-Thapa. It is manifestly the  case  that  the  Judge
    dealt with all such matters in detail and at length.


27.  Nothing of substance was advanced by way of challenge  to  the  Judge's
    conclusions in respect of the Appellant's 'diaspora activity'  and  the
    possibility of any consequent  risk  upon  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  The
    highest the matter was put in the Grounds of Appeal was a reference  at
    paragraph 20 to the fact  that  Judge  Blundell  made  no  findings  in
    relation to diaspora activity, and that  in  such  circumstances  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa should have commenced a consideration of  the  Appellant's
    case in this regard on the basis that there had been no  prior  adverse
    evaluation. I am unable to understand the relevance of this  point:  as
    noted  above  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  made  independent  findings  on  the
    evidence before her as to the Appellant's activities in the UK - indeed
    accepting that he had  taken  part  in  demonstrations/protests  -  and
    otherwise made an evaluation pursuant to country  guidance  as  to  the
    possibility of any consequent risk. Nothing in the  grounds  of  appeal
    articulates a challenge by way of error of law to this evaluation.  Nor
    did the grant of permission to appeal suggest that there was  merit  in
    any such challenge. Ms Gherman did not seek to develop any  submissions
    in this regard.

28.  In all of the circumstances I find that there was no error of  law  and
    reject the Appellant's challenge.


Notice of Decision

29.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
stands.


30.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


23.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 5 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
