
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02793/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 21st October 2020             |On the 30th October 2020             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     DJ
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Albania,  appeals  with  permission
         against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Davison)
         (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")  who   dismissed   his
         protection appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  the  12  February
         2020.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 21 October 2020, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via  video.  There
         were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Mr Jafar and Ms Pettersen  for  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

Background:

      5. The immigration history of the appellant is set out in the decision
         letter and the decision of the FtTJ.

      6. The appellant is a national of Albania. He arrived  in  the  United
         Kingdom on a visit Visa in October 2017 accompanied by his wife and
         two children. On 2 November 2017 he applied for asylum,  his  wife,
         and children as dependents upon that claim.

      7. The basis of his claim was that he had been in  the  Albanian  army
         since 2008 and went  to  assist  the  NATO  forces  in  Afghanistan
         between January -July 2012. Upon his return he stated that  he  had
         been discriminated against within his community  and  had  suffered
         verbal abuse and was not invited to community  events.  He  claimed
         that after he was enlisted for a second tour to Afghanistan that he
         received his first threat from unknown men but whom  he  considered
         would be "Islamic extremists".

      8. The first threat was on the 23 January 2017 and then  his  car  was
         attacked on 26 January 2017. A grenade was left outside his door on
         31 August 2017 and he was threatened by two men  in  public  on  15
         September 2017.

      9. The appellant claimed that the attacks on 26 January and 31  August
         2017 were reported to the police and the family sought updates.

     10. The appellant stated that he left the army on 15 October  2017  and
         the family fled Albania on 22 October 2017.

     11. In a decision letter of 7 March 2019, the  respondent  refused  his
         claim for asylum. In that decision, the respondent  made  reference
         to his claim and the threats from extremists and the evidence  that
         had been provided in support.  It  was  noted  that  the  appellant
         stated in interview that he had only reported the  incident  of  26
         January 2017 to the police and that it was difficult to  understand
         why he would not report  a  dangerous  explosive  such  as  a  hand
         grenade being delivered to the door. No information was provided as
         to how he safely disposed of the hand grenade either.  It  is  also
         noted that he had been receiving threats since 23 January 2017 that
         the threats had not been acted upon during his time in Albania. The
         respondent considered that those he feared had ample opportunity to
         act upon the threats from January to October 2017 that he  and  his
         family did not experience any physical harm.  The  respondent  also
         considered that he had given inconsistent evidence about  how  many
         threats he received and that he had stayed  in  Albania  from  July
         2012 until January 2017 with  no  major  problems.  The  respondent
         considered that he provided no evidence to suggest  he  was  behind
         the threats or whether they were linked to  claim  persecutors.  At
         paragraphs  47  -  56  the  respondent  considered  the  issue   of
         sufficiency of protection and concluded that  taking  into  account
         the objective material in relation  to  Albania  that  it  was  not
         established that there was a  sustained  and  systemic  failure  of
         state protection on the part of  the  authorities.  The  respondent
         also considered that internal relocation would be possible for  him
         at paragraphs 60 - 69.

     12. The appellant appealed that decision, and his  appeal  came  before
         the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Sweet) who, a  decision  promulgated
         on 2 May 2019, dismissed  his  appeal.  Permission  to  appeal  was
         sought and the appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan,
         who in a decision promulgated on 15 August 2019  found  a  material
         error of law on the basis that Judge Sweet had failed to  give  any
         or any adequate reasoning for dismissing the  appeal  and  that  no
         actual findings of fact had been made  (see  paragraph  9  of  that
         decision). As a result, he remitted the appeal to be reheard  again
         by a fresh First-tier Tribunal judge.

     13. The appeal came before the FtT for a second time on 13 January 2020
         before FtTJ Davison. He had the opportunity of hearing the evidence
         of the appellant that in a decision promulgated  on  12th  February
         2020 he dismissed his appeal.

     14. The FtTJ  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  undertaken  military
         service in Albania and further accepted that his father and  mother
         were in the army and that  his  father  had  reached  the  rank  of
         Colonel. The judge further accepted that  during  his  service  the
         appellant  went  to  Afghanistan  as  part  of  the   international
         peacekeeping force as set out in the certificate dated  3  November
         2017 (at [29]).

     15. However, the FtTJ did not accept that he had been involved  in  the
         threats and incidents of violence as he had  asserted.  Whilst  the
         judge accepted that his presence in Afghanistan may not  have  been
         acceptable to all  members  of  the  local  community,  and  whilst
         accepting he suffered some social ostracism and  verbal  abuse,  he
         did not accept for the reasons given that a grenade was left at his
         house, or a note had been left on his  car  nor  the  other  events
         relating to  the  car  incident.   The  judge  found  at  [30]  the
         appellant's family had been living in Albania for many years  after
         his first trip to Afghanistan in 2012 and although he suffered some
         ostracism they were not targeted and persecuted. At [31] the  judge
         took into account that his father was a "high ranking official  who
         still resides in Albania" but that he had not received any  threats
         as a result of his involvement in the army or due to the fact  that
         the appellant was his son.

     16. Having considered the positive and  negative  findings,  the  judge
         reached the  conclusion  that  upon  approaching  the  end  of  his
         military service and with  a  young  family  the  appellant  sought
         economic betterment in the UK. The judge did not accept that he had
         a well-founded fear of persecution should he and his family  return
         to Albania. The judge therefore stated that he  did  not  find  his
         account have been credible. But in any event, the appellant had now
         left the army and has not been to Afghanistan since 2012 (at [33]).

     17. Permission to appeal was sought and was granted on 19 March 2020 by
         FtTJ Appleyard who stated as follows:

             "the grounds assert that the judge failed to consider relevant
             evidence in relation to the appellant being  targeted  because
             he had fought and was going to fight again in 2018  with  NATO
             forces against the Islamists in Afghanistan,  that  the  judge
             failed to take into account expert evidence and  in  assessing
             the  background  material,  that  the  judge's  reasoning   is
             illogical and that he has erred in his credibility findings.

             All grounds are arguable."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     18. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     19. Mr Jafar, Counsel on  behalf  of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the
         written grounds of appeal. I also heard oral  submission  from  the
         advocates, and I am grateful for their assistance and  their  clear
         oral submissions.

The submissions on behalf of the appellant:

     20. Mr Jafar began his submissions by relying on the written grounds as
         supplemented by his oral argument.

     21. In respect of paragraph 5 of the grounds, the judge referred to the
         appellant being Muslim as a reason why extremists would not  target
         him and that it was incredible that they would have waited since he
         last served in Afghanistan in 2012 ( see paragraphs 22 - 23). It is
         submitted that the judge omitted or failed to  consider  the  point
         that he was targeted by extremists because he was going to fight in
         2018. That was clear from the certificate of the  Mayor  which  the
         judge accepted as reliable at [24]. The appellant in his  interview
         also stated this at question 64  where he  said  he  was  going  to
         another mission .Therefore the judge rejected his account  of  risk
         of harm on a false premise (that it was not credible  that  he  was
         persecuted because he was a Muslim and he had served in  2012)  and
         thus went on to  reject  the  events  of  persecution  and  threats
         against him.

     22. In relation to this point, at paragraph 6 of the grounds, Mr  Jafar
         submitted that in reaching his decision he failed to  take  account
         of the expert report and the change  in  circumstances  in  Albania
         between the tour of Afghanistan in 2012  and  the  second  upcoming
         tour.

     23. In his submissions to the Tribunal  he  directed  my  attention  to
         particular parts of the report. He submitted that the expert report
         gave a chronology of ISIS in Albania. At page 19 (page  158AB)  (an
         article in 2014) referred to  ISIS  declaring  authority  over  all
         Sunni Muslims in June 2014 and the declaration was translated  into
         Albanian. Following that there was a slow progression in  the  next
         article referred to 2015. References are made to the  emergence  of
         ISIS. At page 22  there  was  reference  to  the  reintegration  of
         returnees and those holding extremist ideology. Thus, he  submitted
         the evidence suggested that there was no ISIS presence  until  June
         2014 and from the date afterwards there  was  a  slow  approach  in
         Albania. In 2016 ISIS gained a firm foothold.  Thus,  he  submitted
         the FtTJ should have taken that into account in his assessment that
         it would not be reasonably likely after five years  or  after  2012
         that he would have received such threats. At  page  112  a  further
         article referred to the arrest in 2019 of a  terrorist  who  was  a
         serving soldier. Therefore, the appellant's claim was credible when
         he stated that he was targeted because he was to start  a  tour  in
         Afghanistan in December 2017. The FtTJ rejected  his  claim  on  an
         inaccurate basis and an incomplete picture.

     24. Dealing with paragraph 7 of the grounds, the FtTJ made a finding it
         [24] that individuals had disagreed with the appellant but did  not
         threaten him but that finding was not supported by  any  reasoning.
         The judge accepted the documentary evidence that the appellant  had
         reported an intimidation act against him on  31  January  2017  and
         that on 7 February 2017 it was being investigated by the police  as
         a crime and the certificate from the  mayor  that  the  appellant's
         detractors were being investigated. However, the judge  found  that
         the individuals had a mere  disagreement  with  the  appellant  not
         amounting to threats whereas the evidence showed that  the  actions
         of his persecutors amounted to criminal acts.  Mr  Jafar  submitted
         that the judge's reasoning here is illogical.

     25. In respect of paragraph 25 of the FtTJ's decision,  the  judge  did
         not  accept  that  a  grenade  was  left  outside  the  appellant's
         residence on 31 August 2017 because the  mayor's  letter  makes  no
         reference to this and that he would have known of  it.  However  Mr
         Jafar submitted that the letter made no  reference  to  any  events
         including those that the FtTJ accepted as being treated as criminal
         acts. Therefore the judge was wrong and illogical  to  expect  that
         the mayor's letter should corroborate specific events  when  it  is
         clear that the letter did not intend to do so.  It  was  a  further
         error of law by seeking corroboration.

     26. At paragraph [22] the FtTJ found that a note and flowers  were  not
         mentioned by three witnesses and therefore he did not  accept  that
         those  items  were  left  on  the  appellant's  car.  However,  the
         appellant produced pictures of the car with the  object  and  three
         witnesses confirmed that objects were  placed  on  the  appellant's
         car. Also, in respect of the  grenade,  the  appellant  produced  a
         photograph of the suspicious package left  at  his  door,  but  the
         judge made no findings  on  this.  The  judge  failed  to  consider
         corroborative evidence.

     27. At [28] the FtTJ made it clear finding that the  certificate  dated
         30 October 2019 (136AB) confirming that the appellant was to  serve
         in Afghanistan from December 2017 to June 2018 was  "not  genuine".
         The reasoning for this is that the judge considered it contradicted
         the certificate dated 3/11/2017 that the appellant  had  served  in
         the army from 2008 and until ended his service  on  31/10/2017.  Mr
         Jafar  submitted   that   the   first   certificate   was   written
         contemporaneously and then after the appellant left he went back to
         obtain a number certificate that he was planning to take part  from
         17th of December 2017 to 20th of June 2080 Mr Jafar submitted  that
         the two documents were not contradictory at all and the  judge  had
         failed to give reasons for rejecting the 30/10/2019 certificate  as
         "not genuine". One was a statement to say  what  had  occurred  and
         that the appellant had left the military and  the  second  document
         was not contradicted by the fact that he was due to  take  part  in
         further  support  in  2017  -  2018.  They  are  not  contradictory
         documents but different certificates showing different things.

     28. Furthermore, he submitted that the judge was wrong  to  state  that
         the document was not genuine and that he was stating therefore that
         it was a "forgery". However, as the grounds at paragraph 10 set out
         there was no finding that  it  was  a  forgery  and  there  was  no
         evidence to support such a finding. The judge was not  entitled  to
         find or assume that a document is a surgery or treated as a forgery
         the purposes of the decision save for on the evidence

     29. Mr Jafar submitted that the judge  was  required  to  make  logical
         findings and considering all the material. Here the judge  did  not
         leave the appellant being able to understand  why  the  appeal  had
         been  refused.  The  judge  had   misrepresented   the   basis   of
         persecution, found a document from the military was not genuine and
         that was wrong on his part.

The submissions on behalf of the respondent:

     30. Ms Pettersen confirmed that there was no Rule 24 response filed. In
         respect of ground 5, Ms Pettersen submitted that it was  not  clear
         whether the  judge  had  in  fact  accepted  the  contents  of  the
         certificate dated 5 September 2017 at [24].

     31. In relation to the submissions made at paragraph 6,  she  submitted
         that whilst counsel had referred to a number of articles concerning
         extremists in Albania to explain why the judge  was  wrong  in  his
         assessment, there was still a gap between 2014  -  2017  where  the
         expert refers to more Albanian government initiatives with  ISIS  .
         Therefore, the expert report and the articles referred to  did  not
         explain the entire five -year gap.

     32. Whilst the submissions  referred  to  an  article  about  a  former
         commander in 2019, that evidence does  not  corroborate  individual
         members of the military had been targeted by pro- ISIS  people  nor
         did it show that those in the military who had  returned  had  been
         targeted. She submitted  that  when  the  expert  report  was  read
         properly, the expert made no reference to being localised targeting
         of former personnel who had served in Iraq/Afghanistan.  Whilst  it
         referred to radicalisation in Albania the report did not show  that
         those  who  had  been  working  with  NATO  had  been  targeted  by
         individuals. It did  not  show  that  former  military  members  or
         military personnel were targeted for having served alongside NATO.

     33. As to paragraph 7, Ms Petterson submitted that the  fact  that  the
         police acted show that there was  sufficiency  of  protection.  The
         judge was entitled look at all the evidence and that it was open to
         him not to accept the threats that had been made to the appellant.

     34. Paragraph 8 of the grounds criticised the finding  in  relation  to
         the grenade. Ms Pettersen submitted that  given  the  date  of  the
         grenade incident, the letter from the mayor was close in  proximity
         and thus it was surprising that there was no reference to something
         which was important such as an explosive device outside a house and
         was different to a note on  a  car  and  therefore  the  judge  was
         entitled to call into question whether the grenade in fact had been
         left outside his home .

     35. As to the photographs,  the  refusal  letter  dealt  with  this  at
         paragraphs 31 - 34. There are  questions  as  to  why  he  had  not
         reported the grenade.

     36. As to paragraph 10 of the grounds, she submitted that the judge was
         not stating that the document from the military was a  forgery  and
         that if paragraph 28 was read in its entirety, the judge  sets  out
         why he does not understand why the appellant needed  a  certificate
         given that he had an earlier certificate to show that he  left  the
         military in 2017. The judge did not say was a forgery but  said  it
         was a contradictory  document.  According  to  the  chronology  the
         appellant did leave the military in 2017 and it calls into question
         how anyone in early 2017 knew that the appellant was going back  to
         Afghanistan.

     37. Mr Jafar in his reply reiterated that the judge  was  stating  that
         the certificate was not genuine and that it was  a  forgery.  These
         were two different documents and were not contradictory. The  first
         certificate showed that he left the military because he was  forced
         to do so and thereafter obtain confirmation  that  he  was  due  to
         serve in 2017. It is not unusual for them to do repeat tours

     38. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.

Discussion:

     39. The grounds challenge the  assessment  of  the  evidence  that  was
         before the FtTJ that related to this appellant's claim of  risk  on
         return to Albania based on his past history of having served in the
         Albanian army and having fought for NATO in Afghanistan in 2012 and
         that from early January 2017 he was threatened by unknown people as
         a result of having served in Afghanistan.

     40. The grounds challenge the FtTJ's factual findings and assessment of
         the credibility of the appellant's claim by  reference  to  certain
         paragraphs in the decision. However, the decision should be read as
         a whole and concentrating on particular paragraphs runs the risk of
         not viewing the factual findings and the assessment of the evidence
         "in the round" and in their context.

     41. The FtTJ  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  undertaken  military
         service  in  Afghanistan  and  that  he  had  been  part   of   the
         international peacekeeping force (there was a separate  certificate
         in the respondent's bundle confirming this  (at  [29]).  The  judge
         further accepted that his father had also been in the military  and
         had attained the rank of colonel (at [29]).

     42.  Notwithstanding  those  positive  findings  of  fact,   the   FtTJ
         considered  the  appellant's  evidence  and  supporting   documents
         including the expert report as to the claimed  events  in  Albania.
         Having done so, whilst the judge  accepted  that  his  presence  in
         Afghanistan might not have been acceptable to all  members  of  the
         local community and that he had suffered some social ostracism  and
         verbal abuse, the judge did not accept  the  evidence  advanced  on
         behalf of the appellant as to the threats  and  the  placing  of  a
         grenade left at his home on the doorstep (at [30]).

     43. At paragraphs [22 - 28] the FtTJ considered the evidence of threats
         and gave reasons as to why he did not  accept  that  evidence.  The
         grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant seek to challenge those
         findings.

     44. The first ground relied upon by Mr Jafar ( see paragraph 5  written
         grounds) refers to the findings made at paragraphs [22  -  23]  and
         that the judge referred to the appellant as a Muslim  as  a  reason
         why extremists had targeted him and that it was not  credible  that
         they  would  have  waited  until  2017  when  he  last  served   in
         Afghanistan in 2012. In support of that submission he  pointed  the
         Tribunal to various articles contained in  the  expert  report  and
         that  the  evidence  contained  there   described   a   change   of
         circumstances in Albania between his tour of  Afghanistan  in  2012
         and the second upcoming tour.

     45. I have carefully considered that submission but find that there  is
         no merit in it. At paragraphs [22 -  28]  the  judge  set  out  his
         factual findings in relation to the evidence as a whole relating to
         the threats that the appellant claimed had occurred.  At  [22]  the
         judge set out his  assessment  of  the  evidence  relating  to  the
         incident on 23 January 2017 and  at  [23]  his  assessment  of  the
         evidence relating to the car accident was said to have taken  place
         on 26 January 2017. At paragraph 25 he considered the  evidence  of
         the incident on 31 August 2017 where it was claimed a  grenade  was
         left on the appellant's doorstep. At [27] the judge considered  the
         evidence relating to the incident whilst they were having coffee on
         15 September 2017. In all of those paragraphs,  a  careful  reading
         demonstrates that the judge gave adequate and  sustainable  reasons
         for rejecting the evidence that he had been the subject of  threats
         of violence as claimed. At [26] the judge made an  omnibus  finding
         relating to the earlier findings that he accepted that his presence
         in Afghanistan might not have been acceptable to all members of the
         community but that he did not accept that the events  described  by
         the appellant had occurred. The judge found that  on  the  evidence
         the appellant and his family members were in Albania for many years
         after his first trip to Afghanistan (which ended in July 2012)  and
         that he did not find that they had been targeted and persecuted.

     46. This finding is supported by the appellant's own evidence of having
         lived in Albania since returning  from  Afghanistan  in  July  2012
         until he left in October 2017 and that neither  he  or  his  family
         members had suffered any physical harm despite the  nature  of  the
         claim  threats  which  he  stated  had  started  in  January  2017.
         Furthermore, nor had his father (at [31]).

     47. It was against the background  of  those  findings  that  the  FtTJ
         reached the conclusion that he did not accept that  the  events  in
         Albania had occurred as the appellant had claimed (at [30]).

     48. In my judgement it was open to the FtTJ  to  place  weight  on  the
         chronology of the events in the appellant's own  evidence  that  he
         had served in Afghanistan for six months  between  January  -  July
         2012 and that he not been the  subject  of  threats  until  January
         2017, some five years later.

     49. Whilst Mr Jafar has referred the tribunal to material in the expert
         report, the articles that he has referred me to can be described as
         generalised  material  concerning  the  position  of  jihadists  in
         Albania and also Kosovan Albanians (at section 3  of  the  report).
         The evidence he has referred me to refers to support within Albania
         for ISIS and its movement from 2014 and there is reference made  to
         returning jihadists. None of that material, nor the contents of the
         expert report make  reference  to  jihadists  or  former  returning
         jihadists targeting military personnel or ex-military personnel for
         having fought/been part of the peacekeeping forces  for  NATO.  The
         article Mr Jafar referred the tribunal to at page 112 AB refers  to
         a commander who was arrested as an extremist. He had  been  in  the
         military previously and had posted material  on  social  media  and
         flagged ISIS flags on Facebook. That evidence does not show that he
         had targeted ex-military members or any past colleagues  it  served
         with and the acts undertaken were directed to the social media.

     50. Even if the evidence in those articles  demonstrates  that  support
         for ISIS did not emerge until 2014, as  Ms  Pettersen  submits,  it
         does not explain the remaining period between 2014 - 2017 when  the
         appellant had not been subjected to any harm or  threats  of  harm.
         Consequently, it was open to the judge to make  those  findings  of
         fact.

     51. It is also important to note that the judge made  that  finding  at
         [22] by reference to the first  incident  which  is  said  to  have
         occurred on 23 January 2017 when a note was left on the appellant's
         car with some flowers and three stones. The FtTJ did not reject the
         appellant's account based only on the length of time since 2012 but
         also by reference to the evidence in support.

     52. At [22] the  judge  considered  the  evidence  in  support  of  the
         incident. The appellant relied upon a "statement" of support  which
         is contained in the respondent's bundle which  is  unhelpfully  not
         paginated. There is also a copy of the letter  itself.  The  letter
         makes reference to the appellant not being a good  Muslim  and  the
         threat made is "dark days will come for you and your family."

     53. The FtTJ referred to that evidence at [22] and set out the contents
         of the "statement" which said "different obstacles and objects were
         placed" onto the car. It is plain the judge did  not  consider  the
         evidence in that statement to be reliable evidence or evidence that
         any weight should be attached to it. As the judge  identified,  the
         three witnesses attesting to the incident did not say that  flowers
         or a note were left on the car. The contents of the document do not
         set out what in fact the appellant had stated. The  document  gives
         names of three individuals but no evidence  of  their  identity  or
         their address was provided. Whilst Mr Jafar in his submissions (and
         in the written grounds at paragraph 9) refers  to  the  photograph,
         the one in the bundle was illegible and is not dated.  Furthermore,
         whilst the judge did not expressly say so, the appellant's  account
         of the content of the letter in his interview (Q62)  was  that  the
         letter stated "we are going to cut you" and that was not consistent
         with the  contents  of  the  letter  itself  is  exhibited  in  the
         respondent's bundle.

     54. At [27] the judge considered the evidence concerning  the  incident
         on 26 January 2017 when the appellant claimed he was involved in  a
         car accident where occupants of the car jumped out  and  threatened
         him.

     55. The FtTJ considered the evidence in support and  the  letter  which
         referred to individuals jumping out of the  car  screaming  at  the
         appellant and threatening him. Having considered that evidence, the
         judge considered that the letter/note was "vague" and that  it  did
         not set out the threats that were made. In my judgement that was  a
         finding wholly open to the judge to make on the evidence. This  was
         a handwritten note, there was no evidence of the writer's  identity
         provided and no reference to the nature of the threats said or  any
         details of those responsible. In addition, the judge also took into
         account  a  further  inconsistency  between  the  evidence  in  the
         note/letter and the appellant's  evidence.  The  appellant  claimed
         that he had a threat and the perpetrators shouting Allahu Akbar but
         that none of the witnesses had referred to that in the  note  which
         purported to support his account.

     56. The FtTJ also considered that the appellant's evidence  as  to  the
         incident and set out the appellant's evidence that he had described
         "many people surrounded the scene to help me in my work colleagues"
         (see witness statement paragraph 12). The judge found that  despite
         that claim, none of the  suspects  had  been  apprehended,  and  no
         licence plate for the car was obtained. In my  judgement  the  FtTJ
         had  given  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  reaching  the
         conclusion that if this had happened, it was nothing  more  than  a
         road accident and it had  nothing  to  do  with  any  threats  made
         against the appellant.

     57. At  [24]  the  judge  made  a  finding  that  the  threats  to  the
         appellant's family had not escalated to  the  level  claimed.  This
         relates to paragraph [25] in his assessment of the  incident  which
         was said to have occurred on 31 August 2017 where it was claimed  a
         grenade was left on his doorstep.

     58.  The FtTJ did not  accept  that  this  incident  had  occurred.  He
         referred to the evidence before him in particular the  letter  from
         the mayor (at [25)]). The document was dated 5/9/2017. The contents
         of the letter referred to the appellant  and  his  wife,  it  gives
         their address and makes reference to  there  being  "residents  who
         compound a big percentage of Muslim religion of  several  divisions
         of the said religion". It goes on to say "according to this  family
         recorded data it resulted that the over  mentioned  are  hated  and
         despised by some of their neighbours there, because Mr DJ has  been
         a member of peacekeeping forces in  Afghanistan.  The  attitude  of
         these neighbours is a hateful one, because  according  to  them  DJ
         went  in  Afghanistan  to  fight  their  Muslim  brothers.  We  are
         investigating these persons."

     59. After considering the contents of the letter, the FtTJ  noted  that
         it did not make any reference  to  a  grenade  being  left  at  the
         appellant's home.

     60. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant (see written grounds  at
         paragraph 8 and oral submissions) that the FtTJ was wrong  to  make
         that finding because the mayor's letter makes no reference  to  any
         events including those the judge accepted as  being  criminal  acts
         and that the judge was wrong and illogical to  expect  the  mayor's
         letter to corroborate specific events.

     61. That submission fails to take into  account  the  contents  of  the
         mayor's letter and importantly the basis  of  the  factual  finding
         made by the judge. The judge considered the letter in the light  of
         the appellant's own evidence where he stated that the mayor is  the
         person who is informed of local events and issues (see  appellant's
         evidence recorded at paragraph 25). The date of that letter  was  5
         September 2017 and thus was very close  in  proximity/date  of  the
         event in question which was said to have taken place on  31  August
         2017. However, there is no reference to that incident  involving  a
         grenade despite it being in such close proximity to the writing  of
         the letter and from someone who is said to have  been  informed  of
         local events.  In my judgement it was open to the  judge  to  place
         weight on the omission from that letter to  any  reference  of  the
         incident involving the grenade which on the face of it was the most
         serious incident and which had occurred only the  week  before  the
         drafting of that letter. It was open to  the  judge  to  reach  the
         conclusion that it was not credible that someone who is informed of
         local events and issues would not have referred to such an incident
         if it occurred. Therefore, it was open to the judge  to  disbelieve
         the appellant's account that such an incident occurred.  Whilst  Mr
         Jafar refers to an illegible  photograph  which  puports  to  be  a
         grenade this does not assist the appellant. It is not dated nor  is
         there anything to link that photograph to the event.

     62. The other findings made by the FtTJ at [26]  is  that  it  was  not
         credible that that those concerned would not have waited five years
         to target the appellant  and  that  according  to  the  appellant's
         account he had continued to live in the family home but no physical
         harm had occurred to him or his family members despite the  unknown
         people having the opportunity to carry out what was stated in those
         threats (see paragraphs 26 and paragraphs 30 of the determination).

     63. The grounds of paragraph 7  challenge  the  finding  at  [24]  that
         individuals disagreed with the appellant but did not threaten  him.
         Reference is made to the  police  certificate  which  reported  an"
         intimidation act" against him on 31 January 2017 and  that  it  was
         being investigated by the police (document 7 February 2017). It  is
         submitted that none of this  supports  the  judge's  findings  that
         individuals  had  a  mere  disagreement  with  the  appellant   not
         amounting to threats. The grounds submit that the judge's reasoning
         is illogical.

     64. I agree with the submission made by Ms Pettersen  that  it  is  not
         said by the judge that he  accepted  the  contents  of  the  police
         certificate. Furthermore, in my judgement that paragraph should  be
         read in the light of the decision as a whole. The  grounds  do  not
         quote the remainder of paragraph 24 in which the judge stated  that
         whilst he accepted some in the community may  have  disagreed  with
         the appellant and him being in the army, he did not accept that the
         threats to the appellant and  his  family  were  escalated  to  the
         levels claimed..  The  FtTJ  gave  reasons  for  this  set  out  at
         paragraph 22 - 27, and paragraphs 28 - 29 and  30  -  31.  He  gave
         reasons why he did not accept in relation to  the  earlier  threats
         they had been made nor did he accept the evidence contained in  the
         mayor's letter and that of the military to  be  reliable  evidence.
         The certificate dated 31 January 2017 makes  no  reference  to  the
         nature of the acts that had occurred. When read  as  a  whole,  the
         judge gave  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  reaching  the
         overall conclusion  that  beyond  suffering  social  ostracism  and
         verbal abuse, the events described by the appellant had  not  taken
         place as claimed.

     65. The grounds at paragraphs 5 and 10 concerned the evidence  relating
         to the certificates and the military. The grounds at  paragraph  10
         challenge the judge's finding at [28] that  the  document  for  the
         military exhibited at AB 139 dated 30th of October 2019 was  not  a
         "genuine document".

     66. Mr Jafar makes a number of submissions. Firstly,  he  submits  that
         the judge had not given reasons for rejecting the letter  and  that
         the judge had found  that  the  document  contradicted  the  second
         certificate but that there was no contradiction between  those  two
         documents because they were two different  documents  which  showed
         different things. Secondly, he submits that the  judge  by  stating
         that it was not genuine was stating that it was a forgery but there
         was no evidence to support such a finding.

     67. I have considered with care that submission in the context  of  the
         evidence and the judge's assessment of it. Having done so, I do not
         read the decision as stating that the certificate was  a  "forgery"
         when reaching the conclusion that it was "not genuine". The careful
         reading of paragraph 28  demonstrates  that  the  judge  had  given
         reasons why he found the  document  to  be  inconsistent  with  the
         appellant's evidence. He was not stating that it was "forgery"  but
         that it was a document which was not reliable because  it  was  not
         consistent with the appellant's evidence.

     68. Furthermore, I do not accept that the judge failed to give  reasons
         for reaching that conclusion. The FtTJ noted the  contents  of  the
         certificate dated 3/11/17 that he had been employed by the military
         from 1 April 2018 until 31st of October 2017  at  which  point  "he
         passed to the  reserves  at  his  personal  instance".  The  second
         certificate dated two years later 30th of October 2019 stated  that
         the appellant was a "former soldier in the military" who "has  been
         planning to take part "an Albanian mission in Kabul between  17  of
         December 2017 - 20th of June 2018.

     69. It is entirely open to the judge to consider those two documents in
         the light of the appellant's evidence. As  the  judge  recorded  at
         [28] the first certificate  referred  to  the  appellant's  service
         ending on 31 October  2017  at  which  point  he  passed  into  the
         reserves. He then recorded the appellant's evidence  he  was  asked
         about  being  in  the  reserves.  The  appellant   stated,   "which
         reserves". When the certificate was then read out to him he gave an
         explanation that he completed his military service and was  now  in
         the reserves and could be called upon at any time if needed like ex-
         soldiers in America.

     70. In my judgement it was open to  the  FtTJ  to  contrast  that  oral
         evidence with the contents of the two letters, the second of  which
         stated that he was planning to take part in as a  support  mission.
         As the FtTJ found at [28] the contents of  the  second  letter  was
         inconsistent  with  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  that  he  had
         completed military service and was in the  reserves  and  could  be
         called up at any time. The letter refers to him  planning  to  take
         part in a mission  which  was  not  consistent  with  having  ended
         military service and being called up as a reserve.

     71. Whilst it would have been better for the judge to have referred  to
         the document as unreliable  rather  than  as  "not  genuine",  when
         reading the paragraphs and considering the documents as a whole, it
         is plain in my judgement that what the judge was  stating  that  in
         view of the inconsistency and the contents of the document when set
         against the appellant's own evidence, it was an unreliable document
         upon which he could not place weight.

     72. Whilst at paragraph 5 of the grounds,  it  is  submitted  that  the
         judge failed to take into account that he was being targeted due to
         undertaking a further mission, it is plain from the finding at [28]
         when read with paragraph 22 that the  judge  did  not  accept  that
         those threats would be made the appellant some five years after his
         service and also rejected the account that he had  been  threatened
         as a result of attending another mission for the reasons set out at
         paragraph 28.

     73. In so far as it is asserted in the written grounds that there was a
         lack  of  reasoning  for  consideration  of  the  evidence  in  the
         determination, when considering claims of international protection,
         a judge is required  to  consider  the  core  issues  and  to  make
         findings upon them. Following Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)
         [2014] UKUT 341 (IAC) judges need to resolve the key  conflicts  in
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons  for
         preferring one case to the other so that parties can understand why
         they have lost. Reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a
         whole makes sense, having regard to  the  material  accepted  by  a
         judge: Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85
         (IAC), at [10]. I accept the  submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent that this was  a  clear  decision  in  which  adequately
         reasoned findings were made with anxious scrutiny and in accordance
         with the evidence.

     74. The question whether the decision contains a material error of  law
         is not whether  another  Judge  could  have  reached  the  opposite
         conclusion  but  whether  this  Judge  reached  a   conclusion   by
         appropriately  directing  himself  as  to  the  relevant  law   and
         assessing the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

     75. The FtTJ had the advantage of hearing the oral evidence before  the
         Tribunal. In the well-known case of Piglowska  v  Piglowski  [1999]
         UKHL 27, Lord Hoffmann said this:

             "...the appellate court must bear in mind the advantage  which
             the first instance judge had in seeing  the  parties  and  the
             other witnesses. This  is  well  understood  on  questions  of
             credibility and findings of primary fact. But it goes  further
             than that. It applies also to the judge's evaluation of  those
             facts. ..."

     76. The judge had the advantage of considering all the evidence in  the
         case.   As  the  Supreme  Court  stated  in  Henderson  v  Foxworth
         Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41; [2014] 1 WLR 2600 at [62]:

             "It does not matter, with whatever degree of  certainty,  that
             the appellate court considers that it  would  have  reached  a
             different conclusion. What matters  is  whether  the  decision
             under appeal is  one  that  no  reasonable  judge  could  have
             reached."

     77. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and  I have reached the conclusion that the decision
         was one that was reasonably open to him on the  assessment  of  the
         evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated 27 October 2020




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email




