
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02632/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 July 2021                            |On 5 August 2021                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik QC instructed by Mamoon Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The  appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Andrew Davies ('the Judge') promulgated on 15  December
      2020,  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal   on
      protection and human rights grounds.
   2.     The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 18 March 1986.
   3.     The appellant sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
      another judge of the First-tier Tribunal, the operative  part  of  the
      grant being in the following terms:

        2.   The grounds argue that the  judges  decision  is,  in  effect,
             unsafe because the appellant speaks  Afghani  Pushtu,  however,
             the court interpreters spoke Pakistani  Pushtu.  It  is  argued
             that interpretation problems were brought to the  attention  of
             the judge.


        3.   Unfortunately, the judges decision makes  no  mention  of  any
             issues with interpretation or that the matter had been  brought
             to the judge's attention. If this matter had  been  brought  to
             the attention of the judge, then it should have been dealt with
             in the decision. The judges made detailed findings  in  respect
             of the  appellant's  appeal,  suggesting  that  there  were  no
             difficulties  with  the  interpreter.  Nevertheless,   if   the
             appellant did have  such  difficulties  then  a  question  mark
             arises in respect of the appellant's oral evidence. The  matter
             must be explored further.


        4.   Certainly, procedurally, there is an arguable error of law.

   4.     The Secretary of State in her Rule 24 response  dated  5  February
      2021 submits 'there is no evidence of the  appellant's  representative
      having raised an issue of interpretation during the hearing. There  is
      no statement from the representative who  was  in  attendance  at  the
      hearing;  no  copy  of  the  record  of  proceedings  taken   by   the
      representative before the Judge. The Judge has not been approached for
      his comments regarding the issue. The appellant is  put  to  proof  on
      these issues, the respondent reserving the right to amend the response
      should the appellant adduce any evidence in relation to this ground'.
   5.     The author of the Rule 24  response  continues  that  it  will  be
      submitted that the  Judge  has  made  a  detailed  and  well  reasoned
      consideration of the claim, referring to the  evidence  considered  in
      making findings  of  fact  and  considered  the  claim  in  the  round
      attaching relevant weight to the evidence, on the basis of  which  the
      claim failed.

Error of law

   6.     Although this is an Initial, error of law hearing,  the  appellant
      attended and gave oral evidence with the  assistance  of  a  confirmed
      Afghan Pushtu interpreter in relation to which no issues arose.
   7.     Additional documentation had been provided in the  interim,  which
      will be discussed further below.
   8.     Mr Malik QC confirmed he was placing reliance upon the decision of
      the Upper Tribunal in MM (Sudan) [2014]  UKUT  105,  the  headnote  of
      which reads:

          1) Where there is a defect or impropriety of a  procedural  nature
             in the proceedings at first instance,  this  may  amount  to  a
             material error of law requiring the decision of the  First-Tier
             Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside.


          2) A successful appeal is not dependent on  the  demonstration  of
             some failing on the part of the FtT. Thus an error of  law  may
             be found to have occurred in circumstances where some  material
             evidence, through no fault of the FtT, was not considered, with
             resulting unfairness (E & R v Secretary of State for  the  Home
             Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49).

   9.     The appellant repeated in his oral evidence his claim that he  had
      argued with the interpreter at the hearing before the Judge for  about
      15 minutes on at least one occasion as a  result  of  difficulties  in
      interpretation that arose during the course of the hearing.
   10.    The Upper Tribunal and the parties now have available to them  not
      only the Judges record of proceedings but also a statement written  by
      Mr Jon Oborn, a caseworker with the Immigration  Advice  Service,  the
      appellant's previous representatives, who represented him  before  the
      Judge.
   11.    The Judges Record of Proceedings does not record the Judge  having
      been  advised  of  any  difficulties  with   the   interpreter   being
      encountered during the course of  the  hearing.  It  would  have  been
      standard practice for the Judge, as it is with all IAC judges  hearing
      protection  or  immigration  cases  where  an  interpreter  has   been
      appointed to assist a  party,  to  initially  ask  the  appellant  and
      interpreter to establish  that  they  understood  each  other  at  the
      beginning of the hearing to enable any difficulties to  be  identified
      at that stage. The Judge's Record of  Proceedings  does  not  identify
      there were any difficulties raised at that or at any stage  throughout
      the proceedings.
   12.    The Record of Proceedings was typed contemporaneously by the Judge
      on his laptop. There  does  appear  to  have  been  an  issue  of  the
      appellant answering questions in English rather than Pushtu and  being
      directed to use one language, which is a perfectly acceptable approach
      to avoid confusion between differing languages.
   13.    The Judge's recollection that the appellant's  representative  did
      not raise any translation issues either during the evidence or in  his
      submissions, is a position wholly supported by reading the  transcript
      taken by the Judge. There is no evidence that issues of interpretation
      or related problems relating to the same were brought to  the  Judge's
      attention.
   14.    In the appellant's own witness statement dated 23 December 2020 he
      asserts the Judge erred in law in not mentioning during the course  of
      the proceedings that the appellant brought to  the  court's  attention
      that the interpreter was not correctly interpreting for the appellant,
      which it is claimed the Judge did not address.  The  appellant  claims
      that he did not receive a fair hearing  as  a  result.  The  appellant
      claims the issues  of  interpretation  affected  his  ability  to  put
      forward his case properly and that the Judge did  not  understand  the
      case due to incorrect interpretation. The appellant also  asserts  the
      Pakistani Pushtu speaking interpreter was unable to convert the Afghan
      calendar dates into English calendar dates which  were  vital  to  his
      case.
   15.    The appellant in his  statement  makes  various  other  criticisms
      which shall be looked at below.
   16.    The next document is a note provided by Mr Oborn the  front  sheet
      of which, dated 26 April 2021, states he can confirm there were issues
      with the interpreter provided for the appellant's appeal and that  the
      appellant had  to  repeat  himself  several  times  while  giving  his
      evidence to ensure he was understood and that  the  interpreter  could
      not convert the dates the appellant gave him into an English  calendar
      format.
   17.    Mr Oborn's record of proceedings sets out  the  procedure  at  the
      hearing, referring to questions asked  and  replies  given.  There  is
      within that record of proceedings, a reference to the appellant  being
      asked the date he left Afghanistan in cross examination to  which  the
      correct date of 3 August 2019 was given to the Judge, and reference to
      a date in 2013 in the Afghan calendar in which it is  recorded  by  Mr
      Oban 'he gives dates but translator cannot convert". There is  another
      reference to a  question  asked  in  cross  examination  of  when  the
      appellant provided services to a named person.  Clarification  of  the
      question was given by the Presenting Officer as the appellant  claimed
      he did not understand the question, after which he  confirmed  it  was
      1992 in the Afghan calendar. When the Judge asked what year this would
      be in the Gregorian calendar (that used in the UK) it was  noted  that
      the interpreter could not convert this date. The record of proceedings
      however records the Judge intervening to ask, "Can I ask this question
      another way,  how  many  years  before  you  left  in  2019  were  you
      transporting the oil?" To which the  appellant  is  recorded  to  have
      answered "About eight years, since they signed the contract."  It  was
      clear that even if issues arose in relation to  the  actual  dates  of
      events, sufficient evidence  was  provided  to  enable  the  Judge  to
      understand  the  point  been  made  by  the  appellant  and   properly
      appreciate the chronology the appellant was seeking to rely  upon.  It
      is not made out that the issues recorded by Mr Oban  give  rise  to  a
      procedural  unfairness  on  the  basis  that  the  inability  of   the
      interpreter to convert a date has meant the appellant's  evidence  not
      being properly understood or considered.
   18.    Another issue that arises, is whether it was  appropriate  in  any
      event for the interpreter to convert the dates given by the  appellant
      in the Afghan calendar in Pushtu to the Gregorian calendar, when to do
      so would be to give evidence. Whilst some  interpreters  have  in  the
      past been willing to assist no evidence has been provided to show that
      undertaking such conversion with is in the range of expected  services
      of the court pointed interpreter. It is not. There is clearly evidence
      that the appellants evidence of a date given in  the  Afghan  calendar
      was  interpreted  verbatim  as  required.  There  are   two   possible
      explanations for the statement the interpreter could not convert which
      is either because of a lack of understanding or because it is  outside
      the range of tasks an interpreter is permitted to do. It is worthy  of
      note that there is no record of either advocate asking the interpreter
      why she could not convert the date. The answer to this issue, and  the
      more likely reason for such a conversion being outside the  duties  of
      an interpreter is to be found in the judgment in the case  of  Mohamed
      (role of an interpreter) [2011] UKUT 337, the headnote of which reads:
      "The function of a court appointed  interpreter  is  to  interpret  on
      behalf of the Tribunal what is said  at  the  hearing,  including  the
      appellant's evidence. It is no part of the interpreter's  function  to
      be drawn into a position where he or she has to give "evidence"  at  a
      hearing  of  anything,  including  the  language  being  spoken  by  a
      witness."
   19.    Also of relevant is TS (interpreters) Eritrea [2019]  UKUT  00352
      (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held  that  weight  will  be  given  to  the
      judge's own assessment of whether the interpreter and the appellant or
      witness understood each other and gave further guidance:

        43.  ... an appellate tribunal will usually be slow to  overturn  a
        judge's decision on the  basis  of  alleged  errors  in,  or  other
        problems with, interpretation at the  hearing  before  that  judge.
        Weight will be given to the judge's own assessment of  whether  the
        interpreter and the appellant or witness understood each other....


        44.  Such an assessment by the judge should normally be  undertaken
        at the outset of the hearing by the judge (a) putting questions  to
        the appellant/witness and (b) considering the replies. Although  he
        or  she  may  not  be  able  to   speak   the   language   of   the
        appellant/witness, an experienced judge will  usually  be  able  to
        detect difficulties; for example, an unexpected or vague reply to a
        specific question that lies within the area  of  knowledge  of  the
        appellant/witness (such as asking the person concerned  as  to  how
        and by what route they travelled  to  the  hearing  centre);  or  a
        suspiciously terse translation of what  has  plainly  been  a  much
        longer reply given to the interpreter by the appellant/witness. Non-
        verbal reactions may also be  factored  into  the  judge's  overall
        assessment. It is difficult to be any more specific; we are,  here,
        very much in the realm of judge craft.


        45.  Where an issue regarding interpretation arises at the hearing,
        including the situation  where  an  interpreter  appointed  by  the
        appellant's representatives, and present at that hearing, considers
        the Tribunal-appointed interpreter has  inadequately  translated  a
        question or answer, the matter should be raised with the  judge  at
        the hearing so that it can be addressed there and then. Even if the
        representatives do not do so, the judge should act on  his  or  her
        own   initiative,   if   satisfied   that   an   issue   concerning
        interpretation needs to be addressed.


        46.  In many cases, the issue will be capable of swift  resolution,
        with the judge relying upon the duty of the parties under rule 2(4)
        of the Procedure Rules  of  both  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
        Chambers to help the Tribunal to further the  overriding  objective
        of dealing with the case fairly and justly. For instance, it may be
        that clarification of a particular word or phrase, which is thought
        to  be  causing  difficulties,  will  enable  matters  to   proceed
        smoothly. In some cases,  ...  breaking  questions  up  into  short
        component parts will be sufficient...


        47.  A challenge  by  a  representative  to  the  competence  of  a
        Tribunal-appointed interpreter must not be made lightly.  If  made,
        it is a matter for the judge  to  address,  as  an  aspect  of  the
        judge's overall duty to ensure a fair hearing. Amongst the  matters
        to be considered will  be  whether  the  challenge  appears  to  be
        motivated by a desire to have the hearing aborted, rather  than  by
        any genuine material concern over the standard of interpretation.


        48.  It will be for the judge to decide whether a challenge to  the
        quality of interpretation necessitates a check being  made  with  a
        member   of   the   Tribunal's   administrative   staff   who   has
        responsibility for the booking of interpreters. ...


        49.  Under  the  current  arrangements,  it  may  be  possible  for
        appropriate enquiries to be made by the administrative staff of the
        Language Shop as to whether the interpreter is on the register  and
        whether there  is  any  current  disclosable  issue  regarding  the
        interpreter. The initiation of any such enquiries during a  hearing
        is, however, a matter for the judge. In practice,  it  is  unlikely
        that it would be necessary or appropriate to take such  action.  In
        most cases, if the standard of interpretation is such as  seriously
        to raise an issue that needs investigating, the point will probably
        already have been  reached  where  the  hearing  will  have  to  be
        adjourned and re-heard by a  different  judge  (using  a  different
        interpreter).


        50.  On an appeal  against  a  judge's  decision,  even  if  it  is
        established  that  there  was   or   may   have   been   inadequate
        interpretation at the hearing before the judge, the appeal will  be
        unlikely to succeed if there is nothing to suggest the outcome  was
        adversely affected by inadequate interpretation. This will  be  the
        position where the judge has made adverse  findings  regarding  the
        appellant, which do not depend on the oral evidence ....


        51.  It is important that Tribunal-appointed interpreters are  able
        to discharge their functions, to the best of their abilities. It is
        part of the judicial function to enable an interpreter to  do  this
        by,  for  instance,  preventing  a  party  or  representative  from
        behaving  in  an  intimidating  or  oppressive  way   towards   the
        interpreter. By the same token, the Tribunal and  the  parties  are
        entitled to expect that the interpreter will interpret  accurately,
        regardless of what he or she personally thinks of the evidence they
        are being required to translate.

   20.    There is no indication that during the course of the  hearing  any
      issues were brought  to  the  Judges  attention  in  relation  to  the
      standard interpretation. The Judge records no concerns in relation  to
      the standard of interpretation,  the  ability  of  the  appellant  and
      interpreter to understand each other,  or  the  Tribunals  ability  to
      receive 'best evidence'. There is a note recorded  by  Mr  Oborn  that
      during what he describes as a post hearing debrief with his client  Mr
      Oborn confirmed that the appellant did well and that the answers given
      were consistent with his statement and  interview  record,  indicating
      the required evidence was given to the Judge in an understandable  and
      acceptable format. There is however a note made by  Mr  Oborn  in  the
      following terms:

        "Client  complains  about  the  interpreter,  they  she   did   not
        understand the words he was saying, and there were a few  incidents
        when he seemed to repeat or re-clarify with  the  interpreter,  but
        nothing major seemed to happen, as his answers were all  consistent
        with what I know about his case.


        NB - interpreter not been able to convert the Afghani calendar  was
        a problem, but we will have to see if  that  is  an  issue  in  the
        judge's decision."

   21.        There is no reference in  either  record  to  the  alleged  15
      minute dispute between the  appellant  and  the  interpreter  and  the
      appellant's own legal advisers  seems  to  be  of  the  opinion,  post
      hearing, that the appellant's answers given  through  the  interpreter
      were consistent with what Mr Oborn knew about the appellant's case.
   22.    My primary finding is that there is no  evidence  to  support  the
      appellant's contention that he engaged in 15 minute  dispute  or  even
      one in the region of 15 minutes with the Pushtu  interpreter  provided
      and that his claim in that respect is not made out.
   23.    Also, in  relation  to  the  inability  to  interpret  dates,  the
      appellant in reply to a question put in cross examination in the Upper
      Tribunal confirmed that the dates he gave to the  interpreter  was  in
      Afghan Pushtu, which he confirmed was correct. The appellant was asked
      by Mr Tan whether the date recorded of 3 August 2019 by the Judge  and
      the representative was the correct  date  that  he  left  Afghanistan,
      which he confirmed it was.
   24.    The appellant in reply to questions put in  re-examination  by  Mr
      Malik QC concerning his claim to have argued with the interpreter  for
      approximately 15 minutes, and when  asked  whether  it  was  a  single
      period or cumulative, claimed it was every  time  when  they  asked  a
      question. The interpreter had not given the correct interpretation and
      that there was one incident that lasted 15  minutes.  I  find  such  a
      claim is not made out on any basis on the available information.
   25.    Mr Malik QC in his submissions undertook a  forensic  analysis  of
      the two records of proceedings claiming that that of the Judge was  no
      more than a summary of the evidence, and that the Judge gave a  rather
      less detailed account than that provided by the  appellant's  previous
      representatives. I find that  even  if  the  later  document  is  more
      detailed than the former document, a reading of the same together does
      not establish the appellant's claim that he raised  difficulties  with
      translation for a period of 15 minutes or otherwise during the  course
      of the hearing, as no reference to this  having  occurred  appears  in
      either record of proceedings.
   26.    The submission by Mr Malik QC, that the "shorthand" nature of  the
      Judges notes undermined their accuracy is without merit. For  even  if
      not recording verbatim each and every word said it  is  not  made  out
      they are an inaccurate or unreliable record of the evidence  given  to
      the Judge.
   27.    The terms 'Afghan Pushtu' and  'Pakistan  Pushtu',  if  suggesting
      these are two different languages, is arguably misleading. Pushtu is a
      language that originated in Afghanistan  with  there  being  two  main
      dialects "Pashto" and "Pukhto" which  are  the  two  main  discernible
      phonetic variations of the language. The interpreter that  was  booked
      to assist the appellant is a  Pushtu  (also  referred  to  as  Pashtu)
      interpreter who would have been properly assessed by  the  interpreter
      services to be competent and capable of providing the  required  level
      of interpretation in this language against the terms of  the  Ministry
      of Justice's Language Services Contract which requires linguists to be
      sufficiently qualified to undertake face-to-face interpretation.
   28.    It is accepted there may  be  an  influence  of  the  individual's
      national language upon  the  use  of  Pushtu,  if  based  in  Pakistan
      possibly  introducing  more  words  from  Urdu,  whilst   those   from
      Afghanistan using more from Dari,  but  it  was  not  established  the
      interpreter was not capable of doing  the  job  for  which  they  were
      appointed before the Judge.
   29.    It is also the case that  the  appellant  is  able  to  speak  and
      understand English, which he claims is the  basis  for  his  knowledge
      that the interpretation was not correct, in which case he  would  have
      been able to address any matters of concern to him.  His  confirmation
      of his ability to understand English, and to  ensure  that  the  court
      received the correct evidence he wished to rely upon, is supported  by
      his own evidence at [3] of his witness statement of 8 March 2021.
   30.    I do not find the appellant's claim of interpreter issues  arising
      to the extent he did not receive a fair hearing before the Judge to be
      made out on the evidence. No procedural irregularity has been shown to
      arise.
   31.    The appellant in his witness statement dated  8  March  2021  also
      raises a further issue where he writes at [5 - 6]:

        5.   My former representative submitted  wrong  translation  of  my
             supporting  documents  with  the  tribunals.  I  contacted  the
             translation  company  recently  who  have  not  corrected   the
             translation and the correct translation is also being  provided
             with the appeal bundle. I would also like  to  mention  that  I
             even complaint at  my  home  office  asylum  interview  at  the
             translation by supporting documents  submitted  with  the  Home
             Office by my former Representative was  not  correct.  Relevant
             pages of my asylum interview have also been  provided  with  my
             bundle.


        6.   My former Representative did not submit my important documents
             with the appeal bundle. Therefore, they  were  not  before  the
             First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider. I provided them now with
             the evidence that I sent them to my former Representatives  who
             unfortunately failed to lodge them with the tribunals.

   32.    The reasons for refusal letter is dated 2  March  2020  which  was
      written  following  the  appellant's  asylum  interview.  Indeed,  the
      chronology  shows  that  the  appellant's  screening   interview   was
      conducted on 4 August 2019, and his Statement of Evidence Form  on  11
      December 2019, with Screening Interview amendments being received from
      the Immigration Advice Service on 25 September 2019, together  with  a
      list of documents in support of the appellant's claim. Directions were
      given following the appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of  his
      claim at a Pre-Hearing Review on 17  April  2020.  The  appellant  was
      aware, as were his representatives, of the need  to  provide  all  the
      evidence upon which he intended to rely in support for his  claim.  It
      must be remembered the appellant speaks both Pushtu and English and no
      doubt  would  have  highlighted  any   problems   with   the   written
      interpretation of documents he was seeking to rely upon.
   33.    The transcript  provided  by  Jon  Oborn  shows  that  during  the
      prehearing meeting with his client  it  was  confirmed  that  all  his
      evidence, statements and arguments were in the  bundle  and  that  the
      original documents brought to the hearing by the appellant  would  not
      be needed. There was therefore no issue raised before the Judge of the
      appellant's documentary  evidence  being  incomplete  or  of  concerns
      arising in relation to the interpretation of the same. I do  not  find
      that any documents before the Judge give rise  to  issues  undermining
      the fairness of the hearing the appellant received  or  infecting  the
      fairness of the Judges assessment of the evidence. If  documents  were
      not provided to the Judge it is not an error for  Judge  not  to  take
      those into account.
   34.    I do not find it has been established that the Judge has committed
      a procedural error sufficient to amount to a material error of law  on
      the basis of the fairness of the hearing and the way it was  conducted
      before the First-tier Tribunal.
   35.    By reference to the decision in MM relied upon by Mr Malik  QC,  I
      do not find the  appellant  has  established  there  is  a  defect  or
      impropriety of a procedural nature in the  proceedings  sufficient  to
      amount to a material error of law requiring the decision of the  Judge
      to be set aside, even when taking into account that such an error  may
      be found to have occurred in circumstances of which the Judge was  not
      responsible.
   36.    A review of the  record  of  proceedings  and  evidence  provided,
      including answers given by the appellant,  even  without  the  finding
      that his claim to have argued with the interpreter for 15  minutes  or
      thereabouts before the Judge has not been shown to claim to  have  any
      merit, shows that the  Judges  dismissal  of  the  appeal,  for  which
      adequate reasons are given, is a finding within  the  range  of  those
      available to the Judge on the evidence.
   37.    I find the appellant has failed to establish arguable legal  error
      material to the decision to dismiss the appeal sufficient  to  warrant
      the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in relation to this matter.




Decision

  38. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's decision.
      The determination shall stand.





   Anonymity.

  39. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
  40. I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 21 July 2021

