
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
pa/02421/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                    |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29th November 2016                 |       On 19th July 2017              |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               morteza alsafi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Pratt, Solicitor instructed by WTB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Smith made
    following a hearing at Manchester on 18 July 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 15th July 1976.  He  arrived
    in the UK on 8th July 2015 and claimed asylum.  He was refused on  26th
    October 2015 and appealed to an Immigration Judge.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim is that  he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return as a consequence  of  having  converted  to  Christianity.   The
    appellant accepted that, when he first came to the UK, in his screening
    interview, he had made up a story stating that he had changed  religion
    in Iran and had been persecuted by the Basij.  At his asylum  interview
    he accepted that his original story was not true and  he  had  lied  in
    order to generate a false asylum claim.  He told  the  respondent  that
    initially he had first attended church for  the  purpose  of  making  a
    case.  At question 11 of the interview, when asked how long he had been
    a Christian, he said:

         "Two or three days after I arrived in Liverpool I started going  to
         church.  First I went over there for the purpose of making  a  case
         but then I slowly, slowly saw the kindness of the  pastor  and  the
         sisters and brothers at the church attracted me."

 4. The judge noted that the appellant accepted he had  told  untruths  and
    said it was not clear at what stage the appellant was stating  that  he
    genuinely  became  interested  in  converting  to   Christianity.    He
    considered all of the evidence, including a letter from the  pastor  of
    the church at D1 of the respondent's bundle.  The pastor said that  the
    appellant had constantly attended the church since 28th July  2015  and
    was baptised on 13th September 2015.  The letter itself is undated.

 5. The judge wrote as follows:

         "This  witness's  evidence  appears  to  me  to  be   fundamentally
         undermined by the fact that at  an  earlier  stage  he  provided  a
         letter produced by the appellant to the Home Office in  support  of
         the asylum application stating  that  he  believed  then  that  the
         appellant was genuine in his faith.   The  appellant  has  accepted
         that at the time of this letter by the pastor he was not a  genuine
         convert.  It seems to be reasonable  to  conclude  that  given  the
         "slowly slowly" nature of the  claimed  conversion  that  when  the
         pastor baptised him as a Christian in September 2015 was still  not
         genuine.  Given his account as  to  the  importance  to  him  as  a
         Christian and telling the truth I  am  satisfied  that  if  he  was
         giving a wholly truthful account he  would  have  felt  obliged  to
         disclose to the  pastor  at  the  time  of  the  baptism  that  his
         conversion to Christianity was much more recent than the pastor had
         thought."

 6. The judge considered all of the evidence and dismissed the appeal.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had made a material error of fact.  The appellant's evidence  was  that
    the letter, as can be seen from its  contents,  clearly  postdates  the
    appellant's baptism on 13th September 2015.  It was therefore evidently
    produced after a time when according to the appellant he had  genuinely
    converted.  As a matter of the evidence before him, the judge had  made
    a significant mistake in stating that it was produced at  a  time  when
    the appellant, according to his own evidence, was being disingenuous.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially  refused  by  Judge  Froom  on  22nd
    August 2016 but subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan  on
    21st September 2016.

 9. On 10th October 2016 the respondent served a detailed  reply.   In  the
    respondent's view, the judge had considered all  of  the  evidence  and
    whether the letter pre or postdated the time  that  the  appellant  now
    claims to have genuinely converted  was  immaterial.   Considering  the
    weight of the evidence against the appellant any error in the treatment
    of the letter from the pastor could not conceivably tip the balance  in
    the appellant's favour.

Submissions

10. Mr Pratt relied on his  grounds.   He  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    committed a significant error of fact which had tainted  his  treatment
    of the other evidence before him.  The pastor's evidence was central to
    the appellant's case and the judge had wrongly concluded  that  it  was
    compromised.

11. Mr Harrison defended  the  determination  and  submitted  that  it  was
    difficult to say when the appellant  had  stopped  telling  lies.   The
    pastor had undoubtedly been deceived in the  past  and  any  error  was
    immaterial.

Findings and Conclusions

12. The judge was undoubtedly wrong when  he said, at paragraph 29  of  the
    determination:

         "The appellant has accepted that at the time of this letter by  the
         pastor he was not a genuine convert."

13. The question here is whether that error is such  as  to  undermine  the
    safety of the judge's conclusions as a whole.  The appellant has said a
    number of different things about when he said  he  converted.   In  his
    asylum  interview  he  said  that,  at  question  15,  that  he  became
    interested in Christianity from the  moment  when  he  was  in  Greece,
    addicted to drugs, sleeping  rough,  and  he  realised  that  the  25th
    December 2012 was the birthday of Christ.  He then gave evidence to the
    effect that when he attended his screening interview in  July  2015  he
    was feigning interest in  Christianity.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    highlight the contradiction in these two positions.  He wrote:

         "Despite this period of exposure to the Christian faith he had  not
         genuinely converted by July 2015 and I  am  not  persuaded  by  the
         appellant's account that between July 2015 and the  A1  in  October
         2015 that the kindness of  the  pastor  and  the  congregation  had
         genuinely converted him."

14. There is therefore no mistake of fact in relation to the  judge's  core
    understanding of the appellant's case.

15. Moreover, even if the judge was wrong to state that at the time of  the
    original letter, it was accepted that he was not a genuine convert, the
    point that the judge makes at the end  of  the  paragraph  still  holds
    good. If the appellant was giving a wholly truthful  account  he  would
    have felt obliged to disclose to the pastor at the time of his  baptism
    that his conversion to Christianity  was  much  more  recent  than  the
    pastor had thought.   This  passage  shows  that  the  judge  correctly
    understood that the  appellant's  evidence  to  be  that  he  had  only
    genuinely converted to Christianity a month before his baptism, even if
    he was wrong to say that the letter was written at  an  earlier  stage.
    At the end of the day the appellant does accept that there was a  point
    when he was deceiving the pastor.

16. Furthermore the pastor himself, when he gave oral evidence,  said  that
    he was not quite  sure  that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine  convert,
    observing that only God would really know.  It was simply  his  opinion
    that he was.

17. The judge properly considered the other supporting  evidence  including
    letters signed by members of the congregation.   Again,  the  point  he
    makes in relation to the appellant having  duped  the  pastor  at  some
    point in the past is still a good one.  As the judge said:

         "If he was capable of wrongly convincing the pastor of  the  church
         as to this point I am satisfied that  he  was  capable  of  wrongly
         persuading other members of the congregation of his bona fides."

18. In summary therefore, whilst the judge was  wrong  to  state  that  his
    evidence was that by the time the letter was written, the appellant had
    not genuinely converted the  error  is  not  sufficient  to  upset  the
    judge's overall findings. It was properly open to the judge to conclude
    that, having employed deception in the past, he was not satisfied  that
    the appellant was not continuing to do  so  both  in  relation  to  the
    pastor and to the other members of the congregation.

Notice of Decision

19. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.  The judge's decision stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

[pic]
Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Taylor
    Date 18 July 2017




