
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02412/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 27 August 2021                |On the 07 October 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     H B
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, instructed on behalf of the appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Morocco,  appeals  with  permission
         against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Gribble)
         (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")  who   dismissed   her
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         7 January 2021.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)   Rules   2008.   The
         proceedings concern a protection claim. Unless and until a Tribunal
         or court directs otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.   No
         report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify
         her or her family members.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
         appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 27 August 2021,  by  means  of  Microsoft
         teams which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The  advocates  attended  remotely.
         There were  no  real  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing, and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

Background:

      4. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle.
         The appellant and her family members are nationals of  Morocco.  On
         22 May 2019 on a plane from Spain on a Schengen Visa she arrived in
         the UK accompanied by 2 of her 3 daughters; I aged 15  and  R  aged
         11. They did not make separate claims for asylum but were dependent
         on the appellant's claim. An older adult daughter was  resident  in
         Spain. The appellant had been with  her  eldest  daughter  and  her
         husband since 15 May having travelled from Morocco to  Bordeaux  in
         France and then travelling to Spain on the same day. The  appellant
         claimed asylum on 3 June 2019.

      5. The basis of her claim was that she was a member  of  a  Particular
         Social Group ("PSG") namely a lone woman fearing honour violence as
         a result of resisting her husband's attempt to have her daughter  I
         married at the age of 13. In summary, she claimed that she was from
         a very religious family in Morocco and that she be married  at  the
         age of 17 to her husband. It was known that he drank and used drugs
         and that she had been forced to marry and  was  beaten  during  her
         marriage.

      6. In March 2019 the appellant stated that a rich man  had  asked  for
         her daughter's hand in marriage and her husband wanted the marriage
         to go ahead but her daughter said that she would kill herself if it
         happened. She confronted her husband and he hit her  and  told  her
         that it was his decision. A few days later she asked her husband to
         let her children  visit  her  other  daughter  was  in  Spain,  she
         obtained a Schengen Visa left the country travelling to France  and
         Spain with her 2 daughters I and R, not intending to return.

      7. She travelled from Spain to the UK where she had 3  of  her  family
         relatives. She made her way to a place in the UK from  the  airport
         where she claimed to have met a woman in a mosque who  advised  her
         to claim asylum which she did 2 weeks after arrival. The  appellant
         was in fear that her husband would find her and the children if she
         returned to Morocco.

      8. The respondent considered her claim in a decision letter of 6 March
         2020. Whilst the background evidence showed there was  gender-based
         violence against  women  in  Morocco,  new  laws  come  into  place
         including a ban on forced marriage,  sexual  harassment  in  public
         places and tougher penalties for certain forms of violence. However
         as to the appellant's factual account,  it  contained  inconsistent
         evidence and discrepancies. They were identified by the  respondent
         in the decision letter. They included the claim that if her husband
         was strict and treated her like a slave he would not  have  allowed
         her to travel freely to the UK in 2012 and March 2017 and  that  he
         would contribute financially and that it was also inconsistent  and
         not credible that after she queried her  daughters  arranged/forced
         marriage that he would, within days, allow her to travel out of the
         country with both her children. The respondent also identified that
         when asked in interview the last time he spoke to her  husband  she
         said she did not speak to him but later said that her  husband  had
         come to the UK to visit her brother  in  2019  but  she  could  not
         remember the year. She later said she did speak to her husband, and
         he came to the UK in September /October 2019. Her factual claim was
         therefore rejected.

      9. The respondent also reached the conclusion that even if  her  claim
         was credible, there was sufficiency of state protection  available.
         The claim that  her  husband  was  a  very  powerful  man  was  not
         supported by any evidence, nor was  the  claim  that  the  man  her
         husband wanted her daughter to marry was a powerful man either.

     10. The remainder of the decision  letter  considered  the  appellant's
         family and private life and the  best  interests  of  the  children
         under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The decision of the FtTJ:

     11. The appeal came before the FtT on 5 January 2021. The judge set out
         the documentary evidence at paragraphs  [13  -  20]  and  the  oral
         evidence was summarised at paragraphs [21 - 39]  of  his  decision.
         The submissions of the advocates were also summarised by  the  FtTJ
         at paragraphs [40 - 48].

     12. The analysis of the evidence and factual findings made were set out
         at paragraphs [53 - 70]. They can be summarised as follows:

          1) The appellant had  made  witness  statements  which  were  not
             consistent with her oral evidence (at [53]).

          2) While the appellant provided a school certificate from Morocco
             and evidence  of  achievements  in  the  UK,  what  was  "very
             striking" was the lack of any supporting evidence from  family
             members in the UK and what  was  "equally  striking"  was  the
             inconsistent reasons given by the appellant  in  evidence  for
             this  (at [54] and [55]).

          3) The FtTJ found that on her own evidence all 3  family  members
             were aware of her problems for  some  time;  one  brother  had
             encouraged her to visit the UK and had her to stay with him on
             a number of occasions and that it would be "very difficult  to
             believe that this brother would  not  provide  at  least  some
             written support for the  long-term  abuse  she  says  she  has
             suffered".  The  judge  also  found  that  it   was   "equally
             difficult" to believe that her sister who  had  also  provided
             support and offer to help in such  a  critical  moment  as  an
             application for international  protection  would  not  provide
             evidence on her behalf. The judge also found  that  her  adult
             daughter also had not provided any support and that  that  was
             significant in the light of documents that had  been  provided
             from Spain (at [56]).

          4) Whilst the judge accepted that violence against  women  was  a
             worldwide problem and that her account was plausible  in  that
             context, the judge identified  a  number  of  aspects  of  the
             appellant's evidence which were not  consistent  or  coherent.
             The  judge  identified  the  appellant's  account   concerning
             contact with her husband in the UK as one of those issues  (at
             [58]).

          5) The FtTJ found that it was not credible  that  the  appellant,
             who was in  fear  of  her  husband  so  that  she  would  seek
             protection for the UK authorities would  countenance  allowing
             him to see the children who were on her  account  "traumatised
             by his actions". The  judge  found  that  she  had  also  been
             inconsistent about what they discussed and that was a  further
             reason which undermined her credibility (at [59]).

          6) At [60] the FtTJ did not find  that  there  was  a  reasonable
             explanation for failing to claim asylum in France or Spain for
             the reasons that the judge set out.

          7) At [61] the judge found that her account of coming to  the  UK
             was inconsistent with the oral evidence  given  and  that  her
             account of meeting a woman in a mosque was not consistent with
             the written account that she had given in her statement.

          8) At [62] the judge found that in her evidence she said that her
             husband agreed to let her go to Spain and that it was "not out
             of the ordinary". However in her oral evidence she  said  that
             her grandchild was born and that was why she had persuaded him
             to let her go. The  judge  found  that  they  were  "few  more
             significant occasions and the birth of the 1st grandchild" and
             the  fact  that  it  was  only  mentioned  in  oral   evidence
             undermined her credibility.

          9) The judge considered the referral to CAMHS for R in April 2020
             which noted the family left Morocco due to  "abusive  father".
             The judge found there was no mention of a  potential  marriage
             of I in no mention of the meeting which is said took place  in
             late 2019 (at [64]).

         10) At [65] the judge found that  there  was  no  mention  of  any
             abusive relationship or  potential  forced  marriage  for  the
             appellant's daughter in the appellant's  GP's  records  either
             and that whilst the referral  noted  that  the  appellant  had
             counselling, no evidence  about  what  it  was  for  what  was
             discussed had been provided in the evidence.

         11)  The  judge  considered  I's  medical  records  and  found   a
             consultation in November 2020 when she was described as  being
             "very stressed due to 2 boys who were  threatening  her".  The
             judge found that there was no mention of events in Morocco  or
             any fears about her  father;  or  the  late  meeting  in  2019
             although she was in a distressed state. The judge  found  that
             there was no evidence  of  any  consultation  before  then  to
             suggest any past issues had ever been mentioned and  that  the
             records are complete suggesting that the problems that  I  had
             was specifically related to  that  incident.  The  judge  also
             noted that there was no copy of  the  letter  of  referral  to
             CAMHS either (at [66]).

         12) The judge considered a typed and unsigned letter  said  to  be
             from I. However for the reasons given at [67]  the  judge  did
             not find that  the  letter  were  the  genuine  words  of  her
             daughter, and the judge did not place weight on  the  document
             as a reliable indicator of events in Morocco.

         13) The judge's conclusions were set out at paragraphs [68 -  69],
             where the judge concluded that from the evidence  he  was  not
             satisfied that there was any potential forced marriage of I in
             Morocco due to the inconsistencies in the evidence  identified
             and due to the lack of any reliable supporting  evidence.  The
             judge  noted  again  that  there  was  no  supporting  medical
             evidence within the GP records and whilst there was a referral
             concerning R it did  not  provide  evidence  of  any  specific
             issues.

         14) The judge did not accept the factual basis of the  appellant's
             claim and that whilst the appellant may have  had  an  unhappy
             marriage, he did not accept her account that her husband tried
             to force their daughter into a marriage with an older man  nor
             was he powerful or had any inclination to harm her  nor  would
             he force her marry on her return. The judge concluded that she
             did not face a real risk of persecution or harm on  return  to
             Morocco and that she had fabricated the claim to enable her to
             seek a new life for herself and her children in the  UK  where
             she had relatives.

         15) At paragraphs [71 - 78] the judge considered Article 8 of  the
             EC HR.  The FtTJ found that the appellant could not  meet  the
             immigration  rules  in  respect  of  her  private  life  under
             paragraph 276ADE and that when considering Article  8  outside
             of the rules and taking into account the best interests of the
             children, their length of residence in the  UK,  their  health
             needs and their relationships with their  UK-based  relatives,
             that their removal  to  Morocco  as  a  family  would  not  be
             disproportionate. He dismissed the appeal.

     13. Permission  to  appeal  was  sought  relying  on  two  grounds  and
         permission was refused by FtTJ  Scott  Baker  but  on  renewal  was
         granted by UTJ Plimmer on 23 April 2021.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     14. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on indicating that it was provisionally of the view that
         the error of law issue could be determined without  a  face-to-face
         hearing and that this could take place via  Microsoft  teams.  Both
         parties have agreed that  they  are  content  for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     15.  I  am  grateful  for  their  assistance  and  their   clear   oral
         submissions.

     16. Mr Howard, who had appeared before the First-tier Tribunal appeared
         on behalf of the appellant  relied  upon  the  written  grounds  of
         appeal. He did not expressly make any oral submissions relating  to
         ground 1 but was content to rely upon the written grounds.

     17. Ground 1 asserts that there was a material  misdirection  to  apply
         the correct standard of proof and that because the  judge  referred
         to the word "doubt" at paragraphs 44, 59  and  63,  the  judge  had
         applied to higher standard of proof when assessing the  appellant's
         credibility. The submission is made that in the consideration of  a
         protection claim, the lower standard  of  proof  should  have  been
         applied.

     18. As to ground 2, Mr Howard  submitted  that  this  was  the  primary
         ground that he relied upon, and this related to paragraphs  68  and
         76 of the decision in the context of the CAMHS referral in  respect
         of R. He submitted that at paragraph 68  the  judge  accepted  that
         there had been a referral but that the judge had failed to consider
         the contents of that referral which  referred  to  there  being  an
         abusive father and also that R was suffering  from  "post-traumatic
         stress". Mr Howard pointed to paragraph 76 of the judge's  decision
         where the judge had stated that the  referrals  in  his  view  were
         easily likely to be due to the impact of being uprooted from  their
         life in Morocco and find  themselves  in  a  strange  country  with
         limited support. Mr Howard submitted  there  was  no  reference  in
         relation to the contents of the  CAMHS  evidence  and  particularly
         reference to the father being abusive and that R suffered from post-
         traumatic stress.

     19. Mr Howard therefore submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  his
         consideration of the medical evidence, and  it  was  material  when
         considering section 55 and the risk on return in the context of the
         vulnerable family.

     20. Mr Howard also referred to paragraph 68 where there  was  reference
         to "a difference between an abusive father and one who is insisting
         his 13-year-old is  married  off  to  an  old  rich  man".  In  his
         submission, the judge erred in making that finding as  it  did  not
         necessarily follow that there was  such  a  difference  as  it  was
         possible for an abusive father to also be one who  insists  on  the
         younger child being married off to an older man.

     21. He relied upon the submission in the grounds that the judge  failed
         to make adequate findings in relation to  whether  the  appellant's
         husband was an abusive father and if so the risk  of  harm  to  the
         appellant's children.

     22. Mr McVeety, senior presenting officer appeared  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent. He relied upon the written submissions which were  sent
         on the  13  May  2021  by  his  colleague  Mr  Avery.  The  written
         submissions set out that  having  considered  the  grounds  lodged,
         there was no error of law  and  that  the  grounds  were  a  simple
         disagreement with the factual findings made. At paragraph [50]  the
         judge gave a correct self-direction with respect to the standard of
         proof and reminded himself of this at paragraph 61  when  assessing
         the evidence. The written reply  also  submitted  that  there  were
         significant credibility issues in the appellant's account,  and  it
         was clearly open to the  judge  to  find  against  her.  The  judge
         properly considered the CAHMS report at paragraph 64, 65 and 68.

     23. In his oral submissions, Mr McVeety submitted that whilst reference
         had been made to "medical evidence" that had been a  referral,  but
         no diagnosis had been made. The author  of  the  referral  had  not
         witnessed or seen anything to support the referral. The  judge  had
         no letter before him as  to  the  basis  of  the  referral  and  no
         evidence in support. This was an entirely  self-reported  referral,
         and the GPs evidence did not provide any assistance or support  for
         the referral. He  submitted  the  judge  correctly  considered  the
         referral in the context of the entirety of the  claim  and  not  in
         isolation and found that there were a number of implausibility's in
         the appellant's account which the judge set out.  He  submitted  in
         light of the lack of supporting evidence alongside the referral  it
         was not known who used the words "abusive father".

     24. As regards the submission directed at paragraph 76, the FtTJ  dealt
         with section 55 and the best interests of the children but  did  so
         in the context of the earlier findings and the  evidence  that  was
         before the tribunal. The  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
         reasonable likelihood for the referral was that it was likely to be
         due to the impact of being uprooted from their life in Morocco  and
         finding themselves in a strange country with limited support. There
         was evidence at [66]. The judge was entitled  to  say  that  having
         been taken from their home and having left their school  and  their
         lives that this would likely have an adverse effect upon them.

     25. Mr McVeety submitted that the factual findings were  not  expressly
         challenged other than in ground 1  (based  on  applying  the  wrong
         standard of proof) and  that  the  evidence  of  the  self-reported
         referral was considered by  the  FtTJ.  He  therefore  invited  the
         tribunal to uphold the decision.

     26. Mr Howard by way of reply referred to the referral again at page 18
         and that there was a reference to "post-traumatic stress" therefore
         the  judge  mischaracterised  the  evidence  at  paragraph  76.  He
         therefore submitted that there was a material error of law  in  the
         decision of the FtTJ.

     27. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision which I
         now give.

Decision on error of law:

     28. I have carefully considered the grounds advanced on behalf  of  the
         appellant and have done so in the context of the  submissions  made
         by the parties and the evidence that was before the  FtTJ  and  his
         decision. I am grateful to both advocates for their submissions.

     29. Having done so, I am not satisfied that there is any error  of  law
         in the decision of the  FtTJ.  I  shall  set  out  my  reasons  for
         reaching that conclusion.

     30. Dealing with ground 1, it is submitted in the grounds that the FtTJ
         made a material misdirection in law by failing to apply the correct
         standard of proof. The written grounds identify paragraph 44 and 63
         by reference to the word "doubt". It is  therefore  submitted  that
         the judge applied too high a standard of proof when  assessing  the
         credibility of the  appellant  and  her  claim  and  that  a  lower
         standard of proof should have been applied. I note that whilst  the
         grounds purport to identify paragraph 44, this is in fact a summary
         of the submission made on behalf of  the  respondent  and  not  any
         assessment of the evidence made by the FtTJ. Similarly at [63]  the
         use of the word "doubt" is in the context of the judge accepting or
         believing  that  the  appellant  is   engaged   in   education   as
         demonstrated by the phrase used by the judge "nor do I  doubt  that
         the  appellant  has  engaged  in  education."  Neither   of   those
         paragraphs support the claim  made  in  the  grounds  of  the  FtTJ
         applying the wrong standard of proof.

     31. Having read the decision in its entirety, the ground has no  merit.
         The FtTJ directed himself in accordance with the law and identified
         the correct standard of proof at paragraph [11].  When  undertaking
         his consideration of the evidence, the FtTJ again returned  to  the
         standard of proof at paragraph [50]  where  he  stated,  "I  remind
         myself that the lower standard of proof applies" and then proceeded
         to undertake the assessment of  the  evidence  by  looking  at  the
         credibility indicators in accordance with the decision  of  KB  and
         AH(credibility - structured approach) Pakistan  [2017]  UK  UT00491
         (IAC). In reaching his conclusion at [69] the FtTJ plainly  applied
         the correct standard of proof  when  stated  "I  do  not  find  the
         appellant established to the required standard that  her  claim  of
         potential honour violence on return  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
         true".

     32. I am therefore satisfied that there is no merit in  the  submission
         that the judge applied the wrong standard  of  proof  or  a  higher
         standard of proof in undertaking the assessment of the  appellant's
         credibility. That ground must fail.

     33. The second ground is based upon the submission that the FtTJ failed
         to properly  consider  the  evidence  in  the  CAMHS  referral  and
         identifies that at paragraph  [76]  where  the  judge  reached  his
         finding that the referral was  "reasonably likely to be due to  the
         impact of being uprooted from their life  in  Morocco  and  finding
         themselves in a strange country with limited  support"  was  not  a
         finding properly based  on  the  evidence  set  out  in  the  CAMHS
         referral.

     34. Mr Howard on behalf of the appellant submits that the  FtTJ  failed
         to take into account the  evidence  and  that  it  related  to  the
         father's conduct as abusive to the children and therefore the judge
         failed to consider the risk to them. He further  submits  that  the
         judge therefore erred in law when  considering  this  evidence  and
         that the materiality of  the  error  fed  into  his  assessment  of
         section 55 and the "best interests" assessment.

     35. I am satisfied that the FtTJ did not fall into error in the way the
         grounds assert and in the way that Mr Howard has submitted. As with
         all decisions, it should be read  as  a  whole  and  when  this  is
         undertaken in the context of this particular decision,  it  can  be
         readily seen that the FtTJ properly considered all of the  evidence
         together before reaching his overall assessment and analysis of the
         risk on return. As Mr McVeety submitted, the FtTJ was  entitled  to
         consider the CAMHS referral in the context of the overall  evidence
         and not to view the document in isolation.

     36. Mr Howard points to the following in the CAMHS referral "  R  along
         with mom and sister have escaped Morocco, from an  abusive  father.
         It seems like she  is  suffering  with  a  form  of  post-traumatic
         stress, with erratic behaviour, mood swings... ". He  submits  that
         that was not  taken  into  account  by  the  FtTJ.  I  reject  that
         submission. The FtTJ plainly had regard to that CAMHS referral  and
         expressly set out its contents at [64], [65  and  [68].  Whilst  Mr
         Howard refers to the referral as "medical evidence" the referral as
         it stood was not an assessment, medical otherwise of the  children,
         but was  a  referral  to  undertake  an  assessment.  The  referral
         document does not provide any support from where  this  information
         has come save that it is stated in the same box "concern for R  has
         come from her mother H and her sister I".

     37. As the judge identified in his decision, the medical records for  R
         set out in the bundle at page 30 provided  no  supportive  evidence
         that R had presented with any symptoms or any  symptoms  consistent
         with post-traumatic stress. No reference is made of any concerns in
         the context of abuse.

     38. Consequently whilst the FtTJ accepted  that  a  referral  had  been
         made, it was open to him to  find  that  there  was  no  supporting
         evidence alongside the referral and that on  the  face  of  it  the
         factual part of  the  referral  appeared  to  have  come  from  the
         appellant herself having self-reported  the  circumstances  of  the
         children.

     39. Against that background the  FtTJ  was  entitled  to  consider  the
         evidence in this context and the evidence as a  whole  and  not  to
         view it in isolation. I am satisfied that the FtTJ did approach the
         evidence in  this  way,  and  this  can  be  seen  in  his  factual
         assessment. At [64] the judge noted that the content of  the  CAMHS
         referral and identified that there was no  reference  made  to  the
         potential forced marriage of I and a meeting which  took  place  in
         late 2019. The judge noted that R  was  disturbed  and  angry,  and
         whilst the judge properly took into account that the referral notes
         are often brief, the lack of any reference made  to  the  issue  of
         forced marriage of I who was a child and the failure  to  refer  to
         the meeting with the father undermined the weight attached to it.

     40. Furthermore at [65]  the  judge  considered  the  other  supporting
         evidence including the GP records  and  found  that  there  was  no
         mention of an abusive relationship or potential forced marriage  of
         her daughter in the appellant's records and that  in  this  respect
         whilst there was a reference  to  counselling  in  respect  of  the
         appellant, there was no evidence about what the counselling was for
         or what was discussed. At [66] in terms of I's medical records, the
         judge noted that there was no mention of events in Morocco nor  any
         fears about her father (or after the meeting in 2019) although  she
         was in a distressed state and that there was  no  evidence  of  any
         consultation before then to suggest any past issues  (i.e. relating
         to Morocco) had ever been mentioned. What the GP's notes did record
         in relation to I was that she was described as being "very stressed
         due to neighbours 2 boys who are? threatening I" further references
         "mum has to walk to and from bus stop before and  after  school  as
         she is scared..".

     41. The FtTJ did not consider the evidence in isolation and earlier  in
         the decision considered the appellant's evidence as to  the  events
         in Morocco and her claim that the appellant's husband was intent on
         forcing I into marriage and was abusive.  The  FtTJ  highlighted  a
         number of significant issues of credibility concerning her account.
         At [54] the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  provided  evidence
         concerning personal achievements in  the  UK  but  what  was  "very
         striking" was the lack  of  supporting  evidence  from  her  family
         members who were present in the UK and what was "equally  striking"
         was the inconsistent evidence given by  the  appellant  as  to  the
         reasons why they had not provided support for her. The judge  found
         at [56] that all 3 family members identified had been aware of  her
         problems for some time with one brother having  encouraged  her  to
         stay with him and that it was not credible that he had not provided
         any written support for her long-term  abuse  which  said  she  had
         suffered in Morocco. Also the judge identified the same relating to
         her sister and also her  eldest  adult  daughter  neither  of  whom
         provided evidence in support. At [55] the judge noted  the  reasons
         given as to why her brothers and sister in the UK had not  provided
         supporting evidence but found her evidence to be inconsistent.

     42. At paragraphs [58]  -  [59]  the  judge  assessed  the  appellant's
         account of the visit made by her husband who came to the  UK  after
         the appellant claimed to have fled to the UK in fear  of  him.  The
         judge noted that in her 2 witness statements she confirmed that she
         had not had contact with him since April 2019. However in  the  2nd
         interview, after initially saying she did not  see  him,  she  said
         that he did visit the UK in late 2019  on  the  invitation  of  her
         brother to discuss with her either the children  or  her  daughters
         perspective marriage. The judge  found  that  there  was  a  "clear
         discrepancy" in her evidence and  the  account  of  what  had  been
         discussed at the meeting was inconsistent. The judge found that the
         details of such a significant event was not  likely  to  have  been
         forgotten in 2 signed witness statements nor the time of the visit.
         The judge concluded on the evidence that it was not credible that a
         woman who was in such fear of her husband would have allowed him to
         see the children who  were  on  her  account  "traumatised  by  his
         actions". That was consistent with the oral evidence given  by  the
         appellant and set out by the  judge  at  paragraph  [37]  that  she
         confirmed that she let the children see their father in the UK  and
         this was after she left Morocco on the  grounds  of  their  safety.
         There were also a number of other adverse  credibility  issues  set
         out at paragraphs [60), [61] and [62].

     43. At paragraph [67] the judge considered the letter that was said  to
         have emanated from I herself and gave reasons why he did not accept
         that they were the genuine words of I or that they were a  reliable
         indicator of events in Morocco. That finding is not  challenged  in
         the grounds or the submissions made on behalf of the appellant.

     44. At paragraphs [68 - 69] the judge then drew together  the  evidence
         and  reached  the  overall  conclusion  that  in   light   of   the
         inconsistent evidence given by the appellant and due to the lack of
         reliable supporting evidence, the appellant had not established  to
         the lower standard that she had demonstrated  a  risk  of  harm  on
         return to Morocco either in the context of honour violence or  that
         her daughter would be at risk  of  a  forced  marriage.  The  judge
         expressly found that her husband had no inclination to harm her  or
         force I into marriage. The  judge  expressly  considered  again  at
         paragraph [68] the documentary evidence and the risk  of  harm  and
         the CAMHS referral but  again  observed  that  there  had  been  no
         supporting medical evidence and the GPs records (from either  R  or
         I) to suggest a  forced  marriage  had  been  referred  to.  In  my
         judgement the FtTJ  was  correct  in  stating  that  the  documents
         provided were to be evaluated in the context of the evidence of the
         whole and not in isolation and that was a process  that  the  judge
         plainly undertook.

     45. Whilst Mr Howard referred to the final sentence at [68] that "there
         is a difference between an abusive father and one who is  insisting
         his 13-year-old is married off to  an  old  rich  man.  I  did  not
         believe this to be true", the judge was referring  to  the  central
         core of the appellant's account that I would be the  subject  of  a
         forced marriage. The FtTJ gave a number of sustainable and evidence-
         based reasons for rejecting the appellant's account overall.

     46.  Furthermore, I am satisfied that the reference to "abusive father"
         has to be seen in the light of the FtTJ's overall assessment of the
         evidence and not only by reference to the CAMHS referral  document.
         The judge properly identified that there was no supporting  medical
         evidence that R and I had referred to any adverse events in Morocco
         or any abuse. The judge gave reasons why he did not place weight on
         the evidence of I at [67] and at [66] took into account that  there
         was no evidence of any consultation before 2019 to suggest any past
         issues concerning Morocco. At paragraph [64] the  FtTJ  noted  that
         the CAMHS referral did not mention any potential marriage  relating
         to I and in addition the judge found that the  appellant's  account
         of the meeting between the children and their father at [59] wholly
         undermined her account and he did not believe that she  would  have
         allowed  her  husband  to  see  the  children  if  they  had   been
         traumatised by his actions.

     47. Therefore when drawing together the analysis of  the  evidence  and
         those findings of fact, it can be  seen  that  the  judge  did  not
         accept the appellant's factual account that her  children  were  at
         risk from their father whether in the account of a forced  marriage
         in respect of  I or on account of them otherwise being the  subject
         of abuse or at risk of harm from their father.

     48. Against that background the judge's assessment at [76] was open  to
         the judge to make.  On his analysis the judge considered  that  the
         referral was reasonably likely to have been due to the  "impact  of
         being uprooted from their life in Morocco and finding themselves in
         a strange country with limited support. There  is  no  evidence  of
         serious psychiatric  illness.  Both  children  continue  to  attend
         schools they did Morocco." Contrary to the submission  made  by  Mr
         Howard and the written grounds, that finding  was  consistent  with
         the lack of supporting evidence as to the  events  in  Morocco  and
         consistent with the GPs notes which the judge had earlier  recorded
         at [66] in relation to I who had been described as  "very  stressed
         due to the neighbours 2 boys who were threatening her".

     49. Consequently I am satisfied that there is no error of  law  in  the
         FtTJ's assessment of the CAMHS referral for the reasons that I have
         set out above. I am satisfied that the document  and  its  contents
         were properly considered in the context of the claim as a whole and
         not in isolation and that the judge's overall  assessment  was  one
         that was open to him on the evidence before him.

     50. As to the last point made by Mr Howard  which  submitted  that  the
         judge failed to engage with the risk of the appellant returning  as
         a lone woman and as a PSG, I consider that that submission  is  not
         relevant in the light of the rejection of her factual  account.  In
         other words, the judge did not accept that she would  be  returning
         to Morocco as a lone woman with  her  children  having  found  that
         neither she or the children would be  at  risk  of  harm  from  her
         husband.

     51. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law  and  that  the  appeal  should  be  dismissed.  The
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge stands.




Notice of Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT  stands.   The
appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her and her  family  members.   This  direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated   31 August 2021






         NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


         1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision
         must make a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such
         application must be received by the Upper Tribunal within the
         appropriate period after this decision was sent to the person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the way in which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


         2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention under the Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days if
         the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time that the application for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


         6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
         covering letter or covering email.

