
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02325/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2018                              |On 20 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                DAVIE CHAIMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Davie Chaima, was born on 17 December 1976 and is a male
    citizen of Malawi.  He first arrived in the United Kingdom as a student
    in 2009.  He subsequently claimed international protection as a refugee
    in September 2017.  His application was refused by a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 23  February  2017.   The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis)  which,
    in a decision which was promulgated on 26 October 2017,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's claim to the Secretary of State was made on  number  of
    bases, including asylum and Article 3 ECHR.  I  record  at  the  outset
    that this appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  concerned  only  with  the
    appellant's claim that he is  entitled  to  a  residence  card  as  the
    partner of an EEA national, Joanna Czerwinska. Judge Hillis dealt  with
    all aspects of the appeal including the claim for asylum in respect  of
    Article 3 ECHR.  His findings and the dismissal of the appeal on asylum
    and Article 3 ECHR grounds have not  been  challenged.   There  was  no
    appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   Mr
    Hussain, who appeared for the appellant before the Upper Tribunal, made
    it clear that there remained no challenge to the Secretary  of  State's
    decision on Article 8 grounds.  In this  decision,  therefore,  I  will
    consider only the appeal under the EEA Regulations 2016.

 3. The judge accepted that the appellant is in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with  Ms  Czerwinska  and  their  child  [27].   That  the
    appellant had been convicted on 22 September  2015  at  Bradford  Crown
    Court of having made  false  representations  and  possessing  identity
    documents  with  intent.   He  was  sentenced   to   fourteen   months'
    imprisonment.  He did not appeal against the sentence or conviction.  I
    understand that the appellant used a false passport in  order  to  gain
    employment.  The appellant had been issued with a notice to deport  him
    on 4 November 2015.  The deportation had been signed in respect of  the
    appellant on 26 September 2016.  This follows  service  of  that  order
    that the appellant had made his claim for protection.

 4. I am grateful to Mr  Hussain,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant,  for
    providing me with a copy of  his  skeleton  argument  (which  had  been
    directed by Judge Plimmer when she  granted  permission  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal).  Mr Hussain submitted that the findings in  respect  of  the
    EEA Regulations were important if only because the issue of a residence
    permit to the appellant as the unmarried partner of Ms Szerwinska would
    provide protection against his deportation.

 5. I considered the submissions made by both parties' representatives very
    carefully.  I have concluded  that,  although  the  decision  of  Judge
    Hillis contains  errors,  I  have  should  decline  to  set  aside  his
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, I accept, as  Mr  Hussain
    argues, that the judge wrongly failed to identify Ms  Szerwinska  as  a
    "qualifying person" for the purpose of the Regulations because he found
    [52] that she had not been "exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom for  the  minimum  period  of  five  years  and  did  not  have
    residential status in this country".   Regulation  17(5)  of  the  2016
    Regulations provides as follows:

         '(5) The Secretary of State may issue a registration certificate to
         an extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is
         an EEA national on application if-

             (a)  the application is  accompanied  or  joined  by  a  valid
             national identity card or passport;

             (b)  the relevant EEA national is a qualified person or an EEA
             national with a right of permanent residence under  regulation
             15; and

             (c)  in all the circumstances it appears to the  Secretary  of
             State appropriate to issue the registration certificate.'

 6. The appellant has not, pursuant to Regulation 7(3), been issued with  a
    registration certificate or  EEA  family  permit.   He  does,  however,
    satisfy Regulation 17(5)(b) insofar as Ms  Czerwinska  is  a  qualified
    person.  She is a Polish  national  exercising  Treaty  Rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge appears to have read the provisions of  sub-
    paragraph (b) as conjunctive rather than disjunctive; the EEA  national
    is not required to be a qualifying person and have a permanent right of
    residence under Regulation 15.

 7. However, I do not find that the judge's error  is  material.   This  is
    because the appellant cannot satisfy sub-paragraph (a); any application
    made by the appellant has not been accompanied or  joined  by  a  valid
    national identity card or passport.  I accept the judge may have  erred
    (as did the author of the refusal letter) by finding that the appellant
    had not  actually  made  an  application.   The  relevant  Home  Office
    guidance document  (Processes  and  Procedures  for  EEA  documentation
    applications: 21 April 2017) although it postdates the events  in  this
    appeal made it clear that a letter rather than a specific form could be
    used to make an application.  The appellant submits (and this  was  not
    challenged by Mrs Pettersen  for  the  Secretary  of  State)  that  his
    solicitors had written a letter.  However, I am  brought  back  to  the
    observation made above namely that the appellant cannot  succeed  under
    Regulation 17(5) because his application in a letter or  otherwise  was
    not accompanied by a valid national identity card or passport.

 8. The refusal letter [56] although it proceeded on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had not made an application,  did  consider  whether,  if  an
    application had been submitted, a residence permit  would  be  "granted
    solely in the event of a  durable  relationship"  with  Ms  Szerwinska.
    Paragraph 56 of the refusal letter leaves matters hanging in the air:

         "Even if an EEA residence permit application was submitted it would
         not be granted solely in the event of a  durable  relationship  was
         found to exist with an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the
         UK.  The decision will still need to be  made  as  to  whether,  on
         balance, it  will  be  appropriate  to  exercise  discretion  under
         Regulation 17(6) to issue a residence card.  In determining whether
         discretion should  be  exercised,  consideration  is  given  to  an
         applicant's immigration history,  criminal  record  and  any  other
         factors which might indicate that it  would  be  conducive  to  the
         public good to refuse such an application."

 9. Having set out the factors which might be considered by  the  Secretary
    of State in the exercise of a discretion, the letter then  goes  on  to
    record that the appellant does not have an EEA residence permit and  is
    not excluded from automatic deportation.  Thereafter,  the  application
    is considered on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  I accept that paragraph 56 is
    not, therefore, an unequivocal statement  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    that, had the appellant made an application  (which  I  find  he  did),
    discretion to issue him with a  residence  card  would  not  have  been
    exercised in his favour.  However, as I have stated above, this  is  no
    material because the appellant did not satisfy the requirement  for  an
    identity document.

10. The second ground for appeal asserts that the appeal should  have  been
    allowed to the extent that the decision was not in accordance with  the
    law in that the Secretary of State had not followed her own IDI:

         "You  must  consider  whether  the  requirements  of  Regulation  8
         (extended family member)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2016 have been met before you go on to stage 3."

11. Mr Hussain submitted that the Home Office  guidance  indicated  that  a
    senior caseworker should have considered the application and  exercised
    discretion on the part of the Secretary of State.  I reject that ground
    of appeal.  First, the appellant did not have  the  necessary  identity
    document and, secondly, there was no evidence that the  refusal  letter
    has been written without the authority of a senior caseworker.

12. I note that the Rule 24 response of the Secretary of State  appears  to
    assume, as did Judge Hillis,  that  the  discretion  available  to  the
    Secretary of State under Regulation 17 had been unequivocally exercised
    against the appellant.  I have set out  the  relevant  paragraph  above
    from which it will be seen that that is not the  case.   If  discretion
    had been exercised against the appellant, then it is difficult to  see,
    in the light of his criminal offending, that the  discretion  could  be
    challenged successfully.  Further, although the judge has  made  errors
    in his assessment of Ms Czerwinska as a "qualified person"  and  as  to
    whether the appellant had made an application in  respect  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under  Regulation  17
    because he could not satisfy Regulation 17(5)(a).

13. In the circumstances, and notwithstanding the errors of the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge, I find that the appellant's appeal should be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 18 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 18 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
