
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02769/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2016                   |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     RR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, Counsel, instructed by Krisinth
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    made on 6 March 2016 refusing his application for asylum.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  on  9  June  1992.   He
    claims to have entered the UK on 20 October 2015 and he claimed  asylum
    on 17 November 2015.  His application was refused for the  reasons  set
    out in the detailed reasons for refusal annexed to the decision  letter
    of 6 March 2016.  It was the appellant's claim that his father had been
    a member of the LTTE and at school he had become involved  in  publicly
    speaking out against the army and was praised by LTTE members.  In 2006
    he agreed to collect information for the LTTE and he  was  detained  in
    army camps in 2007, 2008 and 2010  and  during  his  detention  he  was
    beaten and tortured.  He was able to escape from the camp in 2010 after
    his uncle paid a guard to let him out and following his escape, he fled
    to Senegal where he stayed for four years.

3.   He was returned to Sri Lanka in  2014  after  being  deported  from  an
    unknown country.  He was  arrested  and  detained  on  arrival  at  the
    airport.  He was able to obtain his release with the assistance  of  an
    agent who also helped him leave Sri Lanka in March 2015,  returning  to
    Senegal for five months before  coming  to  the  UK  in  October  2015.
    However, whilst the  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka, she  did  not  accept  that  he  someone  of  any
    interest to the authorities due to his involvement with the  LTTE.   It
    was her view that he would not be regarded as  having  any  significant
    current role in relation to Tamil separatism within the diaspora or the
    renewal of hostilities in Sri Lanka.  He did not fit into  any  of  the
    risk categories identified by the Upper Tribunal in GJ and others (post-
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal an application  was  made
    for an adjournment to enable the appellant to obtain a full psychiatric
    assessment.   The  application  as  put  to   the   judge   was   based
    substantially on the fact that his counsel,  Ms  Walker,  had  met  the
    appellant approximately two weeks previously at chambers  and  believed
    that he  had  mental  health  issues.   She  accepted  that  no  formal
    application had been made for an adjournment at that stage nor had  any
    efforts been  made  to  seek  a  psychological  assessment  [23].   The
    application was opposed by the presenting officer  on  the  basis  that
    more than sufficient time had been available for the  production  of  a
    psychiatric report.

5.   The judge said that he was not  prepared  to  adjourn  the  proceedings
    having regard to the overriding obligation to ensure a timely and  fair
    disposal of the appeal.  He said that he had regard to  the  principles
    set out in the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
    Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418  (IAC).   He  indicated
    that he believed he was able to consider the appeal and the appellant's
    oral evidence on a fair and balanced basis. The  appellant  could  give
    oral evidence and would be assisted by counsel and  there  had  been  a
    more than  adequate  opportunity  to  seek  a  psychiatric  assessment,
    particularly as the conference with counsel had been two  weeks  before
    the hearing and no issue had been raised until the date of the hearing.

6.   The hearing therefore proceeded and the judge heard oral evidence  from
    the appellant.  He also had a medical  report  from  Dr  Andres  Martin
    dated 17 July 2016.  This report identified scarring on  the  appellant
    which Dr Martin described as consistent with  a  deliberate  injury  as
    described by  the  appellant.  He  discounted  alternative  causes  and
    excluded self-inflicted injury which he believed to be very unlikely.

7.   The judge accepted that there was credible evidence that the  appellant
    had been detained by the Sri Lankan authorities in  the  past  and  had
    been ill-treated as identified in  the  unchallenged  medical  evidence
    from Dr Martin.  However, whilst accepting  that  evidence,  the  judge
    said that he could not  be  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  given
    reliable and accurate evidence as to precisely  when  those  detentions
    occurred.  He had been inconsistent and unsure as to the  occasions  on
    which he was detained and  ill-treated  and  in  cross-examination  had
    accepted that he was confused and unsure about the details of when they
    occurred.  By way of example, the judge referred to the  report  of  Dr
    Martin setting out the appellant's history at 3.34, that he  was  burnt
    with iron rods in 2010 but the appellant claimed  that  these  injuries
    occurred  in  2014.   There  were  other  contradictions  between   the
    appellant's evidence and the account set out in the medical report  and
    the judge found that  this  conflicting  evidence  suggested  that  the
    appellant could not say with confidence or consistency when and for how
    long he had been detained and ill-treated.

8.   The judge did not accept the appellant's claim  that  he  was  deported
    from an unknown country after his arrival  in  Senegal,  that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities had visited his family home looking  for  him  after
    his escape from detention or that they had detained his uncle.  He also
    noted that the appellant  accepted  that  he  had  never  attended  any
    demonstrations in the UK and there was no evidence that  he  had  taken
    any action to work on behalf of the  Sri  Lankan  diaspora  seeking  to
    pursue Tamil separatism or to undermine the unitary state of Sri Lanka.
     He did not accept that the appellant was likely to appear on any  stop
    list or watch list nor was he likely to be perceived as a threat to the
    integrity of Sri Lanka.  For these reasons the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

9.    In  the  grounds  it  is  argued  that  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    application for an adjournment was unfair in the light of the  concerns
    raised about the appellant's mental health, particularly as  the  judge
    subsequently  rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  in  the  light   of
    discrepancies and inconsistencies when there had been no opportunity to
    provide psychiatric evidence which would assist  in  assessing  whether
    they  arose  from  a  lack  of  credibility,  mental  illness  or   the
    appellant's status as a vulnerable witness.  The grounds then challenge
    the judge's findings rejecting the appellant's account of  events  when
    he was detained in 2014, his conclusions drawn from the fact  that  the
    appellant's evidence was inconsistent at points and  his  rejection  of
    the appellant's account that the authorities  had  visited  his  family
    home.

10.  Ms Walker adopted these grounds in her submissions.   Whilst  accepting
    that no application had been made for an adjournment until the date  of
    hearing, she submitted that the judge had failed to take  into  account
    the fact that there was evidence in the appellant's bundle that his  GP
    had referred him to the West London  Mental  Health  Trust,  which  had
    agreed to offer him an assessment for cognitive behaviour therapy.  The
    judge had also failed, so she argued, to deal with the issue of whether
    the appellant was a vulnerable person, an issue raised in her  skeleton
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal at paras 3 - 6.  She  submitted
    that the judge had relied heavily on discrepancies in  the  appellant's
    evidence when reaching his findings and conclusions but had  failed  to
    consider the reasons for them.

11.  Mr Walker accepted that there was  evidence  before  the  judge,  which
    would have justified an  adjournment  being  granted  although  it  was
    perhaps surprising that a psychological assessment had not been applied
    for or produced earlier.  A report from a  psychiatrist  might  in  the
    circumstances  of  this  case  have  cast  some  light   on   how   the
    discrepancies in the evidence should be assessed.  He did not  seek  to
    make any further submissions to resist the appeal.

Assessment of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in Law

12.  In Nwaigwe, the President adopted and affirmed the test set out by  the
    Court of Appeal in SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWCA  Civ  1284  that  when  considering  whether  an
    immigration judge ought to have granted an adjournment,  the  test  was
    not irrationality or whether the decision was properly open to him  but
    the test and sole test was whether it was unfair.  The  President  said
    that he was conscious that in the typical case  the  judge  would  have
    invested much time and effort in  preparation  and  was  understandably
    anxious to complete the day's list of cases for hearing  and  may  well
    feel frustrated by the (usually) unexpected advent  of  an  adjournment
    request.  Moreover, Tribunals must  consistently  give  effect  to  the
    overriding objective but, notwithstanding,  sensations  of  frustration
    and inconvenience, no matter how legitimate, must always yield  to  the
    parties' right to a fair hearing.

13.  I was referred to the letter from the West London Mental  Health  Trust
    at page 44 of the appellant's bundle.  This letter is dated 11 February
    2016.  I also note  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were accompanied by a letter from the appellant referring  not
    only to his intention to produce a  report  from  Dr  Martin  but  also
    stating that he had psychiatric issues and would endeavour to obtain  a
    psychiatric report in due course.  There was a pre-hearing review on 10
    August 2016.  The notice was sent to the appellant, as it appears  that
    he was not represented at that stage and it is  not  clear  whether  in
    fact he returned the reply  notice.   In  any  event,  nothing  further
    appears to have  been  done  to  indicate  to  the  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant wished to rely on psychiatric evidence.  The need or possible
    need for such evidence, however, became apparent to  counsel  when  she
    had a conference with the appellant about two weeks before the date  of
    hearing and in her skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal she
    set out her submissions that the  appellant  should  be  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness who suffered from insomnia and anxiety and  that  it
    would be unreasonable to attach significant  weight  to  any  potential
    inconsistencies in his evidence.

14.  I must take into account the fact that  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had scarring as set out in Dr Martin's report and that  there
    was credible evidence that he had been detained and ill-treated in  the
    past resulting in physical injuries.  Dr Martin noted  the  appellant's
    account that he was burnt during his detentions in 2010 and 2014 on his
    upper arms with hot metal rods and it was his opinion  that  the  scars
    were typical of unwillingly and deliberately caused injuries.  He ruled
    out an accidental injury caused by pressing against heated metal  rails
    such as  a  radiator  or  during  professional,  sporting  or  military
    training as impossible as the duration of exposure with the  source  of
    injury necessary to produce the type of  deep  burn  was  significantly
    longer than the reflex withdrawal time needed to  remove  the  affected
    part of the body.

15.  The judge rejected the account given by  the  appellant  on  the  basis
    that his evidence was vague and unconvincing and that he  was  confused
    and unsure about the details of when the events he sought  to  describe
    occurred.  There is nothing to indicate in the judge's decision that he
    took into account the submissions that the appellant was vulnerable and
    that an allowance should be made for inconsistencies.  There  is  force
    in Ms Walker's submission that psychiatric evidence might have provided
    an explanation for contradictions and discrepancies in the  appellant's
    evidence arising from his mental and  psychiatric  health  rather  than
    simply indicating a lack of credibility.

16.  I accept that the judge was fully entitled to comment  that  there  had
    been ample opportunity to obtain a psychiatric report not least in  the
    light of the letter dated 11 February 2016 from the West London  Mental
    Health Trust but, nonetheless, in the light of the other factors I have
    identified, I am satisfied that the effect of refusing the  adjournment
    has been to deprive  the  appellant  of  an  opportunity  of  producing
    psychiatric evidence  which  could  have  a  material  bearing  on  the
    assessment of his evidence and, in his particular  circumstances,  this
    has caused unfairness. I am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law by failing to grant the adjournment sought.

17.  Both representatives accepted that in these  circumstances  the  proper
    course would be for  the  appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing.



Decision

18.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  reconsideration
    by way of a full rehearing before a different judge.

19.  The First-tier Tribunal decision states that  no  anonymity  order  was
    made but an anonymity direction was made at the pre-hearing  review  on
    10 August 2016.  There is nothing to indicate that  the  direction  has
    been varied and I remind the parties that an order has been made  under
    Rule 13 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)   (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 and, assuming that the direction has not
    been varied or discharged, of the possible consequences of  failing  to
    comply with it.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 7 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



