
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02116/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 December 2019                   |On 10 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     GN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda.  Her date of birth is 10 September
1979.  There is a direction to anonymise the Appellant.  This was ordered
by the First-tier Tribunal.  I continue that order.

In a decision which was promulgated on 14 August 2019, following a hearing
at Taylor House on 26 July 2019, the Appellant's appeal was dismissed by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Hoffman.  The Appellant appealed against the
decision of the Secretary of State dated 22 February 2019 to refuse her
claim on protection grounds.  The Appellant's case was that she would be at
risk of persecution on grounds of her sexuality.

Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith on 10 October
2019.  Judge Smith's decision reads as follows:

"1.  The application is a day out of time.  The appellant appears to have
been mistaken as to the time limits.  There is a good reason to extend time
on this minor breach.

2.   The evidence of Ms Tanah was key.  The criticism at [10] of the
grounds about the judge's concerns at [95] about her evidence being
'rehearsed' have merit.  The operative reasoning of judge at [95] was based
on the demeanour of the witness which is arguably an unreliable method of
assessment: see SS (Sri Lanka) [2018] EWCA Civ 1391 at, for example, [41].
There, the Court of Appeal said, 'the only objective and reliable approach
is to focus on the content of the testimony and to consider whether it is
consistent with other evidence...'.  The judge appeared to adopt the polar
opposite approach, which was arguably unlawful: 'While on paper this might
not read as being particularly damming, having had the opportunity to see
Ms Tanah give the oral evidence... the impression I obtained was that her
responses had been delivered in a rehearsed way..."

3.   At [27], the appellant contends that the judge was mistaken in his
treatment of the medical evidence, discounting it on the basis the
appellant no longer experienced PTSD.  The judge's failure to consider
whether the past history of PTSD supported the appellant's overall account
arguably led to the judge overlooking past PTSD as a significant piece of
supporting evidence.  A further and significant difficulty with the judge's
analysis of the medical evidence is that it features at [105] to [109]
after the judge has already reached significant adverse credibility
findings of the appellant's evidence, infected by his approach to
demeanour, as a whole: see [91] to [104].  It is arguable that the judge's
operative reasoning demonstrates that his analysis was conducted only once
he had already reached adverse credibility findings: Mibanga [2005] EWCA
Civ 367.

4.   The other criticisms have less merit.  However, given the centrality
of the judge's analysis of Ms Tanah's evidence, and his dismissal of the
medical evidence, it is arguable that his overall credibility assessment
was tainted.  I grant permission on all grounds.

DIRECTIONS

It is my preliminary view that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Hoffman did involve the making of an error of law capable of affecting the
outcome, and that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set
aside, the appropriate course of action being to remit the case to the
First-tier Tribunal for a fresh determination on all issues.

Unless within ten working days of the issue of these directions there is
any written objection to this course of action, supported by cogent
argument, the Upper Tribunal will proceed to determine the appeal without
an oral hearing and will remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

In the absence of a timely response by a party, it will be presumed that it
has no objection to the course of action proposed."

At the hearing before me Mr Clarke conceded that the Secretary of State had
not responded to the directions.  In these circumstances, I conclude that
in accordance with Judge Smith's decision the decision of Judge Hoffman to
dismiss the Appellant's appeal is set aside and the matter is remitted to
the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 5 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


