
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02354/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th December 2017                          |On 18th December 2017         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                  ms t.n.p.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Telford)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal to grant her leave to remain in the UK on  account
    of her asylum/humanitarian protection/ECHR rights.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam (born [ ] 1991).  She entered the
    UK on 7th January 2016 illegally.   She  claimed  asylum  eight  months
    after arrival, by which time she was pregnant with her son.  Her  child
    was born on [ ] 2016.

 3. In summary, her claim to asylum was based on her statement that she was
    a supporter of Viet Tan, that her family had  fallen  foul  of  a  loan
    shark, and that she had  been  arrested  by  the  authorities  on  10th
    January 2014.

 4. In addition she claimed her father had been arrested and imprisoned  on
    18th December 2015.  She said she was told by him not to return home as
    there were Viet Tan leaflets found  in  the  house  and  she  would  be
    arrested.

 5. She left Vietnam and entered the UK on 7th January 2016.

 6. The Respondent accepted none of the core elements  of  the  Appellant's
    claim. When her appeal came before the FtTJ he heard evidence from  the
    appellant and it is correct  to  say  that  he  found  the  Appellant's
    account lacking in credibility and  dismissed  her  asylum/humanitarian
    protection claim. He also dismissed her human rights appeal.

Onward appeal

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal.  Although  there  were  four
    grounds set out seeking permission, essentially these can be  distilled
    into two challenges:

     . the judge failed to properly consider whether the Appellant qualified
       for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules and/or  private  life
       Article 8 considerations outside the Rules when looking at the  "best
       interests" of a British child (grounds 1 and 2)

     . the judge's credibility findings made in respect of  the  Appellant's
       protection claim were unsustainable (grounds 3 and 4)

 8. Permission was granted in terms which on my reading  of  it,  sets  out
    that there was little arguable merit in the grounds seeking  permission
    on the second challenge outlined above.   There  was  however  arguable
    merit in the first challenge. Thus the matter comes before me to decide
    if the FtT decision discloses error of law requiring it to be remade.

Error of Law Hearing

 9. Before me Mr Malik appeared for the Appellant and Miss  Ahmad  for  the
    Respondent. At the commencement of the  hearing  I  indicated  to  both
    parties that I was of the view that  what  was  before  me  centred  on
    grounds 1 and 2 only and this was  reflected  in  paragraph  3  of  the
    permission grant. I said my provisional view was that having  read  the
    decision, I was satisfied that the FtTJ's findings with regard  to  the
    credibility of the Appellant's asylum claim were ones which  were  open
    to him. Neither party persuaded me otherwise.

10. I also said that I was of the provisional view that there was merit  in
    the Appellant's challenge raised on her human rights grounds.  I  asked
    Miss Ahmad if she wished to say anything  to  the  contrary.  She  made
    brief submissions but did not press  the  Respondent's  case  strongly,
    following which I  announced  I  was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
    challenge on this point was made out. I now give my  reasons  for  this
    finding.

Discussion

11. The outstanding matter before me therefore centres around  paragraph  3
    of the permission grant which says as follows:

         "However, there is arguable merit in grounds 1 and 2.   There  does
         not appear to be anything within  the  decision  which  establishes
         that  the  Judge  had  regard  to  the   Respondent's   policy   on
         applications for leave to remain by the primary carer of a  British
         national child where that  child  would  be  forced  to  leave  the
         territory of the EU  because  of  removal  of  the  primary  carer.
         Permission to appeal is therefore granted."

12. It is now the case that the  Appellant  is  the  mother  of  a  British
    national child.  The Respondent gave little consideration to  the  best
    interests of the child when refusing the Appellant's  claim.   This  is
    not altogether surprising.  At the date of the Appellant's interview on
    7th February  2017  there  was  no  birth  certificate  for  the  child
    produced.  This factor is reflected in the Reasons for  Refusal  letter
    dated 21st February 2017.  It would seem that evidence became available
    at a later stage apparently confirming the child's British nationality.

13. Likewise there was no evidence to  show  that  the  child's  father  is
    involved with his care.  It would appear that  there  may  be  evidence
    available to show the reverse is true.  It was therefore incumbent upon
    the FtT Judge to make a fact-sensitive assessment on the reasonableness
    (or otherwise) of a British child leaving the UK, on the removal of his
    primary carer.

14. It is correct that the FtT Judge did give consideration to the question
    of dual nationality, but I find that consideration led him to take  the
    wrong approach in saying:

         "The  Appellant  is  able  to  help  the  child  renounce   British
         citizenship for the purposes of the Vietnamese State." [13]

15. In short I find that there has been no proper  consideration  given  to
    Section 117(B)(6) of 2002 Nationality, Asylum and Immigration  Act  and
    accordingly that part of the decision must be set aside for  error  and
    must be remade.

16. So far  as  any  matter  raised  in  the  grounds  on  the  Appellant's
    protection claim is concerned I find, as the grant of  permission  sets
    out, the FtTJ made findings which were open  to  him  on  the  evidence
    before him.  They were neither irrational nor perverse.  Those findings
    which were set out in [18-22] of the decision are therefore  preserved.
    The findings that the Appellant is not a refugee and that she does  not
    qualify for humanitarian protection therefore stand.

17. I canvassed the question of disposal of this matter with  the  parties.
    Both were of the view that, as no proper consideration had  been  given
    to the Appellant's claim of being the primary carer of a British  child
    nor to Section 117(B)(6) of the 2002 Act, then the  appropriate  course
    would be for the matter to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is on the basis  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  carry  out  an
    extensive judicial fact finding exercise. It is fair that this is  done
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  I agree with that course.

18. The appeal of the Appellant is therefore allowed to the extent that the
    FtTJ's decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds is set aside.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Appellant against the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  is
allowed to the  extent  that  the  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Telford) for that Tribunal to  remake  the  decision  on
the Appellant's claim that any removal of her from the UK would be  unlawful
under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date 16 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
