
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02255/2020(V)
                                                            PA/02254/2020(V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by video        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Conference on the 12th May 2021      |On the 21st June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                  IL and EL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellants are granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms E. McIlveen, instructed by Arndale Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellants are a married couple. They  appealed  the  respondent's
    decisions dated 20 February 2020 to refuse their protection  and  human
    rights claims.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro ('the judge') dismissed the  appeals
    in a decision promulgated on 12 January 2021. The judge summarised  the
    background to the appellants' claim [3-12] and the respondent's reasons
    for refusal [13-17]. She noted that the respondent  accepted  that  the
    first appellant was trafficked in 2012-2013 but did not accept that her
    trafficker would have a continued interest in her or that she would  be
    at risk of re-trafficking [34]. The judge went on to give  reasons  for
    rejecting aspects of the appellants' account of  their  encounter  with
    her former trafficker 'A' in Tirana in July 2015.

                     '37.    ..... I find  that  if  [A]  had  a  continuing
                 interest in the  first  appellant,  when  she  returned  to
                 Albania in 2014, he had the means to find her and force her
                 back into prostitution, but he did not.  According  to  the
                 first appellant's evidence  she  returned  to  Albania  and
                 moved to live with her friend in Tirana where she  met  her
                 husband and married him  in  November  2014.  She  and  her
                 husband lived together happily until July 2015 and they had
                 no problems until then. I find the fact the first appellant
                 was never approached by [A] after she returned  to  Albania
                 in 2014 is good evidence that [A] had no  further  interest
                 in the appellant to work as a prostitute. Further,  I  find
                 as [A] must have known where the first  appellant's  family
                 lived because  he  threatened  to  harm  them,  if  he  had
                 continued to have an interest in  the  appellant  he  would
                 have caused some harm to the first appellant's  family  but
                 the first appellant has provided no evidence of her  family
                 being harmed by [A] after she returned to Albania or indeed
                 after the claimed incident which took place in July 2015.

                      38.    Regarding the incident  where  the  appellants'
                 claimed that they were attacked by [A] in July 2015,  I  am
                 prepared to accept that by chance, [A] saw the appellant in
                 the restaurant in Tirana and may  have  made  disrespectful
                 comment to her which caused the second appellant  to  react
                 leading to the ensuing fight which they said occurred but I
                 do no accept that [A] had approached  the  first  appellant
                 because he had a continuing  interest  in  her.  I  reached
                 (sic) this finding because the first appellant remained  in
                 Tirana for a few weeks after the incident and if [A] had an
                 interest in her, he had the opportunity to find her  before
                 she left Albania. In addition, the first appellant  on  her
                 own evidence was 6 months pregnant which  would  have  been
                 noted by [A]. In those  circumstances  I  find  it  is  not
                 credible that [A] would have wanted  to  pursue  the  first
                 appellant for her to work for him as a prostitute when  she
                 was  clearly  pregnant  and  would  not  be  attractive  to
                 potential customers.

                           39.    For these reasons I  do  not  accept  that
                 [A] had any further interest in the first  appellant  after
                 she returned to Albania and certainly had  no  interest  in
                 her to work as a prostitute when he saw her again in 2015.

                           40.    As I have found that [A] had  no  interest
                 in  the  first  appellant,  I  do  not  accept  the  second
                 appellant's claim that [A]  made  telephone  calls  to  him
                 asking  for  the   second   appellant's   whereabouts   and
                 threatening him or that he was required to sign a document,
                 which he said he did  not  read  and  therefore  could  not
                 explain what was written in the document.'

3.    The judge went on to consider whether the appellants would be at  risk
    on return to Albania at the date of the hearing. She  referred  to  the
    country guidance decision in TD and AD  (Trafficked  Women)  CG  [2016]
    UKUT 0092. She noted that the assessment of whether an individual would
    be able to access sufficient  protection  from  the  authorities  would
    depend  on  the  individual  circumstances  of  the  former  victim  of
    trafficking [43]. She referred to the non-exhaustive list  of  examples
    given in TD  (Albania)  before  turning  to  consider  the  appellants'
    individual circumstances [44]. In assessing  the  risk  on  return  the
    judge noted that the first appellant lived  in  Tirana  before  leaving
    Albania. She has family but they disapproved of her  relationship  with
    [A]. The appellants were married and  have  two  children.  The  eldest
    child has been diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder. The judge noted
    that the first appellant was educated to secondary level and that  both
    she and her husband had  experience  of  working  in  the  construction
    industry in the UK [46].

4.    The judge then considered the evidence given by  the  first  appellant
    about the effect that her experiences have had on her. She  noted  that
    the first appellant told her that she  suffers  from  depression  as  a
    result of past trauma. She had seen a psychologist in the past. She was
    given medication but stopped taking it because she had to take care  of
    the children. Other than the first appellant's oral evidence, the judge
    noted that there was no cogent evidence relating to her  mental  health
    [47]. The judge took into account what was said in TD  (Albania)  about
    the damage that past experiences of trafficking might have on a person,
    which could lead to difficulties in reintegration  [48].  However,  she
    went on to note that the first appellant would return to  Albania  with
    her  husband  who  would  be  able  to  support  her  financially   and
    emotionally. Both appellants and worked in the UK and she saw no reason
    why they could not do so in Albania [49].

5.    The First-tier  Tribunal  decision  went  on  to  consider  background
    evidence contained in the respondent's  CPIN  report  from  March  2019
    [51]. In light of that evidence the  judge  concluded  that  the  first
    appellant would be offered a package of support to assist her  and  her
    family with reintegration, which was likely  to  include  psychological
    support and help with finding accommodation and employment [52-53].  In
    light of the background evidence the judge concluded that the appellant
    could return to Albania and re-establish herself there [55].

6.    The judge went on to make findings with reference to Articles 3 and  8
    of the European Convention. It is unnecessary to set out those findings
    because those aspects of the First-tier Tribunal decision have not been
    appealed.

7.    The appellants appealed the decision on the following grounds:

        i) The judge was 'wrong' to find that the second appellant was  not
           likely to be at risk of being targeted in 2016 because  she  was
           pregnant and therefore unattractive to potential customers.

       ii) The judge failed to have proper regard to factors identified  in
           the country guidance decision of TD (Albania) including (i)  the
           fact that she is undergoing treatment for hepatitis in  the  UK;
           (ii) her area of origin; (iii) her age; and  (iv)  her  lack  of
           support in Albania given that  she  has  been  disowned  by  her
           family.

      iii) The judge failed to mention background evidence put  forward  by
           the appellants, which supported their assertion that there would
           be a lack of support by the authorities in Albania.

8.    Due to the continued need to take precautions to  prevent  the  spread
      of Covid 19 the hearing took place in a court room at Field House with
      the legal representatives appearing by video conference and  with  the
      facility for others to attend remotely. I was satisfied that this  was
      consistent with the open justice principle,  that  the  parties  could
      make their submissions clearly, and  that  the  case  could  be  heard
      fairly by this mode of hearing.

Decision and reasons

9.    Having considered the grounds of appeal and the oral submissions  made
    by both parties I conclude that the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  did
    not involve the making of a material error on a point of law.

10.   The grounds of appeal are generalised and fail  to  particularise  any
    errors of law of the kind identified by the Court of Appeal in R (Iran)
    & Others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 that would have made  any  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.

11.   The first ground asserts that the judge was 'wrong' to  find  that  it
    was unlikely that [A] would want to force the first appellant back into
    prostitution when she was 6 months pregnant.  The  ground  referred  to
    'one article' without stating what it was or identifying where it could
    be found. At the hearing Ms McIlveen pointed me to a print  out  of  an
    internet search history which was provided with the grounds of  appeal.
    She referred to an internet  search  result  entitled  'Entrapment  and
    Enmeshment Schemes Used by Sex Traffickers'. Under the  search  heading
    was a partial and intermittent summary of the article of the  kind  one
    finds in a list of search results, but nothing more. The search  result
    stated 'Some johns will reportedly pay more for sex with pregnant girls
    due to sexual fetishes.' Those representing  the  appellants  have  not
    printed out the article. It is not possible to assess the source of the
    information, the context of the single line relied upon, or  any  other
    information relating to the article. Partial and incomplete evidence of
    this kind cannot be given any meaningful weight.

12.   Even if the brief statement gleaned from  a  print  out  of  a  search
    history was taken  at  highest,  the  grounds  do  not  come  close  to
    formulating an error in the judge's findings.  It  is  clear  from  the
    judge's findings at [37-38] that the main reason why she found that [A]
    was unlikely to have a continuing interest in the first  appellant  was
    because he had not shown any interest since her return  to  Albania  in
    March 2014 despite the fact that he also lived in Tirana,  and  on  the
    appellant's own evidence, was said to be an influential person who knew
    where her family lived. Those findings were open to the judge  to  make
    on the evidence. The judge made clear that  the  observation  she  made
    about the appellant being 6  months  pregnant  at  the  time  of  their
    coincidental encounter with [A] in Tirana in July  2015  was  only  'in
    addition'  to  her  earlier   findings.   Even   if   the   appellant's
    representative has found an oblique and unidentified reference to 'some
    johns' reportedly paying more for sex with pregnant girls,  it  is  not
    arguable that the judge's finding was outside  a  range  of  reasonable
    responses to the evidence when, on the facts of this  case,  the  first
    appellant gave an account of her trafficker forcing her to  take  pills
    to terminate a pregnancy during the  time  when  she  was  forced  into
    prostitution.

13.   The second ground asserts  that  the  judge's  failure  to  take  into
    account four factors amounted to an error of law but failed to identify
    how or why those factors would have made any material difference to the
    outcome of the appeal. The judge directed herself to the relevant  part
    of TD (Albania) and made structured findings with reference to  factors
    that were relevant to the facts of this case  as  outlined  above.  The
    factors identified in TD (Albania) were examples of circumstances  that
    might need to be taken into account but  might  not  be  applicable  in
    every case.

14.   The only evidence relating  to  the  first  appellant's  diagnosis  of
    'Hepatitis B surface antigen positive' was a letter from  the  hospital
    to her GP confirming the outcome of tests dated 31 March 2020.  Nothing
    in the evidence indicated what the consequence of the  diagnosis  might
    be or what treatment she  might  need.  Her  legal  representative  had
    submitted no evidence relating to the situation in Albania  before  the
    hearing despite the fact  that  background  evidence  is  an  essential
    element in the competent preparation of any asylum case. There  was  no
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to suggest that treatment might
    not be available in Albania. I cannot see how this medical issue  would
    have made any material difference to the assessment. It was open to the
    judge to note that despite the health  issues  outlined  by  the  first
    appellant, the evidence indicated that she was well enough to  complete
    courses and to work.

15.   It is also difficult to see how the first appellant's area of  origin,
    her age or her  estrangement  from  her  family  would  have  made  any
    material difference to the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  The  appellant's
    family come from  Kukes  in  northern  Albania.  Even  though  she  was
    rejected by them, she was able to return to Albania in  March  2014  to
    live in Tirana. On her own evidence she was able to stay with a  friend
    and then met and married her husband. Even if she was  without  support
    from her parents and sibling it is clear that she  was  not  completely
    without support. At the date of the hearing the appellant was 29  years
    old. She was not vulnerable due to a particular young  or  particularly
    old age.

16.   None of the four factors identified in the grounds were likely  to  be
    significant to the assessment of this particular case or were likely to
    make any material difference to the outcome. Having found that  it  was
    not likely that [A] had any continuing interest in  forcing  the  first
    appellant into prostitution,  it  was  within  a  range  of  reasonable
    responses to the evidence for the judge to conclude that the appellants
    could return to Albania as a family and re-establish themselves  there.
    They had lived for some time in Tirana without any serious problems and
    were able to support themselves. Undoubtedly the  first  appellant  has
    been through traumatic experiences and will be worried about returning,
    but the evidence showed that despite not  pursuing  treatment  for  any
    mental health issues, she has been able to  look  after  her  children,
    complete courses, and work to help support  the  family.  Even  if  she
    could not look after herself, there was no evidence  to  indicate  that
    her husband could not support her if need be. It was open to the  judge
    to note that some support services were  likely  to  be  available  for
    victims of trafficking in Albania. Many of the  factors  identified  by
    the Upper Tribunal in TD (Albania) relate to the return  of  vulnerable
    lone women. That was not the factual matrix in this  case  because  the
    appellants would be returned as a family unit.

17.   The third ground  referred  to  evidence  which,  again,  had  not  be
    properly filed on the First-tier Tribunal or served on  the  respondent
    before the hearing, nor after. It is understandable  that  Ms  McIlveen
    might  have  sought  to  refer  to  some  background  evidence  in  her
    submissions given the fact that those instructing  her  had  failed  to
    produce relevant evidence in the hearing bundle. The copy of the  email
    sent by Ms McIlveen to the  First-tier  Tribunal  court  clerks  on  16
    December 2020 contained links to  two  documents  and  to  the  country
    guidance decision in TD (Albania), but the documents themselves do  not
    appear to have been filed on the Tribunal even though they  are  relied
    upon to support the third ground. Nothing in the email sent  after  the
    hearing indicates that the references to the evidence  were  served  on
    the respondent.

18.   Not having  an  electronic  copy  of  the  email,  or  copies  of  the
    documents themselves, the Upper Tribunal has been left to type  in  the
    address to discover the content. The first is an  online  article  from
    The Independent dated 11 June 2020 entitled  'Home  Office  relying  on
    flawed evidence to deport modern slavery victims, lawyers warn'. Again,
    sending a link  to  this  evidence  is  useless  when  The  Independent
    requires the person to register their details on the website before the
    content can be  read.  In  other  words,  the  content  is  not  openly
    available online. In effect, only  the  headline  is  known,  which  is
    meaningless as a piece of evidence.

19.   The second link refers to a  document  entitled  'Albania:  Trafficked
    boys and young men' dated May 2019 by an organisation called Asylos  in
    association with the ARC Foundation. The Asylos website indicates  that
    the  organisations  stated  aim  is  to  assist   asylum   seekers   to
    substantiate their claims although it is clear that the report provides
    the sources for its information. The grounds recognise that  the  focus
    of the report is on boys and young men, but listed  several  references
    of a more general nature  relating  to  the  level  of  protection  and
    services likely to be available in Albania.  Ms  McIlveen  relied  upon
    sections of the report indicating that there is an  implementation  gap
    between the legislative framework and practical reality, that there  is
    corruption in the courts and police, that there are shortfalls  in  the
    support available to women, as well as evidence to indicate  that  lack
    of family support places returnees at risk of poverty, and as a result,
    the risk of re-trafficking is a reality. Again, neither the grounds nor
    the oral submissions made at the hearing identified why  this  evidence
    might have made any material difference to the decision on the facts of
    this case. The general situation in Albania was considered in detail by
    the Upper Tribunal  in  TD  (Albania)  and  recognised  many  of  those
    problems.

20.   The judge found that the appellant returned to Albania in  March  2014
    after being trafficked and was able to find support with  a  friend  in
    Tirana and then lived with her husband. In view of the  fact  that  [A]
    did not actively seek her out during  that  period,  that  it  was  not
    likely that he was interested in re-trafficking her. It was  also  open
    to the judge to take into account the fact that the appellant was not a
    lone woman without support and as such was not likely to be  vulnerable
    to  re-trafficking  despite  her  previous  experience.  Although  this
    generalised evidence might show that someone in a different position to
    this  appellant  could  become  vulnerable  to  re-trafficking,  it  is
    difficult to see  how  this  evidence  might  have  made  any  material
    difference given the findings of fact made  in  this  particular  case,
    even if the judge had made specific reference to it in her decision.

21.   The grounds end with reference to the wrong procedure  rules  and  the
    wrong legal test. The  applicable  rules  for  this  tribunal  are  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. For the  purpose  of  a
    statutory appeal, the Upper  Tribunal  derives  its  jurisdiction  from
    sections 11 and 12 of The Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007.
    Under section 12 the Upper Tribunal may (but  need  not)  set  aside  a
    First-tier Tribunal decision if it involved the making of an error on a
    point of law.

22.   For the reasons given above, I conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of a material error on a  point  of
    law. The decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law



Signed   M. Canavan          Date 10 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
covering letter or covering email

