
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02955/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27th July 2017                     |On 20th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                         mr Salman Khorshid Gaydian
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms O Duru (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lagunju promulgated on 24th January 2017, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 30th September 2016.  In the determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal, whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

 2. For ease of reference, I refer in this determination to  the  Appellant
    as he  was  originally  referred  to  and  the  Respondent  as  he  was
    originally referred to  in  the  appeal  hearing  before  so  that  the
    Secretary of State, who hereby appeals, is still  referred  to  as  the
    Respondent.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he owned a shop in a village  in  Kirkuk.
    Fighting broke out between IS and the peshmerga.  He fled from the shop
    to his friend's house for safety.  He was forced to  leave  his  mother
    and sister behind.  The Appellant claims that he received  a  telephone
    call from an IS fighter accusing him  of  working  with  the  peshmerga
    because he is Kurdish.  The IS caller informed the  Appellant  that  he
    had his sister in custody and requested the Appellant to meet him.  The
    Appellant was warned that it was likely to be a trap so he did not  go.
    The Appellant was sure that his  mother  and  sister  had  been  killed
    (paragraph 16).  Therefore, the Appellant fled Iraq for his own safety.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge applied the country guidance case of AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq
    CG [2015] UKUT 544, which confirms that there is at present a state  of
    internal armed conflict in certain parts of Iraq.   A  feature  of  the
    Appellant's case was that he was without identity documents and a CSID.
     The judge preserved how, "a returnee arriving in Baghdad from  the  UK
    will only be granted entry if the person is in possession of a  current
    or expired Iraqi passport or laissez-passer" (paragraph 20).

 5. The judge also observed that Kurds who did not originate from  the  IKR
    can only be returned there via Baghdad.  On entry, the  returnee  would
    be granted a visit entry permit for ten days which can be extended  for
    a further ten days.  The judge found that the Appellant was a Kurd  and
    that he would be granted entry and given the initial  and  further  ten
    days stay (paragraph 23).

 6. However, the Appellant did not have any documentation with  respect  to
    his Iraqi passport or a laissez-passer and  "the  Respondent  does  not
    challenge the Appellant's claim that he is not in possession of any  of
    the relevant documentation" (paragraph 25).

 7. The judge went on to conclude that,

         "I note the Appellant does not have a CSID and without  a  passport
         he cannot obtain one in the UK.  As he does not have any family  in
         Baghdad, I find it is likely it will  be  challenging  for  him  to
         secure employment, accommodation and  receive  support"  (paragraph
         26).

 8. Nevertheless, the judge did not find that the Appellant's  difficulties
    would amount to a breach of Article 3 (paragraph 26).  The  judge  also
    found that it would "not be unduly harsh for the Appellant to  relocate
    to Baghdad" (paragraph 27).  However she then went on to conclude  that
    given that the  Appellant  neither  had  a  current  or  expired  Iraqi
    passport or a laissez passer, "I find the Appellant cannot in  fact  be
    returned to Baghdad as return is not  feasible.   Accordingly  internal
    flight is not viable" (paragraph 27).

 9. The appeal is allowed.

10. The Respondent Secretary of State was granted permission to  appeal  on
    3rd May 2017.  A Rule 24 response was entered by  the  Appellant  dated
    25th May 2017.

Submissions

11. The essence of the appeal before me today is, as Mr Mills appearing for
    the Respondent argued, the application of AA  (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    944.  In this case, the Court of Appeal stated that, "no Iraqi will  be
    returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in  possession   of"   the   relevant
    documentation.  (See annex at paragraph 6).  Mr  Mills  submitted  that
    the question of "returnability"  was  a  practical  question,  and  one
    entirely for the determination of the Respondent Secretary of State, in
    working out exactly how a person was  to  be  made  returnable  to  the
    country of their origin.  It was not a question that went to the "risk"
    that such a person may face, which was an entirely separate matter.

12. This being so, the Court of Appeal in AA  (Iraq)  [2017]  had  made  it
    quite clear that, "an  internal  protection  claim  made  by  P  cannot
    succeed by reference to any  alleged  risk  of  harm  arising  from  an
    absence of the current or expired Iraqi passport or a  laissez  passer,
    if the Tribunal finds that P's return  is  not  currently  feasible  on
    account of a lack of any of those documents" (see and accept  paragraph
    7).

13. This passage, submitted Mr Mills, drew a very neat distinction  between
    the "alleged risk of harm" and the practicality of return, and the  two
    were quite separate considerations.  This being so, once the judge  had
    concluded that "it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to
    relocate to Baghdad" (paragraph 27), she could  not  then  also  upheld
    that the absence of a current or  expired  Iraqi  passport  or  laissez
    passer meant that the Appellant could not in fact be returned,  because
    that was a practical question entirely for  the  determination  by  the
    Secretary of State.  (See  paragraph  27).   Therefore  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State's appeal should be allowed.

14. For her part, Ms Duru submitted that the  issue  here  is  whether  the
    Appellant, provided he could get to Baghdad,  would  then  be  able  to
    access the necessary support, in order to get to his home  area,  given
    that his mother is dead.

15. If one considers the case of AA (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944,  it  is
    apparent from paragraph  9  of  the  annex  there  that,  it  would  be
    necessary to decided whether the Appellant has a CSID, or whether he is
    able to obtain  one  reasonably  soon  after  arrival  in  Iraq.   What
    paragraph 9 makes clear is that,

         "A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
         financial assistance from the authorities,  employment;  education;
         housing; and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no family  or
         other members likely to be able to provide means of support,  P  is
         in general likely to face a real risk of destitution, amounting  to
         serious harm..." (paragraph 9).

16. Ms Duru submitted that this was a situation that appertained here.   If
    one then turns to the way in which the judge determined the  issue,  it
    is clear from paragraph 26 of the  determination  that  the  judge  did
    apply the legal position correctly, observing,



         "I note the Appellant does not have a CSID and without  a  passport
         he cannot obtain one in the UK.  As he does not have any family  in
         Baghdad, I find it is likely it will  be  challenging  for  him  to
         secure employment, accommodation and  receive  support"  (paragraph
         26).

17. The judge, accordingly, had not erred  in  law,  but  had  applied  the
    correct legal position to the  facts  before  him.   Finally,  Ms  Duru
    referred to her Rule 24 response which pointed out that at paragraph 19
    the judge in her findings on the evidence and  submissions  had  agreed
    that the Respondent had established a real risk of return to  his  home
    town in Kirkuk, which is a contested area.

18. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that if there had been a Rule 24 response,
    as there plainly was in this case dated 25th May 2017, it ought to have
    been brought to the Home Office's attention  earlier.   In  any  event,
    this Rule 24 response does not  make  a  cross-appeal,  to  assert  the
    points that Ms Duru had now asserted.  Accordingly, there can  be  only
    one solution, and that was to dismiss this appeal.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  Whilst I accept that the general position set out  in  the
    annex of AA (Iraq) is that an  international  protection  claim  cannot
    succeed by reference to any  alleged  risk  of  harm  arising  from  an
    absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport, paragraphs 9 to  11  of
    that annex make it quite clear that "it will  be  necessary  to  decide
    whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain  one,  reasonably  soon
    after arrival in  Iraq"  because  possession  of  such  a  document  is
    essential if one is to access financial assistance from the authorities
    or to gain employment or education or housing.

20. In this case, the judge has properly applied the guidance set out in AA
    (Iraq).  The findings made by the judge at paragraph  26  are  entirely
    sustainable.  Moreover, the judge's decision is sophisticated enough to
    recognise that although it would not be unduly harsh for the  Appellant
    to relocate  to  Baghdad,  nevertheless,  this  is  a  case  where  the
    Appellant has neither a current or expired Iraqi passport and therefore
    cannot be returned to Baghdad "as return is  not  feasible"  (paragraph
    27).

21. Those findings are open to the judge  in  a  case  which  requires  the
    application of "anxious scrutiny" on well-established legal principles.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017

