

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: PA/02940/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision Promulgated          |
|On 14 July 2016                           |   On 27 July 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |MB                                                |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


                               ANONYMITY ORDER


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269),  I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the appellant.


    This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford, of Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Mexico, born on 5 June 1974. She appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Herlihy  who,
    following a hearing on 10 March 2016, dismissed her appeal  under  s.82
    of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds against a decision  of
    the respondent of 16 November 2015 to refuse her  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights claims.

 2. At the outset, I stress that this is a case with a lot of evidence  and
    a very detailed account. The summary I give below is very brief one but
    sufficient for the purposes of this decision,  as  I  have  decided  to
    remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal  for  the  decision  on  the
    appellant's appeal to be re-made.

 3. The basis of the appellant's protection  claim  may  be  summarised  as
    follows: Whilst in Mexico, the appellant was in a relationship  with  a
    man who I shall refer to as "SM" (he is anonymised because I  take  the
    view that the use of his full name  may  reveal  the  identity  of  the
    appellant) from 1993. He was physically and  sexually  abusive  towards
    her. She reported the incidents to the police between 5 and 7 times  up
    to 2013 but the police did not  take  her  complaints  seriously.  From
    2013, she stopped reporting incidents to the police as she suspected SM
    had become involved with a drug cartel  called  Los  Zetos  ("LZ").  He
    started to have a lot of money. She believed that he was in the LZ gang
    because the gang members referred to each  other  in  code,  using  the
    letter Z and a number attached to it. They also wore paraphernalia like
    rings and  Z-shaped  pendants.  She  says  that,  as  far  as  she  was
    concerned, her relationship with SM ended in  2007.  However,  although
    she tried to live and hide away from him, her  attempts  to  leave  him
    were unsuccessful, in that, he found her. She relocated away  from  her
    home area on two occasions but SM  found  her  and  beat  her.  In  the
    periods when she managed to  stay  away  from  him,  she  formed  other
    relationships, someone named H and someone else named  R.  However,  SM
    tracked her down on both occasions. He threatened R and his family,  so
    he stopped seeing her. She believes  that  SM  was  able  to  find  her
    because of his connections with the gang. She fears that,  if  returned
    to Mexico, she will be persecuted by SM and also LZ. The gang had  also
    threatened her on one occasion.

 4. The judge accepted that the appellant had had a relationship  with  SM.
    She found that the relationship ended in 2007/2008 (para 49).  She  did
    not accept that SM was a member of LZ. At para 45, she said:

            45.  ...I find it very likely that [SM] may have  been  involved
             with  the  illegal  narcotics  trade   given   the   widespread
             prevalence of the drug  trade  in  Mexico  and  the  background
             material that indicates more people in  Mexico  work  for  drug
             cartels than any other business or industry in Mexico.  However
             given the background  relating  to  LZ,  their  reputation  for
             extreme violence; particularly towards women I did not find  it
             credible that the appellant would have been able to continue to
             live in [the appellant's hometown] after her relationship  with
             SM finished in 2007/2008 if he had  made  threats  against  her
             which it is claimed he did.

 5. The judge considered the appellant's evidence further at  paras  46-53.
    She found, inter alia, that there was no evidence that SM  or  LZ  have
    any interest in locating the appellant after a passage of 4 years since
    she left Mexico and 7-8 years after her relationship with SM ended.

 6. I am satisfied that the judge erred in law in reaching her finding that
    SM was not a member of LZ. The judge accepted that SM was involved with
    an illegal narcotics trade but rejected the appellant's claim  that  SM
    was a member of LZ. In rejecting the appellant's evidence that SM was a
    member of LZ, the judge failed  to  take  into  account  the  following
    evidence:

    i)     The appellant's evidence that SM and the  members  of  his  gang
        referred to each other in code, using the letter  Z  and  a  number
        attached to it and that they wore paraphernalia like rings  and  Z-
        shaped pendants.

    ii)    The supporting evidence of the expert in this regard,  that  the
        wearing of gang jewellery by non-members would  pose  a  very  real
        risk to the non-member wearing the jewellery.

 7. I have noted para 29 of the judge's decision's  where,  in  summarising
    the appellant's evidence, she said that the appellant had said that she
    knew that the gang members were members of LZ because  they  wore  caps
    and earrings and weapons with "Zetos" on it and that they  often  spoke
    "in codes" when they spoke to each other. Mr  Gaisford  submitted  that
    the judge had mischaracterised the appellant's evidence at para  29  in
    saying that the appellant had  said  that  the  gang  "often  spoke  in
    codes", whereas her evidence was that they referred to  each  other  in
    code.

 8. I do not need to make a decision on this submission for  the  following
    reasons. The judge found that SM was involved in the "illegal narcotics
    trade" but did not make it clear whether she found he was acting on his
    own or part of a gang. If the former, she  did  not  say  why.  If  the
    latter, she failed to take into account the evidence described at  para
    6(i) and (ii) above which was material to  the  identification  of  the
    gang to which SM belonged. Given the importance of this evidence to the
    identification of the gang and thus  the  future  risk  on  return,  it
    cannot be assumed from the summary of the evidence at para 29 (even  if
    accurate) that the judge had had  it  in  mind  and  considered  it  in
    reaching her finding at para 45. It was incumbent  upon  the  judge  to
    engage with that evidence before rejecting the appellant's  claim  that
    SM was a member of LZ.

 9. Mr Tufan accepted that the judge had erred by overlooking the  evidence
    set out at para 6(i) and (ii) above but submitted that  the  error  was
    not material to the judge's rejection of the appellant's evidence  that
    SM was a member of LZ because the judge said in the final  sentence  of
    para 45 of her decision  that  she  found  it  not  credible  that  the
    appellant would have been able to continue  to  live  in  her  hometown
    after her relationship with SM  ended  in  2007/2008  if  he  had  made
    threats against her as claimed by the appellant. However, I  reject  Mr
    Tufan's submission: Firstly, in  reaching  the  finding  in  the  final
    sentence of para  45,  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's evidence that she had tried  to  relocate  outside  of  her
    hometown on two occasions and that she was found. Secondly, the judge's
    assumption that the appellant would not  have  been  able  to  continue
    living in her hometown if SM had made threats against her proceeded  on
    the assumption that it was SM's purpose to end the appellant's life  if
    she did not remain with him whereas the appellant's evidence  was  that
    it was his purpose to keep her in a relationship with him expecting her
    to continue to put with abuse and violence.

10. I am therefore satisfied that the judge erred in law  in  reaching  her
    finding that SM was not a member of LZ and that the error was  material
    to the finding that SM was not a member of LZ.

11. The next question is whether the fact that the judge assessed the  risk
    to the appellant from LZ means that the above error is not material  to
    the outcome of the appeal, albeit that it was material to  the  judge's
    finding that SM was not a member of LZ.

12. It is clear from the evidence of Dr Watt that drug cartels such  as  LZ
    use methods to instil fear into people who become involved with them or
    are perceived by them to have become involved, in order to keep  cartel
    members  loyal  to  the  group  and  their  female  partners   in   the
    relationships. That is why Dr Watt's  opinion  is  that  once  you  are
    involved with a group like LZ, it is for life  and  you  cannot  leave.
    Accordingly, the judge's view (expressed at para 52) that the risk from
    LZ arises only if  the  appellant  had  knowledge  or  participated  in
    activities that were opposed to the interests of  LZ  was  not  only  a
    simplistic view of the situation but it ignored  the  evidence  of  Dr.
    Watt's evidence that the risk arises from the fact that the attitude of
    gang members is that a woman is not permitted  to  leave  once  she  is
    associated with the group by having a  relationship  with  one  of  its
    number. It must follow that this applies if the woman is  perceived  by
    LZ to be associated with it, which is the appellant's case.

13. At para 49, the judge said:

      49.   The Appellant says she did not interact with the cartel  members
           and appears to have avoided any  social  interaction.  She  only
           recounts one instance where she claims  she  was  threatened  by
           gang members whilst waiting in  a  car  which,  at  the  highest
           amounts to being told she should not be there she was  and  that
           she did not  see  anything.   There  is  no  evidence  that  the
           Appellant had any involvement with the gang's activities or knew
           anything about their business or why they  would  perceive  that
           she does given that she had no interaction  with  them.  I  find
           that her relationship with Salvador ended in 2007/2008 and  that
           although an abusive relationship I do not find it credible  that
           the relationship continued beyond this point  or  that  Salvador
           had any interest in the Appellant after the relationship ceased.



      (my emphasis)

14. The question whether the appellant had had social interaction with gang
    members  is  important  to  the  question  whether  the  appellant  was
    perceived by the gang members to be  involved  with  them  through  her
    relationship with SM notwithstanding that she herself was not  involved
    in any gang activities.

15. There are two difficulties with  the  part  of  para  49  that  is  not
    underlined in the quote above. Firstly, this does not properly  reflect
    the appellant's evidence. For example, it is clear from paras 41 and 41
    of her witness statement (p20) and question 12 of her asylum interview,
    that the appellant's evidence was that  she  was  present  with  SM  in
    restaurants and bars when members of the gang came  and  that  she  was
    known to be SM's partner. It is clear that her evidence  was  that  she
    could not avoid some such interaction but she did not go out of her way
    to interact  with  them.  I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  the  judge
    mischaracterised the appellant's evidence.

16. It is clear that the judge's view that there was no  evidence  that  LZ
    would perceive that the  appellant  was  involved  with  them  or  knew
    anything about their activities given that she had had  no  interaction
    with them was a reason for her finding that there was no real  risk  in
    the future. However, as I have said above, the  judge  mischaracterised
    the appellant's evidence in this respect. Furthermore, in  arriving  at
    her conclusion as to the future risk on this basis, the judge failed to
    take account of the evidence of Dr Watt that a woman who is the partner
    (or perceived partner) of a gang member is expected to stay loyal.

17. I have noted that the judge referred to and assessed the evidence of Dr
    Watts at paras 50 and 51, which read:

      50.  I have carefully  examined  the  two  reports  from  the  expert
             witness which are predicated on his belief that the Appellant's
             claim is credible. Although I have not found that the Appellant
             has established to the lower standard of  proof  that  Salvador
             was a member of LZ, I have nevertheless considered the  reasons
             given by DR Watt for finding the Appellant is at risk on return
             to Mexico. When I asked about the latest report at paragraph 43
             dealing with internal relocation  and  how  the  Appellant  has
             undermined the authority of the LZ, he said if you are involved
             with a group like LZ involvement is for  life  and  you  cannot
             leave and no operative can leave and you would be  expected  to
             continue with them for life and it would  apply  equally  to  a
             girlfriend who is expected to stay loyal.  He said  that  women
             were particularly at risk given the way women are perceived  as
             a group by LZ, they would be viewed as commodities and that the
             Appellant's actions would be  viewed  by  male  members  as  an
             affront to their machismo and  would  be  threatening  and  not
             tolerated.  Dr Watt said it  was  expected  that  if  you  were
             involved with a cartel member you were his possession  and  you
             could not just leave.


      51.  However I have not found that the Appellant and Salvador were in
             a relationship when she left Mexico for the reasons given and I
             do not find that her actions for this reason would be viewed as
             an affront or to be threatening.  I put it to Dr Watt  that  if
             Salvador was interested in the Appellant he is likely  to  have
             contacted her  family  members.   He  said  the  possible  main
             concern  would  be  not  to  go  to  the  police  as  they  are
             ineffectual and if the Appellant was returned to Mexico  it  is
             possible that  the  LZ  might  consider  that  she  could  give
             information to a rival organisation or she could be captured by
             a rival organisation but whilst she was abroad she was not seen
             as a threat to them.  However by the Appellant's  own  evidence
             she did not interact or have any dealing with  Salvador's  gang
             or cartel and I do not find  it  credible  that  she  would  be
             perceived as having any information that she could provide to a
             rival gang.

18. Whilst para 50 shows that the judge was aware of  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Watt that a woman who is a partner of a gang member is expected to stay
    loyal and that women are particularly at risk, the  first  sentence  of
    para 51 shows that the judge in effect disregarded that evidence on the
    basis of  her  finding  that  the  appellant  and  SM  were  not  in  a
    relationship when she left Mexico and  her  finding  that  her  actions
    would not be viewed as an affront or to be threatening. I am  satisfied
    that both of these findings do not in fact take account of the expert's
    evidence, notwithstanding that the expert's evidence is  summarised  at
    para 50, that a girlfriend is expected to remain loyal to  her  partner
    and that the appellant's action in attempting to leave SM would be seen
    as an affront to the machismo of the men in the gang and would  not  be
    tolerated.

19. Accordingly, the judge materially erred in law in her assessment of the
    risk to the appellant from LZ. It follows that the errors  in  reaching
    her finding that SM was not a member of LZ were material.

20. Mr Tufan accepted that any errors  in  the  assessment  of  credibility
    would feed into the assessment of the Article 8 claim, since this would
    mean that the appellant's circumstances will  not  have  been  assessed
    against the correct factual matrix.

21. Accordingly, pursuant to s.12 of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007, read together with the above Practice Statement, I find  that
    Judge Herlihy materially erred in law. I set  aside  her  decision  and
    remit the case to the FtT with the direction that it is not to be dealt
    with by Judge Herlihy.

22. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:


       (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
           First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for
           that party's case to be put to and considered by the  First-tier
           Tribunal; or
       (b)  the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
           necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made
           is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule
           2, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.

23. Having regard to para 7 of the Practice  Statement  and  the  Court  of
    Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) & Others [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I  am  of
    the view that in this case Practice Statement 7(2)(a) applies.

24. Paras 27, 28 and 30 to 39 of the determination of Judge  Herlihy  stand
    as a record of the oral evidence given at the hearing before the judge.
    Para 29 is omitted because the appellant takes issue with the  accuracy
    of the summary of this aspect of the appellant's evidence.

25. If the appellant contends that there is an applicable Geneva Convention
    reason, she is directed to serve her  skeleton  argument  which,  inter
    alia, must explain what Geneva Convention reason applies  and  why,  no
    later than 10 working days before the hearing date.

Decision and Directions:

      The decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Herlihy  involved
    the making of an error of law such that is falls to  be  set  aside.  I
    have set it aside. I direct that the appellant's appeal be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for the decision on the appeal to be re-made by
    a judge other than Judge Herlihy.

Signed      [pic]                                  Date: 25 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

