
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02429/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd July 2019                    |On 5th August 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                 Samouka [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Guinea who was born  on  4th  March  2000
    and is therefore 19 years of age.  He made application to the Secretary
    of State for recognition as  a  refugee  but  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused his claim on 6th  March,  2019.   As  a  result  the  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and his appeal was heard by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Foudy in Manchester on 11th April, 2019.

2.   Immigration Judge Foudy dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, humanitarian protection  grounds  and  also  on  human  rights
    grounds.  On 5th June, 2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Loke  granted
    permission to appeal and in doing so said this:-

         "3.  The appellant's grounds are summarised as follows:


             a)   The appellant requested a  Konyanka  interpreter,  and  a
                  Mandinke interpreter attended.  I have reviewed the Record
                  of Proceedings.  The answers given by the  appellant  were
                  direct and thorough answers to all questions put  to  him.
                  Furthermore, the appellant was prepared to  give  evidence
                  in English in any event.


             b)   It is however arguable that [18] of the Judge's  decision
                  do not make it clear what her findings were on  each  part
                  of the appellant's claim (sic).   Furthermore,  the  Judge
                  did not appear to consider the appellant was a child  when
                  he entered the United Kingdom, despite the fact that it is
                  expressly relied upon in submissions.


             c)   With respect to  the  Judge's  failure  to  consider  the
                  appellant's medical condition  there  was  no  appellant's
                  bundle filed, although  I  note  the  appellant's  medical
                  issues were considered by the respondent's decision letter
                  and, therefore arguably ought to have been addressed".

3.   The appeal was  listed  for  hearing  before  me  at  10.00  a.m.  this
    morning.  I put this matter back to the end of my list, since my  other
    appellants were all represented.  At 11.55 there was no  appearance  by
    or on behalf of the appellant.  I am satisfied that the  appellant  was
    given notice of the date, time and place fixed for the hearing  of  the
    appeal by the Tribunal by notice sent by first class  prepaid  post  on
    12th  June,  2019.   Given  that  there  was  no  explanation  for  the
    appellant's non-attendance I concluded that I was required  to  proceed
    with the hearing of the appeal in the appellant's absence.

4.   The first point I need to make is that the appellant did  not  raise  a
    human rights appeal.  Notwithstanding the fact that he  did  not  raise
    one, First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy  concluded,  in  any  event,  that
    there was no risk  that  the  appellant's  rights  under  the  European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms
    would be denied to him were he to be returned to Guinea.

5.   In relation to the first ground  it  is  clear  from  having  read  the
    judge's  Record  of  Proceedings  that  the  appellant  understood  the
    questions put to him and appears to have given clear and full responses
    to those questions.  He does not at any stage indicate that he does not
    understand any particular  question.   In  fact  it  appears  that  the
    appellant can speak and understand English. I do not believe  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law  by  proceeding  with
    the hearing with a Mandinke interpreter.   The  Record  of  Proceedings
    clearly indicates  that  the  appellant  spoke  English  and  that  the
    appellant was quite happy to speak to the interpreter to make sure that
    he and the interpreter understood each other.  They both  indicated  to
    the judge that they did.

6    The second challenge suggests that the judge did not give  reasons  for
    her  findings.   With  very  great  respect  it  is  clear   from   the
    determination (paragraph 18) that she gave numerous reasons for finding
    the appellant not to be credible.  It is also suggested that she failed
    to take into account that the appellant was a child when he entered the
    United Kingdom.  With very great respect, he was  19  at  the  time  he
    appeared before the judge and it is quite clear from the  determination
    that the judge was well-aware of his age at the time of the  events  he
    described.

7.   It is suggested that  the  judge  should  have  taken  account  of  the
    appellant's medical condition.  With very  great  respect,  no  medical
    evidence was submitted to the judge.  The medical evidence referred  to
    is copies of letters which were sent by previous advisers to  the  Home
    Office.  The appellant was suffering from  what  his  GP  describes  as
    being "aches and pains".  It referred  to  investigations  having  been
    completed and the appellant having been referred to neurology  "but  no
    significant diagnosis was found."  There was nothing anywhere  else  in
    the documentation to indicate that the appellant was unfit.

8.   Given that the appellant did not appear I did not trouble Mr  Bates  to
    address me.

9.   I am satisfied that the determination does  not  contain  any  material
    error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I  uphold
    her decision.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley       26th July 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley           26th July 2019

