
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02518/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2019                     |On 20 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     GK
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Albania who  was  born  on  15  November
    1987.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent of  4  March
    2019 to refuse her protection claim.  I make an anonymity direction  to
    preserve the anonymity of the Appellant who has, as will  be  seen,  an
    outstanding protection claim.

 2. The matter came before Judge Devlin at a hearing in  Manchester  on  16
    April  2019.   In  a  lengthy  decision,  after  consideration  of  the
    evidence, the Judge dismissed the appeal.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on 10 June 2019 on three grounds by Judge Pedro.  The first was
    that Judge Devlin did not make reference to  or  conscientiously  apply
    the guidance on vulnerable witnesses,  secondly  there  was  procedural
    unfairness in not putting previously unraised credibility issues to the
    Appellant,  and  thirdly  he   inappropriately   required   independent
    corroboration of aspects of the account.

 3. In relation to Ground 1, Mr Greer stated that  at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing before Judge Devlin an agreement  had  been  reached  that  the
    Appellant is entitled to be treated as a vulnerable witness.  Mrs Aboni
    stated that in the papers she had there was no record of  an  agreement
    being made from her colleague who appeared at that hearing.  I  checked
    the Record of Proceedings of  the  hearing  on  the  Tribunal  file.  I
    pointed out that there was no  record  of  any  preliminary  discussion
    whatsoever.  It simply identifies that the case started  at  12.05  and
    then evidence-in-chief commencing by the Appellant adopting her witness
    statement.

 4.  In  the  absence  of  any  note  on  the  Record  of  Proceedings   or
    contemporaneous note from the Respondent's then representative  to  the
    contrary, and given Mr Greer's professional obligations, I accept  that
    what he said was agreed was in fact agreed.

 5. Mrs Aboni conceded that, given my ruling on Ground 1, there was plainly
    a material error of law which infected the whole decision and the other
    grounds need not be addressed.

 6. As a general comment, the decision from Judge Devlin is 41  pages  long
    and has 258 paragraphs. Much of it is wholly unnecessary  regurgitation
    of uncontested or  irrelevant  facts,  and  recitation  of  screeds  of
    jurisprudence. This does not assist the loser understand why they  have
    lost, or foster confidence that the Judge has understood the  Court  of
    Appeal's concern about excessively long decisions that lack focus.

 7. I therefore find a material error of law. I set the decision aside. The
    Appellant has not had a fair hearing.  The  matter  must  therefore  be
    returned to be heard do novo in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  in
    Manchester.  It will not to be heard by Judge Devlin.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
14 August 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT - FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
14 August 2019
