
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/02548/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 October 2017              |On 3 November 2017              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
                       Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant claimed asylum having entered the  UK  unlawfully.
           That application was refused on 3 March 2016.
        2. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal was heard on  9  December
           2016 and it was allowed on  asylum  and  Article  3  grounds  by
           decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Bircher promulgated  on  3
           February 2017.
        3. The Respondent was initially refused permission to  appeal,  but
           was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  27
           July 2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  on  the  basis  it  was
           arguably not  evident  what  convention  reason  the  Judge  had
           concluded applied. The challenge to  the  findings  on  internal
           relocation were rejected as unarguable.  Whilst  permission  was
           granted it was noted that the Appellant would in  any  event  be
           entitled   to   humanitarian   protection   upon   the   Judge's
           unchallenged findings, even  if  the  challenge  to  the  asylum
           decision was made out.
        4. The Appellant filed no Rule 24 notice.  Thus  the  matter  comes
           before me.


      Error of Law?
        5. Given the limited scope  of  the  grounds,  and  the  even  more
           limited scope of the grant of permission to appeal, there is  no
           challenge to any of the findings of primary  fact  made  by  the
           Judge.
        6. When the appeal was called on for hearing the  parties  accepted
           that there was only one convention reason that the  Judge  could
           have had in mind,  namely  membership  of  a  particular  social
           group. Although the phrase is not to be found in the decision, I
           am satisfied that when the decision is read as  a  whole  it  is
           plain that the Judge  was  finding  that  this  applied  to  the
           Appellant. Both  men  and  women  can  form  the  members  of  a
           particular social group, as those  at  risk  of  "honour"  based
           violence. It is plain from the decision that the Judge concluded
           that the Appellant faced such a risk.
        7. Accordingly either the decision discloses no error of law at all
           because when read as a whole it is tolerably  obvious  that  the
           Judge could only have been referring to  membership  of  such  a
           particular social group, or, there was no material error. If the
           Upper Tribunal were  to  remake  the  decision  based  upon  the
           Judge's unchallenged findings of fact then in my  judgement  the
           conclusion would inevitably be reached that the Appellant was  a
           member of such a social group.
        8. In the circumstances I am  satisfied  that  notwithstanding  the
           grant of permission the grounds identify  no  arguable  material
           error of law. The Judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  must
           therefore stand.

















   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  3
      February 2017 did not involve the making of an error  of  law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 2 November 2017




Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 2 November 2017
