
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02211/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 August 2019                            |On 18 September 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                  BALEN [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STET FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Greasley, promulgated on 23  April  2019,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal on protection grounds against a decision of the Respondent dated
    22 February 2019.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 1 August  1997.   The  basis
    of his claim for protection is helpfully summarised at paragraph  2  of
    the grounds of appeal in support of the application for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

         "The Appellant is an Iranian national  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   He
         maintains that he fears persecution on the grounds of  his  imputed
         political opinion.  In August 2015, he allowed a stranger to  spend
         the night on his family farm.  The next day, while he was out  with
         a friend, his home was attended by Ettela'at in search of him;  his
         father learned that the man he had helped was a  supporter  of  the
         Party of Free Life for Kurdistan ('PJAK'), and that  the  Appellant
         himself was wanted for providing assistance to him.  The  Appellant
         did not, therefore, return home, and his father arranged for him to
         leave the country illegally with the assistance of an agent."


    (See also the summary in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    paragraph 12.)


3.   In this context, I note some of the passages in  the  Asylum  Interview
    Record (appended to the Respondent's appeal bundle  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal).  At  question  95  the  Appellant  was  asked  how  the
    Ettela'at had known  that  he  had  hidden  someone  on  his  farm;  he
    responded "I believe we were  reported  by  neighbouring  farms,  or  I
    believe that man was followed".  This was followed up at  question  96:
    "Why do you believe the man was  followed?";  to  which  the  Appellant
    answered, "Sorry this is my own speculation".


4.   In my judgement it is adequately clear from questions 95-100  that  the
    Appellant's answers were to the effect that he had no actual  knowledge
    of the circumstances in which the security forces had become aware that
    a stranger had been sheltered on the family farm overnight.


5.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for  protection  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  22
    February 2019.


6.   Amongst other things the Respondent's reasons  include  the  following.
    Having made reference to 'country information' evidence in  respect  of
    the sophistication  of  the  Ettela'at  -  described  as  "an  advanced
    intelligence force"  -  the  decision-maker  stated  "It  is  therefore
    considered unreasonable  and  externally  inconsistent  that  Ettela'at
    informed your father of their interest in you, allowing your subsequent
    escape" (paragraph 32).


7.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


8.   The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal for  reasons  set  out  in
    the decision of Judge Greasley promulgated on 23 April 2019.


9.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The application was initially refusal by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin
    (sitting in capacity as a First-tier Tribunal Judge) on  4  June  2019.
    However,  permission  to  appeal  was  subsequently  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Storey on 5 July 2019. In granting permission to  appeal
    Judge Storey made the following observations:

         "It is arguable that the  judge's  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
         credibility rested unduly on (im)plausibility findings and did  not
         assess or weigh in the balance  whether  the  Appellant  had  shown
         internal or external consistency or sufficiency of detail (the  two
         most established indicators  of  credibility).   Also  relevant  in
         respect of the challenges to the judge's (im)plausibility  findings
         is that the judge does not appear to have considered or weighed  in
         the  balance  the  Appellant's  alternative  explanation  for   how
         Ettela'at may have become aware of the Appellant's involvement with
         the stranger."




10.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did indeed essentially turn  on
    the Judge's credibility assessment.  This is apparent at paragraph  40,
    where the judge summarises his  conclusions:  "I  do  not  accept,  for
    reasons that follow, that the Appellant has  provided  a  truthful  and
    credible account of events in Iran and find that he is  not  a  genuine
    refugee in need of urgent  international  protection."   The  essential
    reasoning for this conclusion is  then  set  out  -  in  particular  at
    paragraphs 42-47 of the decision.


11.  In my judgment there  is  substance  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   In
    particular, I find there to be substance in the  following  aspects  of
    the challenge.


12.  The Judge states:

         "I do not find it credible that the neighbours of  the  appellant's
         family farm would have sought to report to the authorities  or  the
         Intelligence  Services  that  a  fellow  Kurd  was   visiting   the
         appellant's family farm and remaining there.  I  find  that  it  is
         highly unlikely that a fellow ethnic Kurd  would  have  reported  a
         visiting Kurd to the farm in these circumstances.  This evidence is
         not credible." (paragraph 42).


13.  I accept that the judge appears to be making an evaluation  as  to  the
    likely conduct of fellow Kurdish neighbours, and in so  doing  requires
    to be cautious as to the perspective  of  considering  the  conduct  of
    people following different cultural practices, and in the context of  a
    security situation unlike that experienced  domestically.  The  Judge's
    finding appears to be made  without  identifying  on  what  basis  such
    conduct is unlikely to an extent that the Appellant's  account  can  be
    characterised as incredible in this regard. However, be that as it may,
    in my judgement there  is  a  more  fundamental  difficulty  with  this
    passage.  The Judge refers to it as being  "highly  unlikely"  that  an
    ethnic Kurd would have reported such a visit.  Necessarily that is  not
    a conclusion that it is implausible, or that it could not  happen.   It
    follows that the next sentence - "The evidence is not  credible"  -  is
    not supported by the preceding reasoning.  It  is  not  appropriate  to
    conclude something is 'not credible' simply because it is  unlikely  or
    highly unlikely.  In my judgment this constitutes an error.


14.  I also note that criticism is made on behalf of the  Appellant  of  the
    remainder of paragraph 42, which states:

         "The Appellant, nor his father, appears to have known the  identity
         of the Kurdish man or indeed what position or occupation he had  in
         any political party or indeed any employment. Details  ascribed  to
         him are vague and unconvincing."


15.  It seems to me that the Appellant has at no  point  pretended  anything
    other than that his knowledge of  the  stranger  was  vague.   In  such
    circumstances I am unable to identify or otherwise follow any reasoning
    that leads to a conclusion that  such  vagueness  renders  the  account
    'unconvincing'.



16.  I also accept that there is  substance  to  the  Appellant's  challenge
    with regard  to  consideration  of  the  conduct  of  the  intelligence
    services. This picks up from the observations in the RFRL at  paragraph
    32 (cited above). At paragraph 43 the Judge says this.

         "If the intelligence Services were aware that the visiting Kurd was
         a member of the PJAK, and had established this, and that this visit
         had  taken  place  on  the  appellant's  father's  farm,  then  the
         appellant's account lacks credibility as to why his father was  not
         instantly arrested and taken in for questioning at that time.  This
         evidence further damages the appellant's credibility."

    The point is continued at paragraph 47:

         "I do not accept that the appellant has  provided  a  truthful  and
         credible account of events in Iran.  I do not accept  that  he  has
         been involved in any political activity, imputed or  otherwise  and
         nor too has his father.  I note from the  Country  Information  and
         Guidance that the Iranian Intelligence  Services  are  an  advanced
         intelligence force and I consider  the  appellants  claim  to  lack
         credibility that they would  have  informed  the  father  of  their
         interest in the  appellant,  effectively  allowing  his  subsequent
         escape.  This is specifically referred to in the refusal  decision.
         These comments are not rebutted."




17.  For the avoidance of any  doubt,  the  Appellant  did  not  claim  that
    either he or his father had "been involved in any political  activity",
    beyond the inadvertent engagement with the PJAK suspect.


18.  On the premise that the security forces were  indeed  looking  for  the
    Appellant, it is difficult to understand on  what  basis  it  might  be
    concluded that they would not have informed the Appellant's  father  of
    that circumstance, to an extent  that  the  Appellant's  account  could
    rationally be characterised as  lacking  credibility.   In  a  scenario
    where the intelligence agents have attended the family farm looking for
    the Appellant, I do not find it can be remotely suggested  that  it  is
    implausible that they would not have mentioned  the  reason  that  they
    were there: the supposed circumstance was  that  they  were  seeking  a
    specific person. It is difficult to envisage how any police or security
    force could effectively operate in tracking down a person if  they  did
    not question others as to his  or  her  whereabouts.  The  Respondent's
    reasoning in the RFRL, and in turn the Judge's  reasoning  in  adopting
    it, is to the effect that it would be implausible for the  intelligence
    services in pursuit of the Appellant to arrive at his family  farm  and
    not demand to know his  whereabouts.   In  my  judgement  there  is  no
    rational substance to the  reasoning  in  the  RFRL,  and  it  was  not
    rational for the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  adopt  it,  or  expect  the
    Appellant to rebut it. The Judge's reasoning at paragraph 47 is  flawed
    to an extent that it amounts to an error of law.


19.  It may be that there is something more  by  way  of  substance  to  the
    Judge's observation at paragraph 43 (cited above), that it  would  have
    been reasonably expected that the Appellant's father himself might have
    been arrested.  However, again it seems that  that  is  essentially  an
    operational decision for the intelligence services, and one not readily
    to be disregarded as 'unlikely' or  'implausible'.   Whilst  I  do  not
    specifically identify an error of law in respect  of  paragraph  43,  I
    observe that in isolation the reasoning at paragraph 43 cannot  sustain
    what is otherwise a flawed decision.



20.  I also accept that there is  clear  and  unanswerable  concern  arising
    from the final sentence at paragraph 47.  After the quotation  set  out
    above, paragraph 47 ends with the seeming non-sequitur:

         "Nor do I find it credible the Appellant would have sought to  have
         left his entire family and life in the country where  he  was  born
         and raised."


21.  As Ms Revill points out, it is difficult to understand what place  that
    sentence has in the overall deliberations of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  It is not at all unusual for a single member  of  a  family  to
    leave the rest of his or her family to seek refuge  or  asylum  abroad.
    Nor is it uncommon for a single member of a family to leave for reasons
    other than protection, to seek a  better  life  abroad.   Yet  further,
    plainly it is the case that the Appellant did indeed leave  his  family
    and come to the United Kingdom. It may be that the Judge intended to go
    on and say something further by way of context, but the reality is  the
    Judge did not.  The reader  of  the  decision  is  confronted  with  an
    adverse sentence that has no substance or reasoning behind it.   In  my
    judgement this is a further error that must be factored into an overall
    consideration of the  quality  of  the  reasoning  in  this  particular
    decision.


22.  Further to the analysis above, the  'intact'  aspects  of  the  Judge's
    adverse credibility reasoning are: the point that the  father  was  not
    arrested (commented upon at paragraph 21 above); the Judge's evaluation
    that the Appellant lacked credibility because he  claimed  he  had  not
    been informed where he was going when arrangements were  made  for  his
    departure from Iran (paragraph 44); and with reference to section  8(4)
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004
    (paragraph 45).  The latter two matters are essentially  peripheral  to
    the  core  of  the  Appellant's  account.  These  matters  -  even   in
    combination - are not in my judgement sufficient to sustain the Judge's
    overall conclusion such as to render the identified errors  immaterial.
    Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge must be  set
    aside for error of law.


23.  Given that it will be necessary for there to be  a  full  re-evaluation
    of the credibility of the Appellant's account, the appeal is to be sent
    back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard anew.


Notice of Decision

24.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


25.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley  or
    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin with all issues at large.


26.  No anonymity direction is sought made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 17 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
