
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/02680/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19th September 2019                   |On 24th September 2019             |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     TS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan of Acharyas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss R Bassi, HOPO

                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Wilding made
following a hearing at Taylor House on 24th April 2019.

Background

The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 15th December 1997.  He
arrived in the UK on 29th June 2017 and claimed asylum on the same day.  He
was refused on 12th March 2019 and it was this decision which was the
subject of the appeal before the Immigration Judge.

The appellant is a Turkish national of Kurdish ethnicity and a follower of
the Alevi Muslim faith.  He is an HDP supporter, having started his
interest in the party in 2014 and becoming an official member on 1st May
2018.

The judge accepted that the appellant was arrested in December 2017 after
attending the funeral of a person who had been a member of the PKK.  He
subsequently left Turkey unlawfully, but returned when he was detained at
the airport for four hours and questioned.  He was then arrested for a
second time on 1st May 2018 after attending a Labour Day celebration.

On both occasions he was taken to a police station and held for 24 hours,
but no charges were brought against him.  He was not ill-treated.
Following the second detention, he left Turkey for a second time and came
to the UK.

The judge accepted that the appellant was a low level member of the HDP and
that he had been detained twice.  He did not accept that there was any
ongoing interest in him, rejecting the appellant's evidence that the
authorities had visited his home.  The judge gave detailed reasons for his
findings and there is no challenge to them in the grounds.

The judge considered both relevant country guidance cases, namely IK
(Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312 and IA HC KD RO HG
(Risk, Guidelines, Separatist) Turkey CG [2003] UKIAT 00034 and concluded
that the appellant would not be at risk on return.

The Grounds of Application

The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge had
erred in not giving any reasons why the appellant would not be at risk as a
result of his Kurdish ethnicity or Alevi faith, nor for his finding that
the appellant was a low level member of the HDP.  It was argued that the
judge had not adequately considered the appellant's profile within the HDP
in his assessment of risk on return.

Second, the judge had not properly considered paragraph 276ADE and whether
there would be very significant obstacles which could arise for the
appellant on return and whether he would be subjected to significant
harassment in Turkey.

Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Ford, who stated that the judge's
assessment of the background evidence and the assessment of risk on return
in light of his accepted Kurdish ethnicity, Alevi faith and history of two
detentions, arguably involved the Tribunal in making a material error of
law.

On 9th September 2019 the respondent served a reply defending the
determination.

Submissions

Mr Khan submitted that the judge had failed to properly take into account
the background evidence, in particular the Turkish government's present
attitude towards members of the HDP in connection with their links with the
PKK.  He referred to the CPIN note on Turkey dated August 2018 which
recorded that thousands of members of the HDP had been arrested since the
coup attempt of July 2016 and by April 2018 approximately 850 people had
reportedly been detained for taking part in demonstrations or protesting on
social media about Turkish military operations in Syria.  Furthermore, some
HDP members had been arrested by the authorities and charged with
involvement with either the PKK or with supporting autonomy for Kurds.  The
judge was wrong to conclude that the appellant would not be of any interest
to the authorities, bearing in mind the fact that the appellant was a known
member of HADEP who had been arrested on two occasions.

Miss Bassi defended the determination and argued that the judge had come to
sustainable conclusions properly supported by adequate reasons based on the
evidence before him.

Consideration as to whether there is a Material Error of Law

I am not persuaded that there is any error of law in this determination.

The judge set out the appellant's case at the start of his determination
and accepted that the appellant had had difficulties with the authorities
on two occasions as a consequence of his involvement with HADEP.  In doing
so, he noted that the appellant had been arrested  as part of an
intelligence-gathering exercise and on both occasions, he was released
without charge after a short period of time.  He did not claim to have been
tortured on either occasion.

The judge recorded that the appellant had never got into trouble with the
authorities as a result of his activities with the HDP.

In IK the Tribunal set out their conclusions in relation to risk on return
to Turkey.  They considered the computerised GBT system, which comprises
only outstanding arrest warrants, previous arrests, restrictions on travel
abroad, possible draft evasion, refusal to perform military service and tax
arrears.  Arrests as comprised in the GBTS require some court intervention
and must be distinguished from detentions by the security forces followed
by release without charge.

Accordingly, the two detentions which the appellant has suffered would not
be recorded on the GBTS.  Indeed, that is consistent with his return to
Turkey after the first detention when he was held for only four hours and
questioned before being released.

Whilst the appellant would be returning on a one way emergency travel
document and therefore identifiable as a failed asylum seeker, there is
nothing in the country guidance case which establishes that he would be at
risk of anything other than the type of investigation which took place when
the appellant returned in 2017.

In summary, the appellant has been briefly held twice in the past following
attendance at large gatherings but released on both occasions without any
charge or further interest in him. There is no indication that the
authorities view him as a suspected separatist.  He was not even placed on
reporting conditions.

The judge reached credibility findings which were entirely open to him and
indeed which are not challenged.  He applied the country guidance as he was
required to do, summarising his findings at paragraph 25 as follows:

"In my view the fact that the appellant is Kurdish, of the Alevi faith, a
member of the HDP and has been detained on two unrelated occasions
following larger scale round ups does not mean he is at real risk of
persecution on return.  He is at best a low level member of the HDP who
carries out activities for them which he has never come into trouble doing.
 Why that would change has not been explained."

The grounds do not refer to a lack of consideration of the background
evidence but in any event there is no basis for concluding that the judge
did not take it  into account in reaching his assessment of the possible
risk on return.

So far as Ground 2 is concerned, it stands or falls with Ground 1.  On the
judges sustainable and unchallenged findings, there could be no very
significant obstacles in the context of paragraph 276ADE, which in any
event was considered by the judge at paragraph 33.

The grounds do not disclose any material error of law and the appellant's
appeal is dismissed.  The judge's decision will stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed[pic]                             Date 23 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
