
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: PA/02349/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2017                           | On 19 December 2017          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                  AA (iraq)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Goodrich sitting at Taylor House on 4 April 2017) dismissing his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  to
    recognise him as  a  refugee  on  account  of  his  claimed  homosexual
    orientation.  The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction  in
    favour of the appellant, and I consider that  it  is  appropriate  that
    this anonymity direction is maintained for  these  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.







The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 4 October 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Flinch  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal for the following reasons:

        The First-tier Tribunal Judge reminded herself of the difficulties a
        gay man from Iraq may experience when disclosing his sexuality,  but
        does not apply this factor to any large  degree  when  reaching  her
        findings in relation to his credibility.

        In addition, in  paragraph  37,  she  makes  assumptions  about  his
        feelings about first entering into a gay relationship which was  not
        based on any evidence and was speculative.

        As a consequence, it is  arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Goodrich's decision contained arguable  errors  of  law  and  it  is
        appropriate to grant permission to appeal.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Iraq, whose date of birth is 6  December
    1987.  He is of Kurdish ethnicity, and he comes from Erbil in the Iraqi
    Kurdish region.  His account is that he realised that  he  was  gay  in
    2012.  Prior to  this,  he  was  attracted  to  women,  and  he  had  a
    relationship with a girl when he was aged 17.  In 2012 D,  who  he  had
    known for two months, told him that he was gay and that  he  loved  the
    appellant.   A  week  after  this,  the  appellant   entered   into   a
    relationship with D, which lasted for four years.  He would see D every
    day and would go to D's  house.   He  and  D  kept  their  relationship
    secret.

 4. On 12 July 2016, D's father came into D's bedroom, and  discovered  the
    appellant with D.  He beat both of them.  The appellant managed to  get
    dressed and escape from the house.  He went home, collected  his  money
    and fled the country.

 5. He says that he arrived in the United Kingdom in the back of  a  lorry,
    on 24 August 2016.   At his screening interview on 27  August  2016  he
    said that his life was in danger because he had been accused by A,  who
    worked for the Government and who was in the  Army,  of  having  sexual
    relations with his wife.  This had happened on 12 July 2016.

 6. The appellant subsequently instructed Duncan Lewis & Co  Solicitors  to
    act for him, and he told them in January  2017  that  there  were  some
    answers in his screening interview that were not accurate.  In fact, he
    was caught having sex in bed with A's brother D (not  with  A's  wife).
    He explained that he was too embarrassed to indicate  the  real  reason
    for his asylum claim when giving his screening interview.

 7.  The  appellant  confirmed  his  new  account  at  the  outset  of  his
    substantive asylum interview. The appellant was extensively  questioned
    by the Interviewing Officer about the genesis of his relationship  with
    D.  He was asked whether the  incident  had  sparked  any  feelings  of
    confusion  or  an  internal  conflict  regarding  his  sexuality.   The
    appellant answered (Q&A 129): "Just a little, not much, because  I  was
    thinking I liked  women  before  but  now  I  am  going  to  have  this
    relationship.  It is OK because I am going to have a comfortable  life,
    an easy life."

 8. In the subsequent  refusal  decision,  the  respondent  said  that  the
    appellant's answers regarding the decision to enter into his first same-
    sex relationship were vague, evasive and incoherent.  In  addition,  it
    was unclear why he was unable to remember even the month  in  which  he
    claimed to have begun a gay relationship with D.  With  regard  to  his
    life in the UK, he had been asked which gay clubs he had attended,  and
    he had not been able to provide any names.  He could  only  state  that
    they were on the Embankment in London.  Furthermore, during  the  whole
    time he had been in the UK, he had only been to these gay clubs on  two
    or three occasions.  With the exception of these infrequent  visits  to
    gay clubs, he did not appear to  have  engaged  further  with  the  gay
    community.  He had not joined any LGBT groups while being  in  the  UK,
    nor had he mentioned any gay partners in the UK.   It was  unclear  why
    he had not fully embraced his sexuality  in  a  country  where  it  was
    acceptable to do so.  His account  of  the  alleged  discovery  of  his
    relationship with D and  his  subsequent  escape  was  both  vague  and
    inconsistent.  Accordingly, it was not accepted that the appellant  was
    gay, and nor was it accepted that he would  be  at  immediate  risk  on
    return to Iraq as the result of his claimed same-sex relationship  with
    D.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Goodrich.  Ms Revill
    of Counsel appeared on behalf of the  appellant.   The  Judge  received
    oral evidence from the appellant, who was extensively cross-examined by
    Ms Weston on behalf of the Home Office.

10.  At  paragraph  [13]  of  her  decision,  Judge  Goodrich  set  out  in
    considerable detail the answers which the appellant gave to  Ms  Weston
    in cross-examination.  In paragraphs [14]-[18],  the  Judge  summarised
    the answers given  by  the  appellant  in  response  to  questions  for
    clarification purposes from her, and in re-examination by Ms Revill.

11. The appellant produced copy photographs of his claimed boyfriend, "NY".
    He said these photographs had been taken two weeks beforehand in a  gay
    club.  He had met NY on 10 March 2017 through  Facebook.   Since  then,
    they had met face-to-face a couple of times.  NY was not here today  to
    give evidence because he was a student.  He had family and  friends  in
    the UK, and being gay was not sociably acceptable, and that was why  he
    had refused to come to the hearing to give evidence in support  of  the
    appeal.

12. In her closing submissions on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Ms  Weston
    submitted that there were a number of discrepancies in the  appellant's
    account of his experiences in Iraq.  He was vague about  his  sexuality
    and how it came about.  There were also discrepancies in  the  evidence
    regarding the recent relationship on which he  relied.   She  submitted
    that little weight should be attached  to  this  claimed  relationship,
    given that NY had not attended the hearing.

13. In reply, Ms Revill submitted that to comment on how long it had  taken
    the appellant to realise his sexuality was to impose a stereotype.   So
    far as  the  evidence  concerning  his  sexuality  was  concerned,  the
    appellant had given a reason for NY's  non-attendance.   The  appellant
    had had contact with other men: his Whatsapp communication at  page  46
    showed his desire to meet up with other men for  sex.   This  evidence,
    together  with  the  photographs  and  his  membership  of  ELOP,  were
    corroborative of his claim to be gay.

14. The Judge's findings are set out in  her  decision  at  paragraph  [22]
    onwards.  At paragraph [33], she said that she attached  no  weight  to
    the fact that the appellant did  not  disclose  his  sexuality  in  his
    screening interview, as she recognised that this could have been due to
    shyness, fear or difficulty in disclosure.

15. In paragraphs [35] and [36], the Judge rehearsed the evidence which the
    appellant had given in his substantive asylum interview as to  how  his
    relationship with D  had  developed.   The  Judge  noted,  among  other
    things, the appellant's response at Q&A 137 cited above.  At  paragraph
    [37], the Judge  held  that  what  was  missing  from  the  appellant's
    evidence was any real sense of any turmoil, anxiety or  concern,  given
    his  existing  sexual  identity  and  the  implications   for   a   gay
    relationship in Iraq.  At paragraph [38], she said that she  recognised
    that the appellant may have difficulty in expressing his emotions,  but
    in her view his answers in interview and in his oral evidence  appeared
    formulaic.  His evidence about the decision that he took  that  day  to
    flee Iraq, and to leave his  family,  was  also  "devoid  of  emotional
    content."  On his case, the appellant had taken the  decision  to  flee
    even before he received any telephone call or threats, and he  did  not
    tell his mother that he was leaving.

16. At paragraph [39], the Judge said that  she  had  also  considered  the
    documentary  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  expression  of  his
    sexuality in the UK.  She observed that the screen-shots appeared to be
    dated after December 2016.  (The date  of  the  refusal  letter  is  17
    February 2017).  It was not necessary for the appellant to be in a same-
    sex relationship, or even to have had the experience of one.   However,
    he relied on a recent relationship with NY  that  he  claimed  to  have
    formed in March 2017, and so she had to assess this evidence.

17. At paragraphs [40]-[43], the Judge gave her reasons  for  attaching  no
    material weight to the evidence concerning the appellant's relationship
    to, or connection with, NY.

18.  At  paragraph  [49]  the  Judge  summarised  her   conclusions.    The
    appellant's account of his relationship with D and  his  departure  did
    not "ring true".   She  did  not  believe  that  this  arose  from  any
    reluctance on his part to discuss his sexuality, but rather because  he
    had sought to maintain consistency with the same account as he gave  in
    interview.  She did  not  find  him  a  credible  witness.   The  Judge
    continued: "I attach no weight to the evidence he has provided to  seek
    to show that he is gay, because this is self-generating and he is not a
    credible witness.  Applying the lower  standard  of  proof,  I  do  not
    believe that the appellant is gay or that he holds any genuine fear.  I
    consider the claim made by the appellant had been  entirely  fabricated
    in order to provide a basis to stay in the UK."

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

19. The grounds of appeal were settled by Ms Revill.   The  focus  of  both
    grounds was on paragraph [49].  Ground 1 was that the Judge  had  erred
    in law in rejecting the documentary evidence concerning the appellant's
    gay lifestyle in the UK on the sole ground that it  was  self-generated
    and that he was not a  credible  witness.   The  Judge  ought  to  have
    considered whether the documentary evidence was  in  itself  worthy  of
    belief.  Ground 2 was that the Judge had not given a sufficient  reason
    in paragraph [49] for not  finding  the  appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness.  The assertion that his account "did not  ring  true"  was  an
    inadequate basis for making an adverse  credibility  finding.   On  the
    face of it, the fact that his oral testimony was  consistent  with  his
    account in interview, would support, not undermine, his credibility.

Discussion

20. It is convenient to begin with ground 2, as this is the springboard for
    the observations made by Upper Tribunal Finch when granting permission.

21. In paragraph [49] the Judge was summarising her conclusions, so  it  is
    unfair to treat what she said in this paragraph on the  topic  of  past
    persecution as being representative of her analysis of this issue.   It
    is apparent from a fair reading of the decision as  a  whole  that  the
    Judge had explained earlier why she found the  appellant's  account  of
    past persecution was not credible.

22. As identified by Judge Finch when granting permission, the  real  issue
    is whether the Judge's reasoning in paragraph [37] is flawed.

23. Despite Mr Lee's able advocacy, I am not persuaded  that  this  is  the
    case.  As the Judge highlighted in paragraphs [35] and [36], a constant
    refrain in  the  substantive  interview  was  that  the  appellant  was
    comfortable about entering into a gay relationship with D, even  though
    hitherto he only had heterosexual feelings,  and  even  though  he  was
    being invited to embark on a gay relationship in a  highly  homophobic,
    and hence dangerous, environment.  Against this background, it was open
    to the Judge to find that it was not credible that the appellant  would
    have felt in the way that he claimed to have done when propositioned by
    D. In short, it was open to her to find that it was not  credible  that
    the appellant felt comfortable about it from the  outset  and  that  he
    envisaged a comfortable and easy same-sex relationship with D in Iraq.

24. However, I consider that Ground 1  is  made  out.   As  pleaded  by  Ms
    Revill, the documentary evidence included 79 pages of screen-shots from
    mobile phone apps called Hanky and Skout.  These showed  the  appellant
    meeting men  online  and  discussing  casual  sexual  encounters.   The
    exchanges took place in December 2016  and  January  2017,  before  the
    respondent made a decision on the  asylum  claim.   The  exchanges  are
    objectively supportive of the appellant's claim to be gay as they  show
    him actively seeking to have sex with like-minded men.  At  times  this
    involves a discussion as to the type of sex which he and/or  the  other
    man favours.

25. The Judge gave  two  reasons  for  wholly  discounting  this  evidence,
    neither of which is sufficient.  The first was that she has  not  found
    the appellant to be credible in his account of past persecution.   This
    is plainly not a sufficient reason for disbelieving  his  claim  to  be
    enjoying a gay lifestyle in the UK.  The second  reason  she  gave  was
    that  the  evidence  was  "self-generated".   This  is   not   a   fair
    characterisation of the evidence, which was generated by the  appellant
    having a dialogue with prospective male partners.  Thus,  the  material
    was as much generated by third parties  as  it  was  generated  by  the
    appellant.

26. In R (on the application of  SS)  -v-  SSHD  (Self-serving  statements)
    [2017] UKUT 164 (IAC), the Tribunal held  that  the  expression  "self-
    serving" is uninformative; and that  what  was  needed  was  a  reason,
    however brief, for that designation.  By analogy,  the  Judge  gave  no
    reason for designating the Whatsapp material as  "self-generated",  and
    she failed to explain why the documentary evidence was  in  itself  not
    worthy of belief.

27. For the above reason,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    unsafe, and it must be set aside in its entirety  and  remade.  It  was
    agreed by the representatives that in this event the appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision must be set aside in its entirety and remade.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a  de
novo hearing before any  Judge  apart  from  Judge  Goodrich.  None  of  the
findings of fact made by the previous Tribunal shall be preserved.


Signed                              Date 18 December 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

