






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02903/2019


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                |                                |
|On 16th September 2019                |On 25th September 2019          |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                   Mr K R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parker promulgated on the  28th  May  2019  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the  appellant's  claims  based  on  international
    protection. Whilst Article 8 of the ECHR is considered in the decision,
    no grounds of appeal relating to Article 8  have  been  raised  in  the
    application.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I make an  anonymity
    direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beach on 8th August 2019. Thus the case appeared  before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

         "3)      The First-tier Judge has  given  cogent  reasons  for  her
             findings of adverse credibility regarding the  claimed  events
             in Iran. She considers the risk to the appellant on return  to
             Iran [30 and 31]. She notes the attendances at a demonstration
             [30] but finds that this would not  lead  to  a  risk  to  the
             appellant (in fact the appellant's  evidence  in  his  witness
             statement was that he had attended ten demonstrations  in  the
             UK.). However in making his assessment the First-tier Tribunal
             Judge only makes  reference  to  the  decision  in  SSH  &  HR
             (illegal exit; failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308
             (IAC). She does not make reference to the most recent case  of
             HB (Kurds) Iran [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC). It is  arguable  that
             the  failure  to  consider  the  most  recent  relevant  Upper
             Tribunal decision means that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did
             not fully consider all the relevant  risk  factors  and  their
             relevance when assessing the risk to the appellant  on  return
             to Iran given his ethnicity, illegal exit  and  attendance  at
             demonstrations or demonstrations in the UK."

 5. Before me Ms Warren sought to raise a number of issues which  were  not
    part of the original grounds of appeal. It has to be accepted that  the
    grounds of appeal had been settled by the appellant in  person  but  Ms
    Warren neither gave the respondent notice of  her  intention  to  raise
    further issues nor sought leave to argue such issues.

 6. Ms Warren sought to argue that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  a
    number of matters in coming to a conclusion on the appellant's account,
    for example Ms Warren sought to argue that:-

      a) the judge had failed to take account of  the  appellant's  evidence
         that he had attended ten demonstrations in the UK; and

      b) the judge in paragraph 19 had come to the wrong conclusion  on  the
         appellant's evidence with regard to answers given in the  interview
         and questions 140 and 187; and

      c) further Ms Warren sought to argue that the judge uses  plausibility
         issues  to  draw  adverse   inferences   against   the   appellant,
         specifically that the background evidence disclosed  that  where  a
         family member was suspected of anti-regime activity  the  remaining
         member of the family would also fall under suspicion. The judge had
         concluded that the appellant's step-mother would not  in  light  of
         that have informed the authorities of  the  appellant's  activities
         for dissident political groups; and

      d) further the appellant had made reference to memory problems in  his
         interview and in his age assessment and no proper consideration had
         been given to such; and

      e) finally Ms Warren sought  to  argue  that  the  judge  had  wrongly
         concluded  that  that  certain  answers  in  the   interview   were
         inconsistent, rather Ms Warren argued they were consistent, in line
         with the  background  evidence  and  therefore  supportive  of  the
         appellant's credibility.

 7. Whilst I was willing to allow Ms Warren some lassitude given  that  the
    appellant had settled the grounds  of  appeal  himself,  still  it  was
    incumbent upon Ms Warren to make application to amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal and to inform the respondent of her intentions.

 8. That having been said however, the findings of fact made by  the  judge
    are properly reasoned and have been made on a  careful  examination  of
    the evidence. At paragraph 28 the judge clearly considers the claim  by
    the appellant to have attended at  10  demonstrations  in  the  UK.  As
    pointed out the appellant had produced no evidence of his attendance at
    such demonstrations. Whilst corroborative evidence is not  required  it
    is to be noted that the judge in the  paragraph  that  follows  make  a
    finding that the appellant has not told the truth with  regard  to  his
    account.   That clearly encompassed the claim by the appellant that  he
    had attended ten demonstrations.

 9. With regard to the issue in respect of the interpreter and inaccuracies
    the judge in paragraph  19  had  specifically  considered  the  issues.
    Similarly whilst the appellant had referred to  memory  problems  there
    was no medical evidence to support such. It has to be  noted  that  the
    appellant had claimed to be a minor the judge concludes that there  was
    clear evidence of the appellant not telling the truth.

10. The judge has considered all of  the  evidence,  including  the  issues
    raised by MsWarren, and has given valid  reasons  for  the  conclusions
    reached, including why he rejects parts of the appellant's account  and
    why he finds part of the appellant's account  inconsistent.  The  judge
    did consider the issues raised. The judge has given valid  reasons  for
    the adverse credibility findings.

11. With regard to the issue raised within the grant of leave the  case  of
    HB headnote [2018 UKUT 00308] sets out that the case of SSH and HR 2016
    UKUT 308 referred to by the judge in his decision continues to be  good
    law in specific material aspects. The case goes on to identify that the
    mere fact of the returnee being of Kurdish ethnicity whether without  a
    valid passport and even if combined  with  illegal  exit  does  not  of
    itself create a risk of persecution or of article 3 ill-treatment. That
    having been said Kurdish  ethnicity  may  be,  if  coupled  with  other
    factors such as a political profile, a risk factor such as to create  a
    risk of persecution or article 3 ill-treatment.

12. The judge has specifically found that the appellant was not known to be
    politically active and not otherwise found to be credible  with  regard
    to  his  claims  of  distributing  leaflets  or   being   involved   in
    demonstrations. That having been said the judge  goes  on  to  consider
    whether or not the mere attendance  at  demonstrations  in  the  United
    Kingdom would be additional factor giving rise to a risk profile.

13. Having considered all the relevant factors including the fact that  the
    appellant also Kurdish ethnicity and  having  rejected  the  appellants
    claim to have been involved in politics, the judge goes on to find  the
    appellant would have no risk profile causing him to be of  interest  to
    the Iranian authorities. That was a  finding  of  fact  the  judge  was
    entitled to make on the evidence.

14. Whilst it has to be acknowledged that the case  of  HB  recognises  the
    Iranian authorities have a hair trigger approach to those suspected  or
    perceived to have been involved in Kurdish  political  activities,  the
    findings by the judge are clear that the  appellant  has  no  political
    profile and would therefore be of no interest  to  the  authorities  in
    Iran. Given the findings of fact the judge has found that the appellant
    has no political profile. On the basis of the  findings  by  the  judge
    there would have been no additional factors which  could  increase  the
    risk to the appellant. The judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Iranian authorities would have no interest in this appellant.

15.  Accordingly taking account of the guidance given in HB, there were  no
    additional risk factors and the appellant is a returning individual  of
    Kurdish ethnicity and even taking account of the fact that he may  have
    left illegally such would not create a risk of persecution or article 3
    ill-treatment.

16. In the circumstances there is no material error of law in the  approach
    of the judge.

    Notice of Decision

17. I uphold the decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.






Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 23rd September 2019




Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings







Signed      Date 23rd September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

