

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02044/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 11 December 2019                      |on 2 January 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     TVT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms Frantzics instructed by Howells Solicitors

For the Respondent:      Mr Diwncyz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge T Jones promulgated on 3 September 2019 in which the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 3 October 2000.
     3. The Judge did not find the appellant credible and did not find that
        as a result of any adverse political opinion he had a well-founded
        fear of persecution or breach of a protected right on return.
     4. The Judge records at [10] of the decision under challenge:


             "In terms of the Appellant's claim there is a summary of
             findings at paragraph 61. Therein the Respondent accepts the
             Appellant's nationality but rejected his claim that he has
             taken part in and prepared leaflets for demonstrations which
             resulted in his "arrest twice".


     5. This is a reference to paragraph 61 of the respondent's reasons for
        refusal letter.
     6. At [21] of the decision under challenge the Judge also writes:


             "The respondent at paragraph 61 rejects the Appellant's
             claimed involvement in the demonstrations or the preparation
             of banners or leaflets".


     7. It is clear the Judge was specifically referred during the course
        of the hearing to [48] of the reasons for refusal letter which it
        was submitted was binding upon the Judge. In this paragraph the
        decision-maker writes:


             "It is considered that in relation to this first arrest you
             have been consistent throughout and that therefore it is
             accepted that you and your father were arrested at a
             demonstration and questioned about the leadership. The fact
             that land demonstrators are arrested is supported by the
             country information in the CPIN."


     8. There was, therefore, before the Judge a contradiction in the
        content of the refusal letter.  A submission was specifically made
        by Ms Frantzics that the Judge was bound by the concession at [48].
        There is no indication as to how the Judge resolves this conflict
        in the evidence supported by adequate reasoning.
     9. Mr Diwncyz was asked whether he was able to shed light upon the
        respondent's position. He accepted there is clear ambiguity and
        stated that for the purposes of these proceedings he would have to
        accept that a concession had been made as set out at [48]; although
        the author of the refusal letter appears to have forgotten this by
        the time he or she got to [61].
    10. It is submitted on the appellant's behalf that this error is
        material as:


                  a) The Judge proceeded on the erroneous basis that the
                     respondent had rejected the entirety of the appellant's
                     account and that had the Judge proceeded on the basis
                     that part of the appellant's account had been accepted
                     this should have positively informed that assessment of
                     the remainder of the appellant's account; with specific
                     reference to the adverse findings at [79] of the
                     decision.
                  b) The Judge holds against the appellant, to the extent
                     that his claim is undermined, at [59] and [74], the
                     fact that the country expert Dr Tran was unable to find
                     reference to a demonstration in January 2016 at the
                     same time failing to acknowledge that the respondent
                     accepted that the appellant attended and was questioned
                     after that demonstration and that the expert report is
                     supportive of the credibility of the appellant's
                     account.


    11. I find merit in the appellant's claim in relation to this aspect of
        the evidence and materiality in the error. It is not known what
        decision the Judge would have made had the conflict in the refusal
        letter been properly resolved. It is material that the respondent
        accepted the appellant's account in relation to the first
        demonstration which the Judge rejected and therefore did not factor
        into the assessment of any risk the appellant may face on return to
        Vietnam.
    12. The appellant also asserts that the Judge had no regard to the
        unchallenged expert evidence of Dr Tran, but no specific findings
        are required upon such a claim at this stage in light of the other
        points raised.
    13. I find the appellant has established that the Judge has erred in
        law in a manner material to the decision to dismiss the appeal such
        that the determination must be set aside.
    14. In light of the error it was accepted the matter will need to be
        considered afresh by a judge other than Judge T Jones. Accordingly
        I remit the appeal to the Bradford Hearing Centre to be heard by a
        judge other than Judge T Jones.
    15. Case management directions shall be issued by Bradford according to
        the operational requirements of that centre which it is hoped will
        include a direction for the respondent to clarify her position in
        relation to what is and is not accepted concerning the appellant's
        activities in Vietnam; with specific reference to [48] and [61] of
        the refusal letter.

Decision

    16. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. This appeal shall be remitted
        to Bradford to be heard by a judge other than Judge T Jones.

   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure    (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12th December 2019

