
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Numbers:
PA/02636/2015

                                        AA/13171/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 October 2018                    |On 22 May 2019                       |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NF
                                     KKA
                         (Anonymity directionS made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the SSHD:        Ms M Bayoumi, instructed by the Government Legal
Department
For NF:     Ms A Weston QC, instructed by Luqmani Thompson & Partners For
KKA:  Ms R Chapman, instructed by Birnberg Pierce & Partners

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  NF  and  KKA  (the
respondents herein) are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  respondents  or  any  of  their
family members.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. NF is the husband of KKA and both are nationals of Kenya. These appeals
    are brought before the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State for the
    Home  Department  ("SSHD")  challenging  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") allowing the appeals of NF and KKA.




 2. The SSHD accepted before the FtT that removing  NF  and  KKA  to  Kenya
    would lead to a breach of Article 3 ECHR.



 3. The central issue in NF's appeal before the FtT was whether  he  should
    be  excluded  from  the  protection  of  the  Refugee   Convention   by
    application of Article 1F(c) thereof. The FtT found in NF's  favour  on
    this issue, concluding that he "is a refugee".



 4. The issues before  the  FtT  in  KKA's  appeal  were  (i)  whether  the
    requirements of Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention  were  met  and
    (ii) whether she should  be  excluded  from  a  grant  of  Humanitarian
    Protection pursuant  to  application  of  paragraph  339D(iii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The FtT found for KKA on both issues and allowed her
    appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.



 5. The appeals before the Upper Tribunal centre on the approach by the FtT
    to application of Article 1F(c) of the Refugee Convention (in  relation
    to NF) and paragraph 339D(iii) of the Immigration Rules (in relation to
    KKA). For this reason,  consideration  of  the  appeals  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal was stayed pending a decision from  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Youssef & N2 v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 933, which was handed  down  on  26
    April 2018, and the writing of  this  judgment  was  delayed  with  the
    intention of being able to take into account the decision of the  Upper
    Tribunal on that remitted appeal.



Factual Background




 6. NF entered the United Kingdom on 6 October 2007 with leave to enter  to
    study aerospace engineering. His leave was subsequently extended so  as
    to expire on 15 December 2012. KKA was granted leave in line  with  her
    husband.




 7. On 4 December 2011 both were stopped at Heathrow airport  on  returning
    to the UK from Kenya. A property search  revealed  an  iPod  containing
    images of armed persons with flags associated with Al Shabaab, and also
    included  photographs  featuring  both  male  and  female  'terrorists'
    training on a beach with weapons. None of the photos said to feature Al
    Shabaab also featured either NF or KKA. The iPod also contained a large
    number of audio files that suggested to the interviewing  officer  that
    NF had an "extremist mindset".  It is said that some of the audio files
    were  produced  directly  by  Al  Qaeda  and  were  considered  to   be
    motivational  in  nature  and  designed  to  encourage/glorify  suicide
    operations, giving advice on conducting Jihad.



 8. NF stated in interview that he had downloaded  these  photographs  from
    the internet approximately four months earlier because he  was  curious
    about why so many Somali people were coming over the border into  Kenya
    and he thought Al Shabaab were  responsible  for  this  migration.  The
    Kenyan Army were fighting against Al Shabaab and he was "very  keen  on
    events" involving his country. He had downloaded  the  speeches  of  Dr
    Omar Bakri in 2008. Dr Bakri was a "visiting Sheikh" who  had  given  a
    talk about understanding prayer. NF had "curiosity about this  person".
    KKA stated that the iPod in her husband's possession had been found  by
    him in Africa and  that  anything  found  on  this  iPod  was  not  her
    husband's responsibility.



 9. It was later discovered that on the day NF and KKA returned home  after
    being released from the airport, NF deleted  many  thousands  of  files
    from a computer registered to KKA's name. KKA asserted  that  she  said
    she had never used this computer.



10. On 17 April 2012, the police searched the family residence.   Detective
    Sergeant Anthony Horrocks, of the North  West  Counter-Terrorism  Unit,
    and his team seized various electronic devices including  KKA's  mobile
    telephone, NF's mobile telephone, KKA's  laptop,  the  iPod  previously
    examined at Heathrow Airport and a digital  hard  drive.  The  material
    discovered  on  these  devices  was  described  by  Detective  Sergeant
    Horrocks,  as  seeking  to  "glorify,  explain,  justify  or  otherwise
    encourage acts of terrorism".



11. NF was charged on three counts  of  possessing  information  useful  to
    terrorism contrary to section 58(1)(b) of the Terrorism Act 2000:



         Count 1 - Possessing a document referred to as "Inspire  2",  which
         contained instructions that were used by others  recently  to  make
         the pressure cooker bombs that were detonated in  the  Boston,  USA
         attacks.  It also contained practical  instructions  on  encrypting
         sensitive terrorist  information.   Encryption  software  had  been
         downloaded and used by NF as per these instructions.




         Count 2 - Possessing a document referred to as "39  Ways  to  Serve
         and Participate in Jihad", the details of which are set out in  the
         FtT's decision.

         Count 3 - possession a document referred to as "Physical Planning".

12. KKA was not charged with a criminal offence, although her telephone was
    found to contain a contacts list which included an entry relating to  a
    "a convicted terrorist" and another relating to "a  leading  figure  in
    Muslims Against Crusaders". KKA was also said to be in contact with (i)
    the wife of a leading member  of  Supporters  of  Taweed,  such  person
    having himself been convicted of supporting  proscribed  organisations,
    and (ii) Ruksana Begum, a person who received a 12 month  sentence  for
    possessing documentation useful for terrorism and  who's  brothers  are
    respectively serving sentences of 16  and  12  years  imprisonment  for
    engaging in conduct in preparation for a terrorist act.



13. NF pleaded not guilty to all three counts on  the  indictment  but  was
    convicted on 14 March 2013 at the Central Criminal Court  on  Count  2.
    NF was acquitted on Counts 1 and 3 of the indictment.   In  respect  of
    Count 2, NF was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment and  recommended
    for deportation.  In sentencing, the judge commented:




         "You have been convicted by the jury of one count of  possessing  a
         record containing information likely  to  be  useful  to  a  person
         committing or preparing an  act  of  terrorism.   The  material  in
         question consisted of a version of 39 Ways to Serve and Participate
         in Jihad, best described in my view as a terrorists manual.  It  is
         available over the net which is how you got it and it is  right  to
         say you are not the first person to be convicted in the  courts  of
         this country for possession or versions of it. ...




         It was, as far as you are concerned, part  of  a  very  substantial
         quantity of material that you had downloaded  and  stored  on  your
         computer and external hard drive.   I  make  clear,  however,  that
         despite the volume this is not put forward and never has  been  put
         forward as a specimen charge, although there was other material  of
         an encouraging to Jihad nature which of course is  not  an  offence
         under the section.  ...




         ... Parliament has determined that such is the need to protect  the
         public or sections of  it  anywhere  in  the  world  from  acts  of
         terrorism  that  even  possessing  material  that  may  help  those
         contemplating terrorism in a practical way should  be  against  the
         law and those doing it should be punished, in particular  in  order
         to deter others.  There remains the question of deportation in your
         case since the sentence is one of less than  twelve  months  and  I
         have considered whether or not I should make such a recommendation.
         In my view such is the need to protect the public that  looking  at
         all the circumstances of your conduct it is  proper  to  make  that
         recommendation."



14. On 24 April 2013, NF was served with a 'notice of decision to  deport',
    but this decision was withdrawn on 7 June 2013in  order  to  allow  the
    SSHD to consider NF's asylum claim. A subsequent negative decision  was
    also withdrawn, and both NF and KKA were given  6-months  discretionary
    leave (pursuant to the SSHD's Restrictive  Leave  policy)  -  it  being
    acknowledged by the SSHD that each would be at risk of ill treatment if
    returned to Kenya.



15. On 2 November 2015, the SSHD made a decision excluding NF from  Refugee
    Convention protection. On the same date a decision was made in relation
    to KKA refusing her Refugee Convention claim and excluding her  from  a
    grant of Humanitarian Protection.  NF and KKA appealed these  decisions
    to the FtT.

Legal Background

16. Article 1F(c) of the Refugee Convention provides:



         "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:

         ...




         (c)      he has been guilty of acts contrary to  the  purposes  and
         principles of the United Nations."




17. Paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules states that a person  will  not
    be eligible for a grant of  humanitarian  protection  in  circumstances
    where:




       "(ii)      there are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  he  is
           guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and  principles  of  the
           United Nations or has committed,  prepared  of  instigated  such
           act;




       (iii)       there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering  that   he
           constitutes a danger to the community or to the security of  the
           United Kingdom".




18. In Al-Sirri v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 54
    the Supreme Court stated, when considering Article 1F(c):



      "16.  ... The article should be interpreted restrictively and  applied
           with caution.  There should be  a  high  threshold  'defined  in
           terms of the gravity of the act in question, the manner in which
           the act is organised, its  international  impact  and  long-term
           objectives, and the implications  for  international  peace  and
           security'.  And there should be serious reasons for  considering
           that the person concerned  bore  individual  responsibility  for
           acts of that character."




19. In Youssef, the Court of Appeal, in dismissing  the  applicant's  first
    two grounds, rejected the contention that the Upper Tribunal had  erred
    in finding that  individual  responsibility  for  acts  falling  within
    Article  1F(c)  can  arise  solely  by  way  of  implicit  or  explicit
    encouragement of such acts, in the absence of evidence that the offence
    has been committed or attempted. In the considering the  third  ground,
    in which it was asserted that the  Upper  Tribunal  had  erred  in  its
    consideration of whether the applicant's own activities  of  publishing
    speeches and sermons was sufficient to engage article 1F(c), Irwin  LJ,
    with whom McCombe and Rafferty LJJ agreed, summarised the  guidance  to
    be drawn from Al-Sirri in the following terms:

       "83. ... There is a high threshold before Article 1F(c) is triggered.
            The activity must be capable of affecting  international  peace
           and security.   However,  the  Court  concluded  that  'inducing
           terror in  the  civilian  population  or  putting  such  extreme
           pressures upon a government will  also  have  the  international
           repercussions referred to ...'.  That is clearly  an  issue  for
           specific  consideration  by  the  relevant  court  or  tribunal.
           Finally, the question whether such  international  repercussions
           may be established by  a  person  plotting  in  one  country  to
           destabilise another is a question  of  fact.   The  question  is
           whether the 'resulting acts have the requisite serious  effect'.
           In short, do the relevant acts have the necessary character  and
           the necessary gravity?


       84.  In considering that guidance it is worth bearing  in  mind  that
           the decision in Al-Sirri pre-dated  the  2014  Security  Council
           Resolution.  I have set out the relevant terms of the Resolution
           in paragraph 41 above.  The terms of the  Resolution  underscore
           the State's obligation to 'prevent  terrorists  from  exploiting
           technology, communications and resources to incite  support  for
           terrorist acts' and 'to ensure ... that refugee  status  is  not
           abused by the ... facilitators of terrorist acts', in all  cases
           acting 'in conformity with ... international refugee law'.  This
           Resolution is very direct in its call to action.


       85.  It may be helpful to consider separately the quality of the acts
           in question,  and  their  gravity  or  severity.   To  adopt  an
           illustration which arose in argument, it is easy to conceive  an
           immature 18 year old going online from his suburban bedroom, and
           using the most lurid terms in calling for  international  jihad.
           The nature or quality of this would, it seems to me, satisfy the
           requirements  of  Article  1F(c).   It  would  represent  active
           encouragement or incitement of international  terror.   However,
           it would be unlikely, without more, to be grave  enough  in  its
           impact to satisfy the approach  laid  down  in  Al-Sirri.   That
           might  well  require  more:  evidence  of   wide   international
           readership,  of  large-scale  repetition  or   re-tweeting,   or
           citation by those who were moved to join an armed struggle,  for
           example.


       86.  It is obviously right, for the  reasons  given  by  the  Supreme
           Court in Al-Sirri, that careful consideration is  given  to  the
           gravity or impact of any acts relied on.  This is the answer  to
           the  Appellant's  arguments  as  to  the  vital  importance   of
           protection of refugees, and that such protection should  not  be
           lost for 'mere speech'.  Freedom of speech is a qualified  right
           under the United Nations Convention, as under the  ECHR  or  the
           European Charter."


Decision and Discussion - NF

20. In a decision promulgated on the 26 October  2016,  the  FtT  made  the
    following findings  of  fact,  which  have  not  been  the  subject  of
    challenge:



        i) NF accepted that he had an "extremist mindset" [28];

       ii) NF had in his possession all of the items that  he  was  charged
           with possessing, notwithstanding that he was acquitted on counts
           1 and 3 of the indictment that he faced at the Central  Criminal
           Court [54].

      iii) NF did not provide a credible explanation as to why he  had  the
           material stored on his computer [53];

       iv) There was no evidence that NF had been a member of any terrorist
           group [54];

        v) There was no evidence that NF had incited others  to  terrorism,
           and he had not been charged with participating in  terrorism  or
           inciting it [54];

       vi) The mass of evidence accumulated against NF did not  disclose  a
           case to pursue these more serious charges [54];

      vii) NF was someone with an obsessive interest in  Islamic  terrorism
           and possibly he still has that interest [54];

     viii) NF has developed sympathies with Al Shabaab in Kenya [54];

       ix) It is a matter of speculation whether he would  have  joined  Al
           Shabaab upon return to Kenya on completion of his studies [54];

        x) NF has been in contact with known extremists [64].




21. In concluding that NF is  not  excluded  from  the  Refugee  Convention
    pursuant to Article 1F(c), the FtT said:




         [59] ... The question I have to ask in this appeal is  whether  the
         appellant's possession of all of this material at the time when  he
         must have had the "mindset" of a terrorist or at the very  least  a
         sympathiser with these groups, when  viewed  with  his  association
         with "known extremists" was enough to constitute "serious  reasons"
         for  believing  that  the  appellant's  conduct  was   capable   of
         constituting an act or acts contrary to the  purposes  of  the  UN.
         This begs the question whether the possession of this material  and
         the appellant's "mindset" at the time he collected all of this  and
         his association with "known extremists" and sympathy  with  Islamic
         terrorism is enough to meet  this  test.   I  have  had  difficulty
         notwithstanding the serious concern anyone would have about someone
         downloading and storing all of this  when  in  contact  with  known
         extremists, in elevating the appellant's conduct to  a  level  that
         could properly be called an act or acts contrary to the purposes of
         the UN.  The totality of the evidence before me suggests that  this
         appellant was of a mindset that would have helped explain  any  act
         of terrorism committed  by  the  appellant  had  the  appellant  so
         behaved.  The problem faced by the respondent  in  this  appeal  is
         that the appellant has not taken this disturbing  interest  further
         into the realms of terrorism or incitement to terrorism.  If he had
         then Article 1F(c) would certainly apply. ... [emphasis added]




         [65] ... Notwithstanding the volume of evidence to  show  that  the
         appellant possessed what Detective Sergeant Horrocks has  described
         as a "terrorist mindset" there is a paucity  of  evidence  to  show
         that the appellant has actually  committed  any  criminal  offence,
         other than the three counts on the indictment that he  was  charged
         with.  I have taken as my starting point in this analysis that I am
         satisfied on the balance of probabilities that  the  appellant  had
         committed all three of the offences charged in  the  indictment  at
         his trial, not just count 2 of the indictment that he was convicted
         on.  But having reached  that  conclusion  and  having  taken  into
         account the disturbing evidence that  the  appellant  has  been  in
         contact with known extremists in the United Kingdom, I find that it
         is not enough to meet the threshold of Article 1F[c] set out  above
         by the Supreme Court in Al-Sirri v SSHD.  Therefore the appellant's
         appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  that  he  is
         excluded from protection of the Refugee  Convention  under  Article
         1F(c) is allowed.  It is already conceded by the respondent that in
         these circumstances he is a refugee by reason of being at risk upon
         return to Kenya by reason of his imputed political  opinion  as  an
         Islamist extremist."




22. The core of the SSHD's challenge to the FtT decision is summarised thus
    in the grounds of appeal:



        "The respondent contends that the IJ  strayed  into  material  error
        when he considered that the threshold in Article 1F was not  met  on
        the basis that the appellant had not committed or  incited  acts  of
        terrorism.  On the  basis  of  the  findings  of  fact  he  made  at
        paragraphs 53, 54 and 59 of the Decision, the proper application  of
        the relevant test can only lead to  one  conclusion  -  namely  that
        exclusion is justified."




23. Permission was subsequently granted for the SSHD to amend  his  grounds
    so as to rely upon the Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  Youssef.  The
    substance of the challenge, nevertheless, remained the same.




24. At the hearing, Ms Bayoumi maintained that the FtT erred in  concluding
    that the acts relied upon by the SSHD could  not  in  principle  engage
    Article 1F(c) on the basis that they were not in  themselves  completed
    or attempted terrorist acts, nor could they be shown  to  have  led  to
    specific completed or attempted terrorist acts by others.  She  further
    submitted that the "huge volume" of extremist material held by NF, NF's
    extremist mindset, the type of material collected by NF which  included
    a manual on how to serve  and  participate  in  Jihad,  the  number  of
    devices used by NF to collect/store the  material,  and  his  continued
    actions after having been  detained  at  the  airport,  provided  ample
    justification for NF's exclusion pursuant to Article 1F(c). We did  not
    call on counsel for NF or KKA




25. Taking the issues  in  turn,  we  first  determine  whether  the  FtT's
    decision contains an error of law. The focus of the SSHD's attention in
    this regard is the penultimate sentence of paragraph 59  of  the  FtT's
    decision (set out above) which, it is said, runs contrary to the  ratio
    of the Supreme Court's decision in Al-Sirri and the Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Youssef.  Support is drawn for  this  submission  from  the
    terms of paragraph 63 of the FtT's decision, in which the FtT  conclude
    that NF's possession of the extremist material  "...does  not  overcome
    the absence of  reliable  evidence  that  [NF]  has  been  involved  in
    terrorism. Not even indirectly and innocently.  There  is  no  evidence
    that [NF] has been involved in any terrorist act."



26. We reject this submission. When the penultimate sentence  of  paragraph
    59 is analysed in the context of that paragraph as a whole it is  clear
    that the it does not bear the interpretation Ms Bayoumi seeks to  place
    on it. When read in its proper context the sentence is clearly intended
    to convey no more than a finding which rules out the possibility of the
    SSHD succeeding on the basis that NF had committed a terrorist  act  or
    incited others to do so, because the facts do not  establish  as  much.
    Contrary to Ms Bayoumi's contention it does not close the door  on  the
    possibility of the SSHD  demonstrating  the  applicability  of  article
    1F(c) on an alternative basis.



27. This interpretation is re-enforced by  the  three  pages  of  reasoning
    which follow paragraph 59. Subsequently the FtT lawfully directs itself
    on multiple occasions, including setting  out  the  core  analysis  and
    conclusion of the Supreme court in Al-Sirri:



         "There should be a high threshold defined in terms of  the  gravity
         of the act in question, the manner in which the act  is  organised,
         its  international  impact  and  long-term   objectives   and   the
         implications for international peace and security. And there should
         be serious reasons for  considering  that  persons  concerned  bore
         individual responsibility for acts of that character."



28. We take the same approach to paragraph 61 off the FtT's  decision.  The
    observations therein must be read in the context of the decision  as  a
    whole. Significantly, the SSHD did not assert before the  FtT  that  NF
    had completed or attempted terrorist acts, or that his acts had led  to
    specific or attempted  terrorists  acts  by  others.  If  the  FtT  had
    intended to treat the existence of such matters as a  pre-requisite  to
    the application of article 1F(c) there would have been no need  for  it
    to have undertaken such a detailed consideration to  other  aspects  of
    the NF circumstances. It could simply have relied upon the  absence  of
    evidence of a commission or incitement of  a  terrorist  act  as  being
    determinative of the appeal.




29. When the FtT's decision is read as a whole we are  driven  to  conclude
    that it did not reach its conclusion on the basis "that  the  threshold
    in Article 1F was not met on the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  not
    committed or incited acts of terrorism" but rather it applied its  mind
    to the relevant matters identified in Youssef and Al-Sirri and  reached
    a conclusion on the evidence as a whole which was open to it.




30. In any event, if we are wrong in our analysis of the approach taken  by
    the FtT we find that the asserted error in  its  decision  is  not  one
    which is capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.



31. On the basis of the findings of  fact  made  by  the  FtT,  which  were
    largely not in dispute and have not been the subject  of  challenge  by
    either party, we conclude that there was no lawful basis upon which the
    FtT could have found that the SSHD had made out his case under  Article
    1F(c).



32. The activity of NF relied upon by the SSHD must  be  such  that  it  is
    capable of affecting  international  peace  and  security  (Youssef  at
    [83]).  At the hearing we invited  Ms  Bayoumi  to  draw  attention  to
    evidence before the FtT that could support  the  contention  that  NF's
    actions were capable of affecting  international  peace  and  security.
    Unsurprisingly she accepted that there was none. There was no  evidence
    before the FtT that there had been any outwardly-facing  exposition  by
    NF of his beliefs or mindset at any time. There was also no evidence of
    NF inciting or encouraging others to  follows  his  extremist  beliefs;
    indeed, there was no evidence that NF had even discussed his beliefs or
    mindset with anyone other than his wife and the Home  Office  employees
    dealing with his case.



33. Whilst NF was a hoarder of extremist  material  and  he  had  extremist
    thoughts and beliefs, Article 1F(c) is not triggered by an individual's
    potential  to  undertake  activity  which  attacks  the  basis  of  the
    international communities' existence and threatens international  peace
    and security, but by the undertaking  of  an  activity  which  has  the
    potential  to  attack  the  basis  of  the  international  communities'
    existence and  threatens  international  peace  and  security.  On  the
    evidence available to the FtT no rational person could conclude that NF
    had undertaken such an activity.



34. For these reasons we  dismiss  the  SSHD's  appeal  against  the  FtT's
    decision in NF's case.

Decision and Discussion - KKA

35. In his decision letter of 2 November 2015, the SSHD concluded that  KKA
    did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  Article  1A(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention (the inclusionary provision) and, consequently,  was  not  a
    refugee. The FtT concluded  that  KKA  did  meet  the  requirements  of
    Article 1A(2) - a finding which is not the subject of challenge by  the
    SSHD.




36. The SSHD did not assert in her decision letter of the 2  November  2015
    that KKA should  be  excluded  from  the  Refugee  Convention,  as  was
    correctly observed by the FtT at [20] of its  decision,  nor  was  this
    issue pursued by the SSHD before the FtT. Consequently, the FtT allowed
    KKA's appeal on Refugee Convention grounds. No challenge is brought  to
    the FtT's decision that KKA  is  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention.



37. During the course of its decision the FtT made findings in relation  to
    the humanitarian protection ground, in particular  concluding  that  it
    had not been established  that  KKA  fell  to  be  excluded  from  such
    protection  pursuant  to  paragraph  339D  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, nowhere in the FtT's determination can an explicit decision be
    found on the issue of whether the appeal should be allowed or dismissed
    on the humanitarian protection ground. Although  the  FtT  observed  at
    [33] that the appeal would be allowed "if it could  be  said  that  the
    respondent was correct to refuse Refugee Convention protection  on  the
    ground that  there  was  no  risk  of  persecution...for  a  convention
    reason", this is wholly unsatisfactory. The FtT was required  to  state
    definitively whether it allowed or dismissed the appeal and  it  failed
    to do so.



38. The  answer  though  is  clear.  The  appeal  brought  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds must be dismissed as a consequence of the  operation
    of paragraph 339C(ii)  if  the  Immigration  Rules,  i.e.  because  KKA
    qualifies as a refugee.



39. Nevertheless,  despite  it  being  clear  that  KKA's  appeal  must  be
    dismissed, insofar as it is brought on humanitarian grounds,  and  that
    any appeal to the Upper Tribunal in relation to such ground is entirely
    academic as a consequence of the unchallenged decision of  the  FtT  to
    allow KKA's appeal on Refugee Convention grounds,  the  SSHD  persisted
    with appeal.  For the sake of completion, we deal with  the  appeal  as
    pursued.




40. In a decision  promulgated  on  9  November  2016,  the  FtT  made  the
    following findings of fact [28]:




        i) KKA is not a witness of truth;

       ii) KKA knew that NF was storing material of an extremist nature  on
           the computer and that he  had  an  obsessive  interest  in  that
           material;

      iii) KKA shared NF's interest in the extremist material although  her
           interest did not go as deep as NFs;

       iv) KKA has had contact with those persons identified  in  paragraph
           12 above, although it does not follow that KKA was  involved  in
           any criminal activity.




41. The SSHD's challenge to the FtT's decision in KKA's appeal was  brought
    on substantially the same basis as the challenge  to  the  decision  in
    NF's appeal:




        "That the FtT failed to properly apply the test for  exclusion,  and
        wrongly found that there was no basis to exclude the appellant  from
        humanitarian protection given she did not  actually  participate  in
        any criminal acts.  The respondent submits that the IJ strayed  into
        material error when he considered that the threshold  for  exclusion
        was not met on the basis that the appellant had not participated  in
        actual criminal acts.  On the basis of the findings of fact he  made
        at paragraphs 28  and  31  of  the  determination  ...,  the  proper
        application of the relevant tests can only lead to one conclusion  -
        namely that exclusion is justified."



42. As in NF's appeal, permission was subsequently granted for the SSHD  to
    amend his grounds so as to rely on the Court of  Appeal's  decision  in
    Youssef, but the substance of the challenge remained the same.




43. Turning to the reasons provided by the FtT, insofar as they  relate  to
    the application of the exclusionary provisions in paragraph 339D of the
    Rules:



         "[31] I approach the question as to whether the appellant would  be
         excluded from humanitarian protection as though  she  was  excluded
         from refugee status under Article 1F[c], applying the case law  and
         approach to the issues in the decision  I  made  in  her  husband's
         appeal.  It is unnecessary to repeat  all  that  again  here.   The
         parties are referred to the decision I have made in the appellant's
         husband's appeal where  I  found  that  the  respondent  could  not
         exclude the appellant's husband from exclusion under Article 1F(c).
          And I make the same findings in respect of  this  appellant  whose
         culpability, if culpability is the correct word, is less  than  her
         husbands ... This requires an individualised consideration  of  the
         facts of the case, which will include an assessment of the person's
         involvement in the cat concerned, his/her mental state and possible
         grounds for rejecting individual responsibility. ...there be a high
         threshold "defined in terms of the gravity of the act in  question,
         the manner in which the act is organised, its international  impact
         and long-term objectives, and the  implications  for  international
         peace and security". ...The  acts  that  this  appellant  has  been
         engaged in amount to  the  tacit  acceptance  or  approval  of  her
         husband's obsessive interest in extremist materials and the storage
         of that material on electronic devices which they shared.  She  has
         been in contact with known extremists: but her contact  with  these
         people without more does not establish any act to fall within these
         definitions.  Neither  does  the  tacit  approval  of  her  husband
         storing materials of this kind on  electronic  devices  which  they
         shared, neither does approving of and supporting Islamic  terrorism
         without actual participation in criminal acts.  It follows, to take
         matters  shortly,  that  the  respondent's  evidence  against  this
         appellant fails to meet this high threshold also, the threshold  in
         paragraph 339D."



44. Whilst we accept that the FtT could have expressed  itself  in  clearer
    terms, we conclude that when read as a whole the FtT's reasoning cannot
    bear the interpretation Ms Bayoumi seeks to  place  upon  it.  The  FtT
    lawfully directed itself to the  appropriate  consideration,  and  then
    considered the facts of the case in accordance with its direction.

45. In any event, for the same reasons we identified  in  our  decision  in
    NF's case, on the unchallenged findings of fact made by  the  FtT,  KKA
    has not undertaken any activity which is capable  of  engaging  Article
    1F(c) i.e. which attacks the basis of  the  international  communities'
    existence and threatens international peace and security.




46. For these reasons we  dismiss  the  SSHD's  appeal  against  the  FtT's
    decision in KKA's case.



Notice of Decision



The SSHD's appeals are dismissed. The decisions of the FtT are to stand.





Signed:

Mark O'Connor

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor





