

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02484/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 6 July 2017                         |on 17 July 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Haddow, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He sought asylum because  although
    heterosexual, he had been involved in  a  homosexual  encounter,  which
    became known to the Ettela'at.

 2. The respondent declined to accept his claim, for reasons explained in a
    letter dated 25 February 2016.

 3. The appellant appealed to the FtT, in course of which  he  additionally
    claimed that he had converted in the UK to Christianity.

 4. FtT Judge Blair rejected both claims,  and  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal, for  reasons  explained  in  his  decision  promulgated  on  20
    December 2016.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT, on grounds set out
    in an attachment to his application dated 30 December 2016.  FtT  Judge
    Pedro refused permission on 28 March 2017, on the view that the grounds
    were only disagreement.

 6. Permission was sought from the UT,  on  the  same  grounds.   UT  Judge
    Rintoul  granted  permission  on  9  May   2017,   although   observing
    (accurately) that the grounds were "of  wholly  unnecessary  prolixity,
    being comfortably longer that the decision of Judge Blair".

 7. Mr Haddow (who was not the author of the  grounds)  helpfully  provided
    outline submissions at sensible length, framed by reference  to  the  3
    grounds but in reverse order.  He expanded upon  them  orally,  clearly
    and in detail, by reference to a meticulously prepared  bundle  of  the
    relevant materials.

 8. Mr Mathews followed the same order.  He maintained  that  some  of  the
    submissions were not open to the appellant in terms of the  grounds  on
    which permission had been granted, and were  not  points  which  should
    "obviously" be  admitted;  Mr  Haddow  argued  that  some  issues  were
    "Robinson" obvious, and others  were  permissible  expansion  upon  the
    grounds.

 9. I deal with the grounds in the order used at the hearing.

10. Ground 1 is  that  the  FtT  erred  in  its  approach  to  the  claimed
    conversion:

    (1) by failing to give very  significant  weight  to  the  opinions  of
    witnesses in positions of  religious  leadership,  as  required  by  SA
    (Iran) EWHC 2575 at [24] and Dorodian 01/TH/01537 at [8];

    (2) the need for a compelling reason to determine the case  other  than
    by considering whether  the  appellant  is  an  active  participant  at
    church, SA at [24]; and

    (3) there must be a real risk that professing Christianity and behaving
    as a Christian may be taken in Iran as evidence of apostasy, SA at [24]
    and Dorodian at [8].

11. The authorities relied upon do not vouch  the  propositions  which  the
    appellant sought to derive from them.

12. SA is a decision of a Deputy Judge of the High Court, and  not  binding
    on the FtT or on the UT.  The passage relied upon is obiter.  It  is  a
    passing statement (although a very strong one)  of  the  difficulty  of
    examining the  genuineness  of  a  claimed  religious  conversion.   It
    establishes no principle of general application to Christian conversion
    cases.

13. Dorodian is a decision of the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  from  2001.
    It is available for reference, but is not an authority the FtT  or  the
    UT is bound to follow.  It says that no-one should  be  regarded  as  a
    committed Christian unless vouched for by a minister of a  church.   It
    does not say that an appellant vouched for  by  a  minister  should  be
    found to be genuine. That always remains a question for  the  judge  to
    answer on all the evidence.

14. No case was put to the FtT that the appellant's conversion, even if not
    genuine, might place him at risk in Iran as an apostate.

15. Any such case would face a series of formidable hurdles.

16. The respondent in her decision did not accept that the  appellant  left
    Iran illegally.  The appellant did not try to set up  in  the  FtT  any
    case that he might be detected as a returning failed asylum seeker,  or
    that he might be questioned about his activities in the UK.   There  is
    no reason to think that he cannot, if he chooses,  return  on  his  own
    passport  without  attracting  attention.   Even  if  he  were  to   be
    questioned, there is no reason to infer that he would in fact answer by
    confessing to a falsely manufactured claim.  There was  nothing  before
    the FtT by which it might sensibly  have  found  that  the  appellant's
    involvement in Christianity in the UK might come to  attention  of  the
    authorities in Iran.   In  this  branch  of  the  case,  I  uphold  the
    submission by Mr Matthews that the line of argument was not put in  the
    FtT, does not arise from the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  is  not
    obvious, does not have strong prospects of success, and should  not  be
    admitted; but in any event, I find it of no merit.

17. Ground 2 is error in the judge's analysis of claimed events in Iran:

      (1) by finding  at  [34]  inconsistency  over  whether  the  appellant
      attended one or two parties  in  Iran,  where  no  such  inconsistency
      existed;

      (2) by finding at [35] inconsistency between the  appellant's  account
      of his homosexual relationship or encounter as the appellant narrated,
      and as told to a witness from the  church,  when  no  such  conclusion
      could reasonably be drawn from the evidence; and

      (3) by  finding  at  [29]  implausibility  and  improbability  in  the
      appellant's account about not leaving the  party,  and  not  rejecting
      unwelcome sexual advances, where there was none.

18. Despite Mr Haddow's careful probing of the evidence, I am not satisfied
    that these points disclose factual error.  Mr Matthews demonstrated  by
    reference to different passages in  the  various  statements  that  the
    appellant's evidence was not entirely reconcilable over the  number  of
    parties he attended.  The account given by  the  appellant  did  differ
    from what the witness said he understood from the appellant.   Some  of
    the discrepancies were rather minute, and  some  arose  through  second
    hand accounts; their significance was obviously  debatable,  but  their
    resolution was the function of the FtT.  The judge gave these issues no
    more significance than he was entitled to  do,  and  there  were  other
    reasons for his  decision.   This  ground  resolves  into  disagreement
    rather than into error of law.

19. Ground 3 maintains that the judge assessed the conversion claim by  way
    of pre-judgment, based on prior assessment of events in Iran,  and  not
    in the round.

20. One of the points made under this heading was that there was no  reason
    why it would avail the appellant to keep a claim in reserve,  and  that
    if false it might have  been  more  likely  to  be  raised  earlier,  a
    possibility the judge  failed  to  consider.   However,  I  prefer  the
    submission for the respondent that it was  entirely  rational  for  the
    judge to conclude as he did at [55] - [56] that this  was  deliberately
    kept in reserve as a "plan B" and that if  genuine  this  is  a  matter
    which would naturally  have  emerged  in  response  to  questioning  at
    interview.

21. A fair reading of the decision does not bear out that  the  credibility
    of the conversion claim was decided only by the  prior  assessment  and
    not by the evidence  supporting  it.   The  judge  states  his  overall
    conclusion at the outset of his decision at [2], a matter criticised in
    the original grounds but (rightly) not adopted by Mr Haddow.   He  says
    at [38] that evidence from the church witnesses is entitled to respect,
    but like any evidence is to be  weighed  in  the  round.   He  makes  a
    reasoned assessment of the evidence from the church  at  [42]  -  [51].
    Although he finds the evidence generic  rather  than  specific  to  the
    appellant (a properly  explained  view)  he  does  not  find  that  the
    witnesses are not genuine, rather that the appellant has misled them  -
    [60].  The appellant has not identified anything  in  the  decision  to
    show that the judge failed to consider the evidence in the round, as he
    directed himself to do, or that he pre-judged, based on the failure  of
    the original claim.  He gave his findings thereon no more  weight  than
    was within his rational scope.  This ground resolves into no more  than
    another heading for disagreement with  a  factual  conclusion  properly
    reached.

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

23. An anonymity direction was  made  in  the  FtT.   The  matter  was  not
    addressed in the UT, so anonymity has been preserved in this decision.


            [pic]


            7 July 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




