
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02664/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 December 2017                           |On 22 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    [a y]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 29  October  2016  the  respondent  made  a  decision  refusing  the
    appellant's claim for protection under the Refugee Convention  and  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  The appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Cameroon, born on 15 April 1982.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Agnew on 20 January 2017.   In  a
    determination dated 3 February 2017 the appeal was dismissed.

3.   Challenge is made to the decision on the basis that the  appellant  was
    a vulnerable appellant, that the Judge  failed  to  treat  her  or  her
    evidence in that capacity and failed to abide by the Joint Presidential
    Guidance Note (No. 20) of 2010, Child, vulnerable adult  and  sensitive
    appellant guidance applies to the hearing.  Further guidance  has  been
    given recently by the Court of Appeal.

4.   Permission was granted to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the
    decision on the basis that it was indeed arguable that the Judge failed
    to make any clear assessment of the  claim  that  the  appellant  is  a
    vulnerable witness.

5.   Thus the matter comes before me to determine that issue.

6.   The appellant  attended,  unrepresented,  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter.  Given that the very basis of her appeal is that she is  a
    vulnerable person I was concerned  that  she  should  be  put  in  this
    difficult situation of representing herself when  previously  she  felt
    unable even to give evidence on her own behalf.

7.   It was apparent from my questions to her that she  was  unclear  as  to
    what was to happen.  Indeed, even  through  the  good  offices  of  the
    interpreter, it was often  difficult  to  communicate  with  her.   She
    indicated that she had been in contact with the British Red  Cross  for
    assistance but they  could  not  help  her.   The  solicitors  who  had
    previously  acted  for  her  were  not  acting  for  her  anymore.    I
    temporarily adjourned the hearing in order  to  make  enquiries  as  to
    whether there would be any representation for her at a later stage.  My
    clerk contacted the British Red Cross caseworker who indicated that the
    extent of their assistance had been to request the Tribunal to  provide
    an interpreter.  The  former  representatives  of  the  appellant,  the
    Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit were contacted.  They had  come
    off the record in August 2017 and were no longer  acting  for  her.   A
    list of solicitors who may be willing to act pro bono was  provided  to
    the appellant.

8.   I indicated to her that I was willing to adjourn the matter for her  to
    seek further assistance.  She indicated that she did  not  want  to  do
    that but wanted matters concluded.

9.   In the light  of  the  detailed  grounds  of  challenge  I  invited  Mr
    McVeety, on behalf of the respondent, to make his response.   This  was
    all translated to the appellant who  indicated  that  she  had  nothing
    further to say.  It is indeed unfortunate that a person  considered  to
    be vulnerable should be left without further support.

10.  The background to her case is set out in detail  in  the  determination
    and I do not repeat it here.  It was her case  that  she  was  sexually
    abused by her aunt whilst living with her, leading to the accusation in
    2002 that she was a lesbian.  Her uncle discovered herself and her aunt
    in bed with one another, engaging in  sexual  activity  in  2002.   The
    appellant was banished from the family.   She  and  her  aunt  remained
    together until 2009.  In 2010 the  appellant  met  [J]  in  Douala  and
    commenced a sexual relationship with her.

11.  In 2014 the appellant was taken with other  girls,  including  [J],  to
    the police station where she was raped as was  [J].   She  was  further
    raped by boys around her home the same year.  She came with [J] to  the
    United Kingdom.

12.  A matter of note is that the appellant  attended  the  hearing  with  a
    small child but there is little reference in interview,  or  indeed  at
    the hearing, to her having been pregnant or having  given  birth  to  a
    child.

13.  The first difficulty which presented  itself  at  the  hearing  in  the
    First tier Tribunal was that the appellant's representatives  indicated
    that she was not able to give any evidence on her own behalf and  would
    be relying upon the asylum interview and any statements that  had  been
    prepared.  Thus, it was unnecessary for  the  Judge  to  consider  what
    safeguards should be put in place  to  enable  the  appellant  to  give
    evidence.  It is noteworthy, however as indeed  Mr  McVeety  indicates,
    that the Judge does not  hold  the  absence  of  the  appellant  giving
    evidence against her and proceeds, in a very  detailed  and  systematic
    way, to analyse the evidence that is presented and to draw  conclusions
    from it.

14.  It is contended that the Judge followed procedures  that  were  unfair.
    The Judge found a number of inconsistencies and implausibilities in the
    evidence which were not raised by the respondent at  the  hearing.   It
    was said that these purported  inconsistencies  were  not  put  to  the
    appellant's legal representatives.  The difficulty with that nature  of
    argument is the practicality of a Judge having to consider the evidence
    that has been presented and weighing it up.  It is to be noted that the
    decision of the respondent dated 29 October 2015 is a detailed one  and
    highlights a number of inconsistencies in the  evidence  as  presented.
    Such are set out at paragraphs 39 to 55 of the decision.  The Judge has
    conducted a careful analysis of what evidence was given  at  what  time
    and has come to particular findings in relation to it.  I  see  nothing
    unfair as to that approach.  The correct burden and standard  of  proof
    is set out  in  the  determination  at  paragraph  13.   The  Judge  is
    comparing what was said by the appellant in interview with what is said
    in her statement and relating that to any of the documentation that has
    been presented.

15.  In terms of credibility, it was noted that  the  appellant  claimed  to
    have undergone the second attack of rape in June 2014 but did not leave
    until May 2015.  In terms of the applications which  were  made  for  a
    visa, it was noted that the appellant conceded that  false  information
    had been given to obtain them.  In the application it was claimed  that
    the appellant had married Mr [N] and that they lived in  Waounde.   The
    appellant now claims that the detail of evidence as lodged  was  false.
    The respondent did not believe the change of claim and considered  that
    she was indeed married to Mr [N] but had sought to claim that she was a
    lesbian in order to formulate a claim for asylum.  The  Judge  came  to
    the conclusion that there were grave concerns  as  to  the  appellant's
    credibility.   It  was  difficult  to  understand  how  any   potential
    vulnerability  of  the  appellant  would  undermine   that   particular
    conclusion.

16.  It is said that the vulnerability of the appellant arises not  only  by
    her claimed experiences at the hands of the authorities, but  also  the
    medical evidence as to her mental and physical state which was provided
    through the report of Dr Bonnet dated 29 September  2016.   The  doctor
    noted scarring in the vaginal area and found it to be  consistent  with
    the appellant's account of ill-treatment.  There were more marks on the
    appellant's body than would be normal for a woman of her  apparent  age
    and background history.  Although the appellant claimed to have  had  a
    "torn vagina", that was not in  the  event  examined.   The  Judge  has
    devoted considerable time to the evidence of Dr Bonnet, as can be  seen
    from paragraphs 15 to 21 of the determination, in particular.

17.  The Judge did note, however, that  certain  accounts  as  given  to  Dr
    Bonnet differed from accounts made  elsewhere.   For  example,  it  was
    reported by Dr Bonnet that the appellant, when speaking of her rape  at
    the hands of the authorities, recounted that her  clothes  were  ripped
    off her whereas in interview she indicated that they had removed  their
    clothes in case matters became worse.  The Judge was also concerned  as
    to the way in which the ill-treatment had been described, as can be set
    out in paragraphs 22 to 24 of the determination.  The Judge set out  in
    paragraphs 25 onwards of the determination a number of concerns  as  to
    inconsistencies or implausibilities, discrepancies in evidence  between
    the interview and the medical report or between the interview  and  the
    appellant's other statements.

18.  There were a number of matters which the Judge  indicated  were  raised
    by  the  respondent  in  the  decision  that  had  not  been  addressed
    satisfactorily by the appellant.

19.  The suggestion, which seems to be made in the grounds,  is  that  there
    should  have  been  greater  allowance  made  by  the  Judge  for  such
    discrepancies in the light of the mental state of  the  appellant.   In
    that connection I note at paragraph 84 the Judge states in terms:

         "I have carefully considered the comments and opinion of Dr  Bonnet
         in her report.  I have borne in mind the effect trauma can have  on
         memory.  However, on considering all the evidence in the round, for
         the reasons set out above  and  whilst  bearing  in  mind  the  low
         standard of proof, the cumulative  effect  of  the  issues  in  the
         evidence which I have raised are such that in my view  no  credence
         can be given to the appellant's account.  The appellant has  failed
         to establish that firstly the events she purported to describe did,
         in fact, occur in  Cameroon  and  secondly,  that  she  is  or  was
         perceived to be a lesbian."

20.  It seems to me that the Judge has properly borne in mind the  potential
    vulnerability of the appellant and has discounted credibility  for  the
    very clear reasons set out in the determination.  Just because  someone
    may be vulnerable does not necessarily mean  that  evidence  should  be
    considered as credible.  Allowance clearly must be made for issues such
    as memory, embarrassment, difficulty in expression but  none  of  those
    matters would seem to rise in this case, given that the appellant  gave
    no evidence other than in the statements and interview.   It  is  clear
    from the reasoning of the Judge that  poor  memory  and  lack  of  past
    recall is not of itself an answer to the discrepancies as identified in
    this case.

21.  The appellant clearly admitted deliberately using deception to come  to
    the United Kingdom.  The Judge simply did not believe the account which
    was given for the reasons as set out.

22.   In  the  circumstances,  although  the  appellant  may  be  a   person
    considered to be vulnerable within the guidelines, I find no procedural
    unfairness in the determination of her claim or any lack of recognition
    of that vulnerability in the assessment of the claim.

23.  In all the circumstances  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

24.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand,  namely  that  the
      appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds;  humanitarian
      protection grounds; under the Immigration  Rules  and  in  respect  of
      human rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 19 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

