

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      PA/02741/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 8th August 2017                    |On: 22nd August 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     HQ
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Moffatt, Counsel instructed by the Legal Rights
                       Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a female national  of  Pakistan  born  in  1975.   She
    appeals with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Herwald) to dismiss her appeal on protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.








    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim  for  international  protection  involving
    allegations of sexual abuse.  Having had  regard  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    The Appeal Before the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The Appellant claimed asylum on the 10th October 2015.  At  that  point
    she had been living in the UK as an overstayer since 2003.   The  basis
    of her claim was that  she  had  been  subjected  to  serious  domestic
    violence - including attempted rape - at the hands of  her  brother,  a
    violent drug addict. She had come to the UK to stay with her uncle  and
    aunt and in order to escape from him. She would be unable to return  to
    her former home in Pakistan because her brother  continues  to  exhibit
    violent hostility towards her (and indeed other women  in  the  family)
    and there is now a land dispute going on. Because she is a single woman
    she would not be able  to  safely  relocate  within  the  country.  The
    Appellant relied on her relationships and private life  in  the  UK  to
    also make a human rights claim on Article 8 grounds.


 4. Her claim was rejected on the 1st March 2016.   The Respondent did  not
    accept the historical account, or that  there  was  any  current  risk.
    She further found there to be a sufficiency of protection  provided  by
    the Pakistani state and submitted that the claim was  defeated  by  the
    internal flight alternative available to the Appellant.

 5. The Appellant appealed and on the 8th September 2016 she  was  notified
    that her hearing was due to take place  on  the  20th  September  2016.
    Directions were made that any evidence that she  wished  to  rely  upon
    should be filed and served no later than 5 working days  prior  to  the
    hearing  date.    On  the   15th   September   2016   the   Appellant's
    representatives made an application for an adjournment.  The  basis  of
    that request was that medical evidence had been sought  but  there  had
    been a delay in the doctor  finishing  her  report.  It  would  not  be
    available until after the hearing date. The  request  was  granted  and
    fresh notices of hearing sent out, giving a new date, the 16th  January
    2017. The old directions continued  to  apply,  those  being  that  any
    evidence was to be submitted 5 days prior to hearing.

 6. The 16th January 2017 was a Monday. On  the  preceding  Wednesday,  the
    11th January,  the  Appellant's  solicitors  posted  a  bundle  to  the
    Tribunal. It arrived - at least it is stamped  as  received  -  on  the
    morning of Friday 13th. On the afternoon of Friday the 13th January the
    Appellant's representatives faxed a further document to  the  Tribunal.
    This  was  a  report  prepared  by  Sarah  Heke,  Consultant   Clinical
    Psychologist. The report is dated the 8th January 2017 but I note  that
    an automatic entry on the final page shows that it was completed on the
    9th. The covering letter  from  the  Legal  Rights  Partnership  simply
    states that the report is enclosed. No explanation is offered  for  its
    lateness, nor application made for it to be admitted into the evidence.

 7. When the matter was called on before Judge  Herwald,  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer (HOPO) Mr Barrow informed the Tribunal that  he  had
    not had sight of the bundle or the  psychologists  report  before  10am
    that morning. He objected to their admission. He said that he would not
    be able to consider  them  fully  and  properly  unless  there  was  an
    adjournment. Ms Moffatt for the Appellant  accepted  that  neither  the
    bundle, nor the report  of  Dr  Heke,  had  been  filed  or  served  in
    compliance with directions.   She apologised for the late  delivery  of
    the documents and explained that this was  because  the  solicitor  had
    been waiting for the report from Dr Heke. This had delayed the  service
    of the bundle but on Wednesday, when the report had still not  arrived,
    they had sent the bundle anyway.  The report was faxed as  soon  as  it
    was available. She asked that  the  documents  be  admitted,  stressing
    their importance to the Appellant's case, and invited the  Tribunal  to
    accommodate Mr Barrow by adjourning  the  appeal  or  alternatively  by
    putting the matter back in the list so that he might have time to fully
    prepare the case.

 8. The Tribunal refused to adjourn. The HOPO was given time  to  read  the
    witness statements, but the remaining evidence, including the report of
    Dr Heke, was excluded.  The hearing proceeded and the Tribunal reserved
    its decision.

 9. On the 20th January 2017 the  Appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  Judge
    Herwald imploring him to relist the appeal so that the totality of  the
    evidence could be considered. The letter explained  that  Dr  Heke  had
    been unwell and enclosed emails showing that the firm had been  chasing
    her for the completed report.

10. The  determination  is  dated  the  24th  January  2017.  The  Tribunal
    acknowledges the difficulties that arose in respect of the late service
    at paragraph 2(d) of the determination:


         "Ms Moffatt did not appear to have been aware  that  the  case  had
         been adjourned, at the request of those instructing  her,  back  in
         September 2016. The Appellant's solicitors had written to the court
         to explain that they had instructed a psychologist on  26th  August
         2016 to prepare a report, to be available by  15th  September.  But
         the report had not been received by them. They  requested  a  short
         adjournment, to allow the report to be finalised. And that  led  to
         the adjourned hearing today. It was therefore difficult  to  accept
         why those instructing Ms Moffatt had left  it  right  to  the  last
         minute  before  securing  the  psychological  report,  and   before
         submitting it to the court. I was satisfied that the  bundle  could
         have been submitted timeously, and if necessary, the  psychological
         report could have followed. I  allowed  Ms  Moffatt  time  to  take
         instructions, noting that if the matter had to be adjourned  today,
         that would mean a very lengthy delay, which would  not  be  in  the
         interests of justice, and would not be in the  emotional  interests
         of the Appellant, probably. Having heard further  submissions  from
         Mr Barrow, I resolved not to admit the full bundle, as  this  would
         effectively  mean  that  he  would  have  been  ambushed   by   the
         Appellant's  representatives.  Instead,  I  agreed  to  admit  only
         witness statements of the Appellant, and her witness, consisting of
         only 27 pages, which it would be possible for Mr Barrow to read and
         consider before the hearing. I considered this a  fair  balance  of
         the Appellant's rights to a fair trial, to the Respondent's  rights
         to be able to  reply  to  assertions  by  the  Appellant,  and  was
         satisfied that accorded with the  Tribunal's  overriding  objective
         and that this would not prevent the just disposal of the appeal".


11. The First-tier Tribunal went on to dismiss the appeal. The  Appellant's
    evidence about why she had not sought protection at an earlier juncture
    is rejected as "verging on the fanciful", and her  claim  to  fear  her
    brother is (apparently) rejected on the grounds that  she  returned  to
    Pakistan on two occasions having visited the UK in 2000 and  2001.  The
    appeal is dismissed on the grounds that there would be a sufficiency of
    protection for the Appellant in Pakistan,  and  that  she  could  avail
    herself of an internal flight alternative in that huge country.






    The Challenge


12. The grounds of appeal focus on the  First-tier  Tribunal's  refusal  to
    adjourn the appeal. I intend no disrespect to Ms Moffatt's  grounds  in
    recording that they are well summarised by First-tier Tribunal Keane in
    granting permission:


         "the consequence of the Judge's exercise of discretion was to  deny
         the appellant a right  to  rely  on  cogent  evidence  which  might
         materially have borne  on  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  namely  a
         psychological report which diagnosed  the  appellant  as  suffering
         from the  psychiatric  condition  known  as  post-traumatic  stress
         disorder, declarations from her mother in sister which corroborates
         her version of  events,  documentary  evidence  corroborating  many
         aspects  of  her  account  and  background  evidence.  the  judge's
         exercise of discretion deprived the appellant of the right to  rely
         on all such evidence. The judge's decision to  refuse  the  request
         for an adjournment was arguably unfair and  arguably  deprived  the
         appellant of a fair hearing".








    Discussion and Findings


13. What was the evidence that the First-tier Tribunal  refused  to  admit?
    The first tranche ran from page 28 to 242 of the Appellant's bundle. It
    is little wonder that Mr Barrow felt unable to deal  with  it  'on  the
    hoof'.  Of the 47 items excluded, 39 were documents that went  directly
    to the Appellant's case (in addition to 8 country background  reports).
    These documents were  capable  of  verifying  several  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's evidence: there was for instance an  invoice  from  a  drug
    rehabilitation unit relating to the  man  identified  as  her  brother,
    sworn statements from members of the Appellant's family which  describe
    her brother as "evil", an attested statement from an  advocate  of  the
    High Court who personally knows the family and has had long involvement
    in the case,  court documents relating to  the  alleged  land  dispute,
    photographs of scars and an invoice from an immigration law advisor  in
    Blackburn, adduced to demonstrate that the Appellant had earlier sought
    advice as claimed.   The psychologist report was  prepared  in  January
    2017, the doctor having first seen the Appellant in September 2016.  In
    headline summary,  Dr Heke diagnosed the Appellant with  Post-Traumatic
    Stress Syndrome and depression, opined that return  to  Pakistan  would
    have a highly detrimental impact on her emotional well-being and mental
    health, found her poor mental health to have a negative impact  on  her
    social functioning, and found that  forced  return  to  Pakistan  would
    increase her risk of suicide, albeit  that  this  was  a  low  risk  at
    present.

14. It is Ms Moffatt's case that  these  documents  were  of  such  obvious
    relevance to the Appellant's case that fairness plainly required  their
    admission.   She points out that under the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
    tier  Tribunal)(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)   Rules   2014   the
    discretion is a wide one. The Tribunal  may  take  such  action  as  it
    considers just. The delay in lodging was admitted, and  regretted,  but
    an explanation had been offered. There had been a  delay  in  September
    because the psychologist had been out of the country;  approaching  the
    January hearing she had been unwell. Email correspondence  between  the
    solicitors and the psychologist in respect of both  hearings  had  been
    produced.  She submitted that the Tribunal  does  not  appear,  in  its
    exercise of discretion (reflected in the reasoning at paragraph  2(d)),
    to have considered the potential  relevance  of  any  of  the  excluded
    documents, nor to the diligence with which those  instructing  her  had
    pursued the report from Dr Heke. The finding that an adjournment  would
    "probably" have  been  contrary  to  the  emotional  interests  of  the
    Appellant was speculative; the Tribunal did not appear  to  investigate
    whether an adjournment would in fact have resulted in a  "very  lengthy
    delay". Finally, and most importantly, the Tribunal does not appear  to
    have given any weight to the  most  obvious  point:  that  it  was  the
    Appellant,  entirely  innocent  of   wrongdoing,   who   suffered   the
    consequences of his decision.

15. In her grounds Ms Moffatt relies on the decision in  AK  (Admission  of
    Evidence - Time limits)  Iran  [2004]  UKIAT  00103.  Therein  a  Vice-
    Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal considered  a  case  where  an
    immigration adjudicator had refused to admit a late bundle of  evidence
    in an asylum case, in the context  of  the  then  applicable  procedure
    rules:


         12. However, the understandable desire on the part of  adjudicators
         and this Tribunal to enforce due compliance  with  such  directions
         and provisions must be balanced against the  competing  requirement
         to ensure that justice is done in a jurisdiction in  which  appeals
         routinely require the "most anxious scrutiny",  and  in  which  the
         issues at stake  frequently  involve  matters  of  life,  limb  and
         liberty.  There is an inevitable tension between those  conflicting
         interests.

         13. Whilst there may be individual cases in which it would be right
         for an adjudicator to exclude material,  or  potentially  material,
         evidence on which party (normally the appellant) wishes to rely  by
         reason of the failure by that party to file or serve  the  evidence
         in time, nevertheless as a general principle,  the  requirement  to
         ensure that justice is done in appeals requiring the  most  anxious
         scrutiny will in most cases outweigh the understandable  desire  on
         the part of the Immigration Appellate Authority to ensure that  its
         directions and the  provisions  of  the  Procedure  Rules  are  not
         flouted with impunity.

         14. In the  present  instance,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  late
         evidence  which  the  appellant  sought  to   adduce   before   the
         adjudicator, and which the adjudicator refused to consider  because
         it had not been filed in time, was prima  facie  material  evidence
         which, if it had been considered by him, might (we put it no higher
         than that) have resulted in the adjudicator arriving at a different
         conclusion in  relation  to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
         evidence.  In the  circumstances,  his  decision  to  exclude  that
         evidence from consideration was one which  he  ought  not  to  have
         taken.



16. See to similar affect MD (Pakistan) [2004] UKIAT 00197 at paragraph 15.
     More recently the President of this Tribunal,  Mr  Justice  McCloskey,
    has given  guidance  on  the  approach  to  be  taken  in  cases  where
    adjournment refusals,  made under  the  current  procedure  rules,  are
    reviewed on appeal.  In the decision in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) he stressed that the standard of review is  not
    one of reasonableness (ie whether it was a decision rationally open  to
    the Tribunal) but rather one of fairness. If it  could  be  established
    that there was any deprivation of a party's right to  a  fair  hearing,
    the decision must be set aside:

         If a Tribunal refuses to accede to  an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.



17. The  President  stressed  that  where  confronted  with  the  competing
    interests of expediency and  fairness,  it  is  the  latter  that  must
    prevail:


         "As a general rule, good reason will have  to  be  demonstrated  in
         order to secure an adjournment. There are strong practical and case
         management reasons  for  this,  particularly  in  the  contemporary
         litigation culture with its emphasis on efficiency and  expedition.
         However, these considerations, unquestionably important though they
         are, must be tempered and  applied  with  the  recognition  that  a
         fundamental common law right, namely the right of every litigant to
         a fair hearing, is engaged.   In  any  case  where  a  question  of
         possible adjournment arises, this is the dominant consideration".




18. Examples of the President putting his own guidance into practice can be
    seen in Shabir Ahmed and others (sanctions for non - compliance) [2016]
    UKUT 00562 (IAC) and VA (Solicitor's non-compliance: counsel's  duties)
    Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT 00012 (IAC), both cases in which the  common  law
    right of the litigant to a fair hearing satisfied the Tribunal that  an
    adjournment of proceedings  was  necessary,  notwithstanding  egregious
    breaches of the procedure rules by that  litigant's  lawyers.  See  for
    instance the following passage in VA:

         "The Tribunal was blackmailed  in  this  case  by  the  Appellant's
         representatives on a previous date, 14 July 2016. The order of that
         date is attached. This is aptly described as  "blackmail",  in  the
         figurative sense, because while the Tribunal could have refused  to
         adjourn the hearing and insisted upon proceeding, this was in truth
         a theoretical possibility only given the virtual inevitability that
         any  constitution  of  the  Tribunal  would  have  given  paramount
         importance to the Appellant's right to a fair  hearing  -  in  this
         discrete context, a professionally prepared and properly  presented
         hearing".


13. I am satisfied that in this case, the material that was  excluded  from
    consideration was obviously pertinent to  the  Appellant's  case.  That
    this is so is demonstrated by the Tribunal's own findings. The Tribunal
    rejected as "fanciful" the Appellant's claim  to  have  earlier  sought
    advice about her position in the UK; the bundle  contained  documentary
    evidence confirming the same. The Tribunal found that as a woman on her
    own the Appellant could reasonably be expected to live  somewhere  away
    from her family in Pakistan; the  bundle  contained  objective  country
    material to the contrary, and Dr Heke gave  several  reasons  why  this
    would be extremely difficult for her. The  Tribunal  -  although  clear
    findings are not made  - appeared to  doubt  the  entire  account;  the
    bundle contained numerous statements and items of documentary  evidence
    which arguably corroborated the Appellant's case.


14. I entirely agree with Mr Harrison that the HOPO on the day  was  in  an
    extremely difficult position. There was realistically no way  that  the
    Respondent could have fairly prosecuted  her  case  without  Mr  Barrow
    having at least a few hours to prepare and assess the materials he  was
    presented with at 10.00am  that  day.   The  most  obvious,  and  fair,
    solution would have been to adjourn. The  Tribunal  was  understandably
    reluctant to do so for the reasons that it sets out at  paragraph  2(d)
    of its determination,  but  the  paramount  consideration  was  one  of
    fairness.   I cannot be satisfied that this was the approach  taken  by
    the Tribunal, nor one reflected in the resulting determination.

15. I need say no more about the matter  since  before  me  the  Respondent
    agreed that there was a procedural unfairness in  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal and invited me to remit the matter for hearing  de  novo  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.














    Decisions


16. For the reasons set out above I am satisfied that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is flawed for a material  error  in  approach.  The
    decision is set aside.


17. The decision is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal

18. There is an order for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            22nd August 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 22nd May 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Keane


