
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02418/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st June 2019                    |On 12th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                                     m E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bhatti, Solicitor, Solomon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence promulgated on 25th April 2019  following
    a hearing at Hatton Cross on 11th April 2019.  At  the  appeal  hearing
    before me today the Appellant has been  represented  by  Ms  Bhatti,  a
    solicitor, from Solomon Solicitors, and the Secretary of State has been
    represented by Mr Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

 2. The Appellant seeks  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lawrence in which he dismissed the  Appellant's  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights claims.

 3. Permission to appeal in  this  case  had  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 30th May 2019.   In  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal there are nine Grounds of Appeal and Judge  Grant-Hutchison  did
    not specifically limit the Grounds of Appeal in her grant of permission
    so it is necessary for me now to go through each and every  ground.   I
    am grateful to the submissions made by the advocates  in  clarification
    and expansion upon the Grounds of Appeal and to  understand  fully  the
    response from the Secretary of State in the Rule 24 reply.

 4. The Appellant is entitled to anonymity. It is an asylum  claim  and  in
    the specific circumstances of this case it is appropriate for there  to
    be an anonymity direction  made  such  that  I  do  make  an  anonymity
    direction. No record or transcript of these  proceedings  may  identify
    the Appellant or any member of her family either directly or indirectly
    and failure to comply with this direction may lead to contempt of court
    proceedings. This direction applies  to  both  the  Appellant  and  the
    Respondent.

 5. It is the Appellant's case that she is a national  of  Sudan  who  took
    part, she says, in  various  political  activities  in  Sudan  and  was
    persecuted  by  the  Sudanese  authorities  because  of  her  political
    activities.  She says that her political activities  continued  outside
    of Sudan, both in Egypt and also in  the  UK.   Her  case  is  that  if
    returned  to  Sudan  she  fears  being  persecuted  by   the   Sudanese
    authorities because of her political activities in Sudan, Egypt and the
    UK.  It is said that at the First-tier Tribunal hearing for  the  first
    time, the Appellant disclosed to her legal representatives that  whilst
    she had been detained by the Sudanese authorities, she had been  raped.



 6. In Ground 1 of the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that at paragraph  15
    of the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge although  it  was
    said the judge stated that he had not attached too much weight  on  the
    failure of the Appellant to know the address of the JEM headquarters in
    Sudan,  he  had  failed  to  consider  that  there  was   no   official
    headquarters given that it  was  a  banned  organisation.   Looking  at
    paragraph 15 of  the  decision  what  the  judge  stated  was  that  in
    interview the Appellant had been asked  for  the  address  of  the  JEM
    headquarters.  The Appellant, he records as stating that  she  did  not
    know the address  because  she  was  only  involved  in  Hasahesa  (her
    neighbourhood). In her first witness statement the Appellant said  that
    she  completed  a  registration  form.   She  was  not  issued  with  a
    membership card as it had to be a secret and in light of the  fact  she
    actually claimed to complete a registration form the judge  found  that
    her lack of knowledge of the address of JEM's headquarters incongruous.
     The judge stated particularly "I am prepared not to  attach  too  much
    weight to her failure to demonstrate  knowledge  on  this  point".   Ms
    Bhatti argues that he has attached some weight to it, but there  is  no
    official headquarters because it is a  banned  organisation.   However,
    the judge had noted the Appellant  had  been  asked  in  interview  the
    address of the JEM headquarters and rather than saying that because  it
    was a banned organisation, there was no official headquarters, what she
    said was that she did not know the address because she is  in  involved
    in Hasahesa, her neighbourhood.  The judge I find  on  that  basis  was
    entitled to find that her  answers  were  incongruous.   The  Appellant
    herself was not saying there was no headquarters (even unofficial)  and
    Ms Bhatti has not been able to produce any  evidence  before  me  today
    that because it is a banned organisation they just undertake  disparate
    activities with no central base, it may not be an official headquarters
    with a sign outside saying this is the headquarters but obviously  even
    secret organisations may have a headquarters and that is  why  she  was
    asked the question in  the  interview.   But  the  judge  said  he  was
    prepared not to attach too much weight to her  failure  to  demonstrate
    knowledge on that point. I do not consider that there is any  error  of
    law in that regard.

 7. Moving to the second Ground of Appeal.  It  is  there  argued  that  in
    relation to paragraphs 16 to 20 of the  determination  the  Immigration
    Judge stated that the Appellant was  well  informed  and  educated  and
    could not fail to know that JEM was an armed movement.   It  is  argued
    that the Appellant stated in her answer to question 134 that  "she  did
    not know anything about their arms" and that she did not at  any  point
    say that she did not know that they had an armed wing  and  she  stated
    that she did not know anything about this armed wing. It is argued that
    the Immigration  Judge  has  misinterpreted  her  words  and  that  the
    Appellant clarified the point in her witness statement at  paragraph  6
    when she stated that "I know that it is an armed group but I  stated  I
    wasn't involved with that".  It is said that this has not been properly
    understood by the Immigration Judge.

 8. Well when considering what the judge actually found when  dealing  with
    the issue between paragraphs 16 and 20 of the  decision,  he  noted  at
    paragraph 16 of the SEF interview at question 134 that it  was  put  to
    the Appellant that JEM was an armed group.  The  actual  question  that
    was asked was "external information states that JEM is an armed  group,
    do you have any comments regarding being a member of an  armed  group?"
    The answer she gave was "when I actually became a member of JEM  I  was
    mainly concerned with  their  main  objectives  which  is  to  end  the
    oppression of the Darfur people and because I was supporting the rights
    of women I don't know anything about their arms I am not part of that".
     The judge in paragraph 16 referred to a number of background pieces of
    information indicating that the roots of JEM were  well-established  in
    the armed struggle i.e. violence and that the Appellant registered as a
    member in 2008 when JEM was engaged in what the judge described as "its
    most famous operation against the Sudanese government when it  attacked
    the Sudanese capital of Khartoum --- temporarily controlling Omdurman --
    - the government's use of army helicopters to repel the  JEM  advance".
    The judge found that in various accounts the Appellant had  alluded  to
    familiarity with both Khartoum and Omdurman.  She  said  in  her  first
    witness statement her family had moved to Omdurman and that she studied
    in Khartoum and graduated in 2006.  The judge found in light  of  that,
    that it was incredible that she did not  know  that  it  was  an  armed
    movement.  He said in  paragraph  17  that  was  especially  after  the
    violent attack in Khartoum in 2008.  He noted in  paragraph  6  of  her
    statement that the Appellant had said that she knew  that  JEM  was  an
    armed group,  but  she  was  not  involved  with  that  part  of  JEM's
    activities and that she said that JEM had only  carried  out  an  armed
    struggle in Darfur and since she  was  not  from  Darfur  she  was  not
    involved in the armed struggle. The judge  did  not  find  that  to  be
    credible.   The  judge  found  the   background   information   clearly
    demonstrated that JEM's violence was not limited to  Darfur  but  other
    cities like Khartoum.

 9. The judge in paragraph 18 noted that he found was  that  in  answer  to
    question 134 she said she did not know that JEM was an armed group  and
    the answer he quoted was "I don't know anything about  their  arms  I'm
    not part of it".  He found that the operative part of the answer was "I
    don't know about their arms" and on his reading of those words  he  was
    led to find that she had said that she did not know  that  JEM  was  an
    armed group and that "I am not part of it" is an attempt to justify her
    lack of knowledge that JEM was an armed group.

10. At paragraph 20 he said that when all the evidence  was  considered  in
    the round he said it was clear to  him  that  the  Appellant  may  have
    gained information about JEM from external sources and not by  being  a
    member or campaigner and if she had been either she  would  have  known
    from personal experience and knowledge that JEM is  rooted  in  violent
    struggle.  She could not have attended JEM's meetings where  there  was
    not a word mentioned about the violent struggle carried out by  JEM  in
    major cities such as Khartoum and Omdurman.  He said that he found  the
    fact that the Appellant did not  know  this,  is  because  she  is  not
    politically involved when she was in Sudan.

11. What was argued by Ms Bhatti is that the judge has actually  put  words
    into the  Appellant's  mouth  and  what  she  was  stating  within  the
    interview was not  that  she  did  not  know  that  JEM  was  an  armed
    organisation, but simply that she was not part of any armed wing of the
    organisation and that was what she then clarified in her statement.  In
    that regard, with the greatest respect to Ms Bhatti, it  seemed  to  me
    she  is  attempting  simply  to  reargue  the  point.   The  judge  had
    considered both what was said by the Appellant in her interview on that
    issue and in her statement and given the Appellant's answer, when being
    asked specifically to comment upon being a member  of  an  armed  group
    when she said that she did not know anything about their arms "I am not
    part of that", was entitled to find that basically  the  Appellant  was
    seeking to say at that stage that she did not know that it was an armed
    organisation.  It may  be  that  another  judge  may  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion, but what has to be considered is whether  or  not
    that was an irrational finding based upon the evidence before the judge
    and in my judgment that was a finding open to the judge based upon that
    answer given in interview.  The judge has  given  clear,  adequate  and
    sufficient reasons for the findings and made findings which  were  open
    to him on the evidence.  There is no error of law in that regard.

12. In respect of the third Ground of Appeal although initially it was said
    within the Grounds of Appeal that the ground related to paragraph 23 of
    the determination, Ms Bhatti has this morning clarified  that  in  fact
    she is talking about paragraph 22 of the decision.   At  paragraph  22,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated was that:

         "In her first witness statement the Appellant claims  'that  night'
         Sudanese security forces (the Appellant refers to this  as  'NISS')
         came to her house and forcibly took her to a building a  40  minute
         ride away (see: Appendix 1 paragraph 40-41).  However, in  her  AIR
         (q68) she particularises the time of  the  NISS's  arrival  at  her
         home.  It was '11 o'clock at night approximately'.   The  Appellant
         did not mention the time of arrival in her first witness statement.
          It was prepared at leisure.  Again, on its own, nothing much turns
         on this."

13. The argument raised in ground 3 is simply that the  Appellant  did  not
    contradict anything she said in her initial statement and  answered  at
    question 68, the question that she was asked.  It was said the point of
    the  substantive  interview  is  for  the  Respondent  to  ask  further
    questions and obtain clarification.   Had  the  Appellant  contradicted
    what she previously said this would undermine her credibility, but  she
    confirmed that  she  provided  more  information  as  required  by  the
    interviewing officer.  It was said her credibility should not have been
    affected by this.

14. What point the judge is simply making is that in  the  first  statement
    she had said that it was that night but in the interview she  had  said
    it was about 11 o'clock at night.  She had not mentioned  the  time  of
    arrival in the first statement but he said again nothing much turned on
    that.  The judge therefore, although noting  that  what  was  said  was
    slightly  different,  has  actually  not  considered  that  to   be   a
    discrepancy or that it  was  one  to  which  little  weight  should  be
    attached.  He himself says nothing much turned on  that  answer.  There
    was no error in respect of that paragraph.

15. In respect of Ground 4 said to relate to paragraph 24 of  the  decision
    in which the Appellant discussed where it is said she  was  taken  when
    she was detained in February 2017.  In the Grounds  of  Appeal  it  was
    said that the Appellant was asked at question 74 "Where are you taken?"
     In order to answer that question the Appellant says she speculated and
    confirmed in her answer to question 75 that she had speculated and said
    the reason for the speculation was  that  she  was  specifically  asked
    where she was taken and she wanted to answer the  questions  that  were
    put to her.   It  is  argued  her  credibility  should  not  have  been
    affected.

16. The point being made by the judge in paragraph 24 was that in the first
    witness statement the Appellant claimed she was hooded from home to the
    final destination and could not see where she was being taken but  when
    she was asked questions on exactly the same point in the SEF  interview
    at questions 74 to 76 she said that her face was covered  but  said  "I
    didn't know exactly where we had been taken but there was  a  bus  stop
    called Shinti and I know that they have a  lot  of  buildings  in  this
    area" (q74).  The judge noted that it was  difficult  to  see  how  she
    could have had her face covered and still noticed  a  bus  stop  called
    Shinti.  This was put to her in the SEF interview.  The judge  went  on
    to say that the Appellant was not sure but surmised the journey took 40
    minutes and that she knew there were NISS buildings 40 minutes away  so
    she  concluded  it  must  have  been  Shinti.   She  argued  this   was
    speculation.  The judge said "In my view even if this could  be  deemed
    to be an educated guess the  Appellant  is  a  graduate,  there  is  no
    reasonable explanation why this could not have been  mentioned  in  the
    first statement".  He went on in paragraph 25 to say this is  not  just
    speculation but speculation with the aim of embellishment  intended  to
    bolster her claim and add strength to her claim that she  was  arrested
    and detained by NISS.

17. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  in  her  initial  witness
    statement she  said  she  had  been  hooded  from  home  to  the  final
    destination, that the answer she actually gave then  in  the  interview
    when she mentioned that there was a "bus stop called Shinti and I  know
    that they have a lot of buildings in this  area"  and  then  only  when
    asked in question 75 of the interview "how do you know that there is  a
    bus stop called Shinti if your face was covered" and the reply "I'm not
    sure I'm saying this was approximately near this bus  stop  because  it
    took about 40 minutes and I know there had been some buildings there so
    this is speculation not knowledge for sure"   and  the  judge  compared
    that to the explanation then given by  the  Appellant  subsequently  in
    paragraph 10 of her appeal statement.

18. The findings made by the judge in that regard in terms of that being an
    embellishment rather than simply speculation, when she  says  that  she
    was aware that there was a bus stop called Shinti, was a  finding  open
    to the judge on the evidence before him.  Effectively what is sought to
    be done by Ms Bhatti is effectively  seeking  to  simply  reargue  that
    point.  The judge was entitled to find that he had  concerns  regarding
    how she knew there was a bus stop called Shinti if her face was covered
    and obviously Ms Bhatti simply  saying  that  that  is  speculation  is
    obviously an attempt to reargue the point given the  answers  contained
    within paragraphs 34 and 35 of the statements.  There is  no  error  in
    the way the judge dealt with that issue and  the  judge  made  findings
    again which were open to him on the evidence.  That finding is  not  in
    any way irrational.

19. In respect of Grounds 5 and 6 those grounds are  linked  in  that  they
    both relate to the fact that it was said that on the very  day  of  the
    hearing that the Appellant disclosed for the first time  that  she  had
    been raped and that she had  not  mentioned  that  previously.   It  is
    argued in Ground 5 that in respect  of  paragraphs  33  to  49  of  the
    decision  that  it  does  seem  that  the   Appellant's   evidence   is
    contradictory in places, but it had to be taken into account that  just
    before starting the hearing she informed her  representative  that  she
    had been raped for the first time.  It was said  that  the  Immigration
    Judge had indicated that if an adjournment was sought he was not minded
    to grant that because she had mentioned sexual abuse previously. He had
    set the case back to the afternoon for a witness statement to be taken.
     It was said that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  impact  on  a
    vulnerable woman who had for the first time told anyone about the  rape
    and the most traumatic event in her life.  It was said that taking that
    into account the  Appellant's  answers  may  have  been  considered  as
    contradictory and vague and that  should  have  been  understood.   The
    grounds go on to say that the judge did not accept  the  Appellant  had
    been raped because it was  at  the  hearing  the  first  time  she  had
    mentioned it, but the fact she did not mention the rape earlier  should
    not be taken against her.  It was argued that  the  judge  has  wrongly
    stated she should have been able to mention the rape given she was  not
    in the UK and not in a Muslim country where she would be  punished  and
    that the stigma of rape goes far beyond  the  punishment  that  a  rape
    victim may receive in a Muslim  country.   The  stigma  is  social  and
    cultural and not something the Appellant wanted anyone to  know  about.
    It was argued that rape is very different from sexual  assault  and  to
    band the two together showed a lack of empathy and cultural  awareness.
    It was argued that although the judge said  that  the  Appellant  could
    have informed a female doctor the Appellant did not wish anyone to know
    about the rape and when the judge has then gone  on  to  say  that  she
    could have been able to confide in the members of Waging Peace  or  her
    friend Mrs E., that the judge failed to understand the stigma that  the
    Appellant felt.

20. It was confirmed by Ms Bhatti this morning that  the  grounds  are  not
    seeking to say that the judge erred in  law  in  failing  to  grant  an
    adjournment to the case.  She did not actually ask for an  adjournment.
    It was said that the judge had previously indicated he was prepared  to
    stand the case down until 2 o'clock so that a witness statement on  the
    issue could be taken.

21. When looking at the question of the rape the judge  noted  himself  and
    reminded himself that the issue had to be dealt with in accordance with
    the Presidential Guidance at paragraph 50  and  noted  there  are  many
    possibilities in paragraph 51 why a victim  may  not  mention  she  was
    raped at the earliest opportunity.  In the instant appeal the Appellant
    asserted that there is stigma in society and that in the Muslim society
    it is the victim who is punished, not the perpetrator.  The judge  went
    on to find that she was now in the UK and she travelled between the  UK
    and Sudan  on  numerous  occasions  and  that  the  Appellant's  reason
    therefore for not mentioning the rape before the final hearing did  not
    make sense.  He said that in the screening interview she mentioned  she
    was threatened with rape and she was sexually molested and her  private
    parts had been touched and he said she had been  interviewed  by  a  UK
    Immigration Officer it was not too much of a leap to actually say  that
    she was raped.  The judge went on to consider whether or not she  could
    have actually then told  her  GP  or  someone  from  the  Waging  Peace
    organisation or a friend about it.

22. In paragraph 54 the judge went on to find:

         "In my view the alleged rape cannot be seen in isolation.   It  has
         to be considered in the round.  The Appellant  claims  the  alleged
         rape took place in detention between February and  March  2017.   I
         have scrutinised  the  evidence  presented  regarding  the  alleged
         detention in some detail.  I  find,  to  the  lower  standard,  the
         Appellant has  not  demonstrated  that  she  was  detained  between
         February and March 2017.  Therefore I find her claim that  she  was
         raped during the period of detention is equally a false claim.  The
         claim is made at a late stage in order to bolster her claim."

23. In that regard, when looking at the alleged detention between  February
    and March 2017, the judge gave very clear  reasons  for  rejecting  her
    claim that she was detained, both in terms of  it  not  being  credible
    that she remembered that her photograph was taken  but  she  could  not
    remember whether she was fingerprinted and also the findings the  judge
    made in respect of the Shinti bus stop issue discussed above.

24. The arguments in Ground 5 in  saying  that  the  judge  had  not  taken
    account of the impact on a vulnerable woman, the judge did  not  accept
    in this case the Appellant had actually been detained  during  February
    and March 2017 and therefore was entitled to find that she had not been
    raped during such detention. Those were findings open to the  judge  on
    the evidence before him.  Further it was open to the judge to  find  in
    my judgment that she had mentioned previously about the threat of being
    raped and being sexually assaulted and that the judge was  entitled  to
    take into account the fact  she  had  not  mentioned  the  actual  rape
    allegation until the morning  of  the  hearing  itself.   It  has  been
    suggested by Ms Bhatti  that  obviously  this  Appellant  said  in  the
    statement that she did not know previously that she  could  ask  for  a
    female interpreter.  It seems that even on the day of the hearing there
    was actually a male interpreter rather than a female interpreter,  from
    what I have been told from Ms Bhatti who actually attended  the  First-
    tier hearing.  Grounds 5 and 6 do not reveal any material error of  law
    in the decision and are in my  judgment  simply  again  an  attempt  to
    relitigate the point before the First-tier Tribunal.

25. In respect of Grounds 7 and 8 it is argued  that  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's sur place activities that the judge failed to take  account
    of the evidence of the Waging Peace representative in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's risk as a result of her sur place activities.

26. Well having discussed that with Ms Bhatti she  concedes  that  in  fact
    those grounds are not made out and that the judge when dealing with sur
    place activities had properly dealt with that in the correct way.

27. Ground 9 relates to the judge not making  an  anonymity  direction.   A
    decision by the First-tier  Tribunal  is  not  actually  published  and
    therefore whether or not the judge actually made an anonymity direction
    is not going to amount to a material error of law.  As I have indicated
    obviously given the nature of the allegations raised in this case I  am
    making an  anonymity  direction  so  that  although  this  judgment  is
    published it will not be with the name of the Appellant or  any  member
    of her family contained within it. Therefore that ground also does  not
    disclose a material error of law.

28. On that basis having dealt extensively with each of  the  grounds,  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  does  not  disclose  any
    material error of law and the decision stands.  The Appellant's  appeal
    is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

29. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  N  M  K  Lawrence  does  not
    reveal any material error of law and is  maintained.   The  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.

30. I do make an anonymity direction in this case given the nature  of  the
    issues raised within the  asylum  appeal.   The  Appellant  is  thereby
    entitled to anonymity.  No  record  or  transcript  or  note  of  these
    proceedings is to identify the Appellant or any member  of  her  family
    either directly or indirectly.  Failure to comply with  this  direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 7th July 2019

DJ McGinty

District Judge McGinty sitting as
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


