
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02783/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 June 2016                               |On 5 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                             Mr Md Ferdous Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Counsel, instructed by Sony Sadaf Haroon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal  by  the   appellant  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    proceedings against a  decision  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Andonian) (FtT), who dismissed his appeal on asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.  The FtT  found that it was not credible  that  the  appellant
    was gay and therefore not at risk of persecution  in  Bangladesh.   The
    decision and reasons  was promulgated on 12 April 2016.

2.   In the grounds of appeal  it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  erred  in
    finding the appellant lacking in credibility for the  reasons  that  it
    did without having regard to the objective evidence  and  further  gave
    inadequate reasons for the same.  Further it was argued  that  the  FtT
    failed to apply the correct standard of proof and failed to explain why
    the appellant's young age was a factor.  It was further contended  that
    there were inconsistencies in the evidence between  the  appellant  and
    his former partner, for example as between whether or not sweets  given
    represented  a birthday present and as to the location of clubs and the
    names of gay clubs.  A further ground was raised that the FtT failed to
    give reasons for rejecting the evidence  of  the  three  witnesses  who
    stated that the appellant was gay.

3.   Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Deans,  who  considered
    that the approach taken by the FtT in reaching the negative credibility
    findings was flawed and was arguably an error of law.

4.     Rule 24 response
     The Respondent opposed the  appeal  arguing  that  the  FTT  had  given
    sufficient reasons  for  reaching  the  negative  credibility  findings
    having regard to the  evidence  before  it.   Such  findings  were  not
    perverse and  were  sustainable  notwithstanding  that  the  background
    evidence was not considered.

Discussion and decision

5.   I heard submissions from both representatives the details of which  are
    set out in the record of proceedings.  I have looked at the decision as
    a whole and am satisfied that the FtT failed to  consider  all  of  the
    evidence in the round and holistically,  having  regard  to  the  lower
    standard of proof. The FtT failed to consider whether the evidence  was
    both internally and externally consistent and failed to  give  adequate
    reasons for the negative findings of credibility  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's account  as  to  what  happened  or  his  relationships  in
    Bangladesh and his brother's actions.  There was  no  reference  to  or
    consideration  of  the  background   evidence   which   supported   the
    appellant's claim to have engaged in  gay  relationships  when  he  was
    young. The FtT's reasoning that because homosexuality was unlawful  the
    appellant would not have acted as he claimed, was in my view unsound in
    the context of the background material.

6.   The FtT placed too great a  weight  on  discrepancies  as  between  the
    appellant's account and that of his former partner which were only  one
    aspect of the evidence to be  considered.   Further  the  FtT  gave  no
    reasons for rejecting the evidence of the  three  witnesses  called  on
    behalf of the appellant all of whom stated that he was gay.  As to  the
    inconsistencies found in the evidence I am satisfied that there were no
    significant inconsistencies as it is conceivable that sweets  could  or
    could not  have  been  regarded  as  a  birthday  present.  I  find  no
    inconsistency in the evidence about gay clubs as one  witness  gives  a
    location and the other witness given the names of  clubs.   I  conclude
    having regard to the decision and reasons as a whole that there  was  a
    failure to consider  all  the  evidence  in  the  round  before  making
    findings of fact and credibility.

Notice of Decision

7.   The appeal is allowed.  The decision is  set  aside  and  none  of  the
    findings are preserved.  The matter is  remitted  to  the  First  -tier
    Tribunal (excluding Judge Andonian) for a hearing  de  novo  at  Taylor
    House on a date and time to be confirmed.


No anonymity order is made.



Signed                                  Date 1.7.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.






Signed                                  Date 1.7.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
