
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/02272/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 17 August 2017                     |         On 4 October 2017           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                        Mr Collins Iroabuchi Chibuzor
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Anyene, Counsel, instructed by JDS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is Collins Iroabuchi Chibuzor, a citizen of Nigeria  born
    28 September 1988.  In October 2013 he was granted entry clearance with
    a Tier 5 sports migrant visa valid until 27 February  2014.   Prior  to
    expiry he made no further  application.   On  5  January  2017  he  was
    encountered  working  illegally  and  attempted  to  evade  Immigration
    Officers by running out of the back exit of a restaurant  in  which  he
    was working.  He was arrested.

2.   On 6 January 2017 he claimed asylum.  The immigration request  form  in
    respect of this claim was lodged by the respondent's representative  at
    the beginning of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   Attached
    to it was a handwritten statement explaining the reason for his  claim.
    In essence he  stated  that  he  left  Nigeria  because  his  life  was
    threatened by his partner's family.  His partner was pregnant  and  her
    family was not "happy" about it because he was a Christian.   They  and
    their daughter were Muslims.  He was therefore forced to leave  because
    they wanted to kill him.  They hurt him physically.  In particular,  he
    claimed that they had hit him on  the  head  with  a  machete.   On  19
    January a further immigration request form was filled  out  by  him  in
    which he stated that he could not go back to Nigeria because  his  life
    was at risk.  He would be "prosecuted  and  persecuted".   He  gave  no
    further details.

3.   He was served with a notice  under  Section  120  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and responded thereto  by  a  statement
    dated 27 January 2017.  This is set out at pages  129  to  131  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  He stated there that he claimed that his return to
    Nigeria would be in breach of the Refugee Convention, The Qualification
    Directive and Article 3 of the ECHR.  He feared arrest,  detention  and
    torture based upon his membership of the Biafran community  in  the  UK
    and a personal encounter with President Buhari on 5 February 2016.   He
    thought  that  the  Nigerian  Secret  Services  were   monitoring   the
    activities of the Biafran community in the United Kingdom.  He  further
    feared that if he was returned to Nigeria he would be detained and ill-
    treated.  His life would be in danger.

4.   On 30 January 2017 he was subjected to a screening interview.  In  Part
    4 of that interview he was asked to explain all of the reasons  why  he
    could not return to his home country.  He stated that "when I came here
    I joined Biafra community.  I am Biafran  in  Nigeria.   Our  president
    came to UK 5 February 2016 to Kingston Hotel".  He  went  on  to  claim
    that he was a member of the Biafra community and his life as in  danger
    because the Nigerian Government  already  held  the  chairman  of  that
    organisation.

5.   A further interview was carried out on 8 February 2017.  He  was  asked
    whether he  wished  to  amend  anything  in  respect  of  his  previous
    interview.  He answered "no" and in answer to the question "Who do  you
    fear in Nigeria?" he responded  "the  Nigerian  government  because  of
    their attitude".  He again referred to  his  affiliation  with  Biafran
    agitators and his fear of his life due to that.  In answer to  question
    15 "Were you ever a member of the BM (Biafran Movement) in Nigeria?" he
    stated that that was the reason he left Nigeria for the United Kingdom.
     At question 38 he was asked what had happened to him on 28  June  2013
    when he had said that  he  had  had  "problems"  and  his  brother  was
    murdered.  He answered that he had been injured and showed scars on his
    cheek, right lower leg, arm and head.  He further explained  in  answer
    to the question "What treatment did you receive? (number  65)  that  he
    had been stabbed on his head and his wounds had been stitched up.

6.   The respondent refused  his  claims  for  asylum,  refugee  status  and
    humanitarian protection by letter of 20 February 2017.  In the  reasons
    for refusal at paragraph 2 it is stated that his claim for  asylum  was
    based on his fear that he would face mistreatment on return because  of
    his political opinion, being a member  of  the  Biafran  movement.   In
    addition to the contents of his interviews, consideration was given  to
    various documents he produced.  One was an ID card  pertaining  to  his
    membership of the Biafran  movement  and  a  letter  from  the  Biafran
    community in the UK dated 10 February 2017.  Various other articles and
    press reports relating to the Biafran movement in  the  United  Kingdom
    and elsewhere were produced.  At paragraph 29 it  was  noted  that  the
    documents submitted had been considered in line with Tanveer Ahmed  IAT
    [2002] UKAIT 00439.

7.   It was pointed out that it was for  the  appellant  to  show  that  any
    documents relied on to support the case should be or  could  be  relied
    on.  However, various discrepancies in the documents  were  noted.   At
    paragraph 34 it was pointed out that the card produced stated that  his
    membership in the UK started on 5 January 2016 although  the  appellant
    had stated that he had joined on 1 January 2016.  The card did not have
    a membership number on it.  He could not  explain  that  absence,  only
    saying that he did not know the number.  He could produce no supportive
    evidence to demonstrate that he had  joined  such  an  organisation  in
    Nigeria.  It  was  noted  that  he  failed  to  demonstrate  any  basic
    knowledge of the Biafran movement.  As a result, it  was  not  accepted
    that he had been involved in any such movement as he claimed.

8.   There were certain inconsistencies in his account in  relation  to  his
    involvement in the Biafran movement and when he had  taken  part  in  a
    protest against the Nigerian president in the UK (see paragraphs 42 and
    43).  The letter from the Biafran community in London dated 10 February
    2017 was a photocopy.  No original had been  provided.   Reference  was
    made to the inconsistencies in the ID card and to a copy  of  a  charge
    sheet which related to charges laid against the  senior  leadership  of
    the Biafran movement in Nigeria.  These were  considered  to  be  self-
    serving and no weight was placed upon them.   As  to  the  injuries  he
    claimed to have suffered, it was considered that they could  have  been
    inflicted in a number of different ways and were not  determinative  of
    his account.  Accordingly his claims were refused.

9.   He appealed that  decision  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal.   As  stated
    above, at the outset of the  hearing  the  respondent's  representative
    asked for leave to lodge the immigration request  forms  of  6  and  19
    January.  That was allowed.  The appellant produced a witness statement
    and was cross-examined by  the  respondent's  representative.   At  one
    stage during cross-examination it was put to him that forged  documents
    were readily available and the ID card looked  like  something  anybody
    can  produce  with  simple  home  office  equipment.   There   was   an
    intervention by the appellant's representative at  that  stage  on  the
    basis  that  the  refusal  letter  made  no  assertion  of   fraudulent
    documents.  In any event, the appellant had  stated  that  he  did  not
    provide any fake documents.  At paragraph 40 the judge states that  the
    line of questioning had in any event been completed but  "the  question
    of  fraudulent  documents  was  always  in  a  judge's  mind  and   the
    representative should make submissions about it".

10.  He was also asked about the contents of  his  first  claim  made  on  6
    February 2017.  He first of all said that his partner got  pregnant  in
    2007 and then changed that to 2013.  He gave an account that her family
    forbade the marriage and alleged he had raped her.   They  were  Muslim
    and he stated that they would kill him.  He did not know  her  date  of
    birth nor when the family told him he could  not  marry  her.   He  was
    asked whether  this  strengthened  his  resolve  to  join  the  Biafran
    community and his response was unintelligible to  the  interpreter  who
    was involved.  He then  explained  that  he  had  entered  the  Biafran
    community because of that and it made him strongly involved in Biafra.

11.  It was then put to him that he had previously said that he  had  joined
    the Biafran community in February 2012.   His  answer  is  set  out  in
    paragraph 44 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision as follows:

         "He joined in 2012 and then because of what happened  he  supported
         it.  I asked what he meant, because it seemed to indicate  that  he
         did not support the organisation when he joined it.  The  appellant
         said that he supported it, but he was not very much into it at  the
         time, and did not fully support it until later, when not being able
         to marry L (his partner) arose."


12.  He was also asked why he failed to mention his political  beliefs  that
    formed the basis of his current claim in his  first  application.   The
    explanation for that was that he was not sleeping well.

13.  The appellant's  representative  handed  up  a  skeleton  argument  and
    submissions running to ten pages  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal.   This
    makes no  direct  reference  to  any  previous  claim  for  asylum  and
    concentrates on that  based  upon  his  membership  of  the  pro-Biafra
    movement.  A complaint was made that no challenge to  the  authenticity
    of the documents had been made by the Secretary of State in the reasons
    for refusal but a  suggestion  of  forgery  had  been  made  in  cross-
    examination and that was illegitimate and unfair.  As to  the  previous
    claim for asylum, it was pointed out that no response was  set  out  to
    either of the claims of 6 January or 19 January.  There was a departure
    from the Secretary of State's policy which was unacceptable and it  was
    claimed that "only the higher standard of fairness was appropriate".

14.  The judge set out at paragraph 93  the  facts  that  he  found.   These
    included  that  the  appellant  had  no  significant   association   or
    connection with the Biafra community and that he  had  not  established
    that he was at any risk  from  parents  of  a  girl  he  said  he  made
    pregnant.  He found that the claim was entirely fabricated.

15.  The judge then went on to explain that he concluded that the  appellant
    had invented an asylum claim based on an attack by the parents of  that
    girl in his claim of 6 (sic) January 2017.  He filled in a further form
    on 19 January 2017 without specifying any reason and  when  interviewed
    subsequently  he  had  "come  up"  with  another  story  about  Biafran
    separatist activity.  The judge found it wholly  incredible  that  when
    writing the first form he would not mention that he had  been  attacked
    when taking part in demonstrations in Nigeria and had been  beaten  and
    slashed or that on that same occasion  his  brother  had  been  killed.
    Furthermore the judge noted that the Section  120  statement  dated  27
    January made no mention of the family of the pregnant girl although  it
    was prepared with the assistance of his solicitors.  It was pointed out
    at paragraph 97 that the fact that no response is given to the  request
    forms of 16 and 9 January 2017 did not enhance the  appellant's  claim.
    That was because he had been interviewed on two occasions  and  in  the
    first he was specifically asked to explain all of the  reasons  why  he
    could not return to his home country.  No mention  at  that  stage  was
    made of his first claim.

16.  The appellant had no real idea about the history of Biafra and gave  an
    incoherent account of why he supported independence.  He was unable  to
    advance an explanation as to why his support for  that  movement  would
    make any difference to the family of his  pregnant  girlfriend.   These
    factors rendered his accounts incredible.  As to the membership card or
    the letter purporting to be from the Biafra community, the  judge  says
    at  paragraph  100  that  he  attached  very  little  weight  to  that.
    Reference was made to Tanveer Ahmed.  The original card is described as
    homemade  and  a  deeply  unconvincing  document.    The   letter   was
    unconvincing.  The absence of anybody  from  the  Biafra  community  to
    support him was remarkable and was thought to damage his credibility.

17.  The judge then  proceeded  to  deal  in  detail  with  the  appellant's
    account of Biafran activity and rejected  that  as  incredible.   There
    were contradictions within his evidence and he became muddled in cross-
    examination.  The scars on his body were not attributable to any  cause
    by any medical evidence.

18.  In all the circumstances it was considered that  he  had  not  met  the
    lower standard of the burden of  proof  upon  him  and  his  claim  was
    refused.  His human rights claim was also refused.

19.  The appellant was granted leave to appeal.   This  was  principally  on
    the ground of appeal which contended  that  procedural  unfairness  had
    occurred in allowing the  issue  of  forged  documents  to  be  raised.
    Further the judge's comment that the question of  fraudulent  documents
    was always in a judge's mind might raise the question of bias.

20.  Mr Anyene for the appellant advanced all his grounds of  appeal  before
    us.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
    appellant's membership of the Biafran organisation in  the  UK  and  in
    placing undue emphasis on lack of historical knowledge of the movement.

21.  Ground 4 appears to be a complaint that there  was  a  misdirection  in
    fact and law in the assessment  of  the  appellant's  participation  in
    protests in the UK because it was accepted that there is  a  repressive
    regime in  Nigeria  directed  towards  pro-Biafrans  and  there  is  no
    requirement  of  "affirmative  evidence  to  establish"  the  work   of
    intelligence services in that respect.  It is submitted that the  judge
    lost sight of the appellant's evidence.

22.  Mr Wilding for the respondent submitted that the  grounds  were  wholly
    misconceived.  The issue here was  the  credibility  of  the  appellant
    which was dealt with comprehensively at paragraph  94.   He  had  found
    that he could give very little weight to the documents for the  reasons
    given at paragraph 100.  He rejected both his asylum claims for reasons
    given at paragraph 94.

23.  In relation to ground 5 this too was misconceived.   It  was  incumbent
    upon the appellant to provide the grounds  on  which  he  advanced  his
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection and how he was a  refugee.
    In the circumstances no separate decision  on  his  earlier  claim  was
    required.

Decision

24.   From  the  terms  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  section   on
    discussion and conclusion starting at paragraph 94 it is clear that  he
    viewed this case as one which depended  upon  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant himself as set out in paragraphs 87 to 92.  Standing the  two
    quite different claims made as to why he sought asylum in this country,
    it was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to reject his evidence  as
    incredible, implausible and lacking in  consistency.  The  analysis  at
    paragraph 94 of his credibility cannot be faulted.   As  stated  there,
    his credibility is adversely affected by the fact  that  he  failed  to
    mention in his first claim of 6 January 2017 anything about his support
    for the Biafran movement or that he had been beaten  and  slashed  with
    machetes as part of a demonstration in Nigeria  on  the  same  occasion
    when his brother was killed.  Indeed, it is to be  noted  that  in  his
    handwritten letter of 6 January  2017  he  mentioned  being  physically
    assaulted with a machete "most especially on my head" in the context of
    an assault by his pregnant girlfriend's parents.  No further mention of
    such injuries was made and what injuries he had appeared to be ascribed
    in his later claims to the attack when taking part in  a  demonstration
    in Nigeria.

25.  The dates for various events were  self-contradictory  as  set  out  in
    paragraphs 41  and  42.   Some  of  his  evidence  was  described,  not
    unreasonably, as incomprehensible.  The conclusion at paragraph 96 that
    there is no credible or plausible explanation for the two claims  other
    than  they  are  both  invented  is,  in  the  circumstances,  entirely
    legitimate.

26.  In the  light  of  those  conclusions,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
    criticisms of the judge's approach to the appellant's claims about  his
    involvement in the Biafran community in ground of  appeal  3  have  any
    merit.  Although that ground is not easy to understand, it  appears  to
    be contended that the judge erred in failing properly consider  whether
    the Biafran Community organisation existed in  the  UK.   Standing  the
    findings on the appellant's credibility, that was a  collateral  matter
    to consider.  But, in any event, we do not agree that the  judge  found
    that organisation to be an invention.  The judge was not persuaded that
    the appellant was a member of it. Nor can it be  said  that  the  judge
    placed too much emphasis on the appellant's lack of  knowledge  of  the
    history of the Biafran movement in Nigeria.  The comments at  paragraph
    98 about his ignorance of these matters are reasoned and legitimate  in
    the assessment of whether his claimed  support  for  the  movement  was
    genuine.

27.  In relation to the criticism of the judge's approach to  the  documents
    submitted by the appellant, we do not agree that there was any  express
    finding of forgery by the appellant.  The burden is on the appellant to
    demonstrate that any documents he submits can be relied on.  The  judge
    was entitled to  take  account  of  the  criticisms  of  the  documents
    provided as explored in cross-examination of  the  appellant.   In  the
    light of those, he was entitled to place very little weight upon  them,
    as he did at paragraph 100.  It is worthy of note  that  the  documents
    themselves were manifestly self-contradictory.  The appellant's  middle
    and surnames are spelt wrongly, the postcode and  telephone  number  of
    the Biafra community differs between  the  letter  and  the  membership
    card.  In any event, standing the judge's  conclusions  on  credibility
    already made, it cannot be  said  that  the  approach  to  this  matter
    constitutes any material error of law.  As to the criticism that  there
    is the appearance of bias in what the judge said at paragraph 40  about
    "the question of fraudulent documents always being in a judge's  mind",
    this comment needs to be considered in its context.  It appears in  the
    section of the decision where the judge is describing the terms of  the
    objection taken by the appellant's representative to questions in cross
    examination about forged documents.  It is  not  part  of  the  judge's
    reasoning process on these documents.  It does not seem to us that this
    remark could have led a neutral observer to conclude that the judge was
    biased or had already formed a view on the documents.  On the contrary,
    he invited the appellant's representative to make submissions about the
    matter.  When the judge came to consider these  documents  he  did  not
    dismiss them as  forgeries.   He  expressly  applied  the  guidance  in
    Tanveer Ahmed and placed little weight on them for the reasons he  sets
    out at paragraph 100.

28.  As to the final ground of appeal it  is  submitted  that  the  original
    claim of 6 February is a  completely  separate  one  and  there  is  no
    immigration decision in respect of it.  It is secondly  submitted  that
    the judge ignored the appellant's evidence in respect of that claim.

29.  That "claim" was essentially based on  fear  of  retribution  from  the
    parents of a pregnant girl and thus could not constitute a valid  claim
    for asylum or humanitarian protection.  Further, standing the fact that
    in his interviews he had mentioned only his Biafran activities  as  the
    reason why he  could  not  return  to  his  home  country,  it  is  not
    surprising that no further mention was made of that matter. His  appeal
    against the decision makes  no  mention  of  the  basis  of  his  first
    "claim".  However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge makes it clear in  his
    determination that he considered this claim  to  be  invented  for  the
    reasons  he  gives  at  paragraphs  94  to  97.   Presumably,  had  the
    respondent's representative not produced the immigration  request  form
    R2, this issue would not have arisen at all.  As it is, the matter  was
    not ignored but used to test the credibility of the  appellant's  later
    claims  and  proper  reasons  are  given  for  the  rejection  of  that
    particular account.

30.  In the circumstances this appeal is refused.





Notice of Decision

The grounds of appeal are rejected/not made out.  Accordingly, the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal judge must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

