
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02759/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|via Skype for Business                        |On 06 January 2021            |
|On 23 December 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                AMANAY OSMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     ,
For the Respondent:    , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of the Palestinian Territories and  who
    was born on 22 May 1974 in the United Arab Emirates (UAE), appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Thorne)  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  dated  7  March  2019  refusing  her  claim   for
    international  protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 28  February  2019,  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Article 3 ECHR grounds but  allowed  it  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds. The appellant now appeals, with permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal whilst permission has been granted (out of time, but
    unopposed) to the respondent to appeal in respect of  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in July 2019 with her husband.
    Her ability to return to and live in the  Palestinian  Territories  and
    access necessary services there turns upon her ability to  produce  the
    required identity documents upon arrival.

 3. At the initial hearing at  Manchester  by  Skype  for  Business  on  23
    December  2020,  many  of  the  outstanding  issues  were  resolved  by
    agreement by the parties. The position had been substantially clarified
    by the expert evidence which the  appellant  had  obtained  and  served
    since directions were last issued by  the  Upper  Tribunal  during  the
    summer of 2020. I notified the appellant of the outcome of the  appeals
    at the end of the initial hearing and now briefly give my reasons.

    Error of Law

 4. The parties agree that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  At  [47],
    the  judge  relied  on  the  country  guidance  case  MA   (Palestinian
    Territories) [2007] UKAIT 00017 in finding that the appellant would not
    be at risk of harm in the Palestinian Territories. Indeed,  counsel  at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing agreed that the application  could  not
    succeed under the Refugee Convention or Article 3 ECHR,  as  the  judge
    records. However, the facts  of  the  country  guidance  case  and  the
    instant appeal are so different as to render the country guidance  case
    irrelevant to the appeal and the judge's reliance upon it an  error  of
    law. The appellant in  the  instant  appeal  has  never  lived  in  the
    Palestinian Territories and would not in any event ever  'be  suspected
    by the Israeli security forces of being  involved  in  suicide  bombing
    missions or terrorist activities against Israel or Israeli settlements'
    (MA at [121]). The appellant's claim is based not upon  the  threat  of
    any person or state actively seeking  to  harm  her  but  on  the  very
    different ground that, even if she were  able  to  gain  entry  to  the
    Palestinian Territories, her lack of an identity card or document would
    prevent her accessing any essential services. Mr Hussain, who  appeared
    for the appellant, acknowledged that the appellant cannot succeed under
    the Refugee Convention since she does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    eligibility but the parties agree that he is right to  argue  that  the
    reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal are wrong. I make no criticism
    of the judge given that counsel for the appellant  told  him  that  she
    accepted that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the  Refugee
    Convention or by way of humanitarian protection [47-48]. However, I set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal decision.

    Passport/Identity Documents

 5. The parties agree that the position of the appellant may be  summarised
    as follows: (i) although she has been registered as  a  UNRWA  refugee,
    neither the appellant herself or her husband (or either's parents) have
    been registered as having any status  in  the  Palestinian  Territories
    under any census conducted by the Israeli government in the  1960's  or
    subsequently; (ii) as accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  the
    appellant is not formally stateless, is not a citizen (or  person  with
    rights of residence) in either Jordan or the UAE, her state  of  birth;
    (iii) the appellant's passport is a 'zero zero' document  (as  detailed
    by the expert) which, whilst it may act as a laissez passer and provide
    her with the ability to travel between countries, does not  operate  as
    an identity  document  which  would  guarantee  her  admission  to  the
    Palestinian Territories or, even if it did admit her,  the  right  when
    residing in the Palestinian Territories to  access  any  state-provided
    services.

 6. Mr McVeety, which appeared for the Secretary of State,  helpfully  drew
    my attention to the two passages from  the  CPIN  for  the  Palestinian
    Territories 2018 which provide a  background  to  the  difficulties  in
    which the appellant now finds herself:

         18.1.2 The HRW report further stated,  referencing  other  sources,
         that: 'Since 1967, the population  registry  has  been  central  to
         Israel's  administrative  efforts  to   control   the   demographic
         composition  of   the   occupied   Palestinian   territory,   where
         Palestinians  want  to  establish  a   state.   Israel   has   used
         Palestinians' residency status as a tool to control  their  ability
         to reside in, move within, and travel abroad from the West Bank, as
         well as to travel from Gaza to Israel and the  West  Bank.  A  2005
         survey conducted on behalf of B'Tselem, an  Israeli  rights  group,
         estimated that 17.2 percent of the Palestinians registered  in  the
         West Bank and Gaza, around 640,000 people,  had  a  parent,  child,
         sibling, or  spouse  whom  Israeli  military  authorities  had  not
         registered as a resident.'

         18.1 3 The same HRW report also noted that: 'Palestinians  must  be
         included in the population registry to get identification cards and
         passports. In the West Bank, Palestinians need identification cards
         to travel internally, including to schools, jobs, hospitals, and to
         visit family, because Israeli security forces  manning  checkpoints
         demand to see such cards before allowing  passage.  Israeli  border
         officials, who control all entry and exit to the  West  Bank,  also
         require  Palestinians  seeking  to  travel  abroad  to  present  an
         identification card or passport.

 7. In light of her current circumstances, is apparent that  the  appellant
    is entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection. As regards Article 8
    ECHR, Mr McVeety confirmed that the only basis upon which the Secretary
    of State sought to challenge  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  no
    longer pertains. That basis was a statement in the  appellant's  travel
    document which appeared to indicate that the  bearer  of  the  document
    would be admitted to the  Palestinian  Territories.  He  accepted  that
    little weight should be given to that statement in the light of what is
    now known regarding the limitation on the appellant's  right  to  enter
    and reside in her territory of nationality. Accordingly, the  Secretary
    of State's appeal in respect of Article 8 ECHR should be dismissed.

 8. Mr McVeety told me that the respondent is in the process of issuing the
    appellant with 2 years' Article 8 ECHR leave to remain as a consequence
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision. He said that, as the appellant's
    humanitarian protection appeal would now  be  allowed,  the  period  of
    leave to remain would be 5 years in accordance with current Home Office
    policy.




    Notice of Decision

1. The Upper Tribunal remakes the decision. The appellant's appeal against
the Secretary of State's decision dated 28 February 2019 is allowed on
humanitarian protection grounds;

2. The appeal on asylum grounds is dismissed;

3. The Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal on Article 8 ECHR grounds is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 23 December 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




























