
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02297/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 December 2019                            |On 13 December 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                    mr OH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Smith, Counsel, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Details of the Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1 March 1991 who appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 28
    February 2019 to refuse the appellant protection.  In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 10 July 2019, Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Broe dismissed the appellant's appeal on all  grounds.   The  appellant
    appeals with permission on the grounds that:

      1) It is arguable that the judge's findings and credibility were based
         primarily on assessments of Section 8 of  the  2004  Act  including
         with reference to the appellant's contact with his uncle and failed
         to have sufficiency of regard to the evidence before the First-tier
         Tribunal.  The judge focused on such matters to  the  exclusion  of
         any consideration of  the  credibility  of  the  substance  of  the
         appellant's account which was that ISIS had come to his home  area,
         that his brother's shop was targeted by ISIS and that  he  left  in
         fear of ISIS and militia operating in the area;

      2)  It  was  argued  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence
         concerning his uncle was flawed including that  the  appellant  had
         made an attempt to amend his interview which had been sent  to  the
         respondent.  Even if that had not been accepted, the judge  took  a
         point which was not raised by the respondent and it  was  incumbent
         on the judge to give the appellant an opportunity to  clarify  this
         prior to reaching an adverse credibility finding.  The  judge  also
         failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that  the  appellant's
         uncle did not have a  phone  and  further  made  reference  to  the
         appellant's friends who knew of ISIS sleeper cells  in  Hawija  (in
         the context of questioning why these friends could  not  have  been
         used to contact his uncle) when in fact these were  friends  living
         in the UK as the judge had himself had  recorded  (at  [17]).   The
         judge  also  failed  to  have  consideration  to  the   appellant's
         evidence, including at paragraph 8  of  his  witness  statement  in
         relation to further displacement in Iraq;

      3) Risk in Hawija: the judge found that the appellant was not at  risk
         but failed to apply the applicable country guidance including in AA
         (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  544  (IAC)  where  the  Kirkuk
         Governorate (where Hawija is located) was found to be  a  contested
         area and there were substantial  grounds  therefore  for  believing
         that if the appellant was returned there he would face  a  risk  of
         being subjected to indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  serious
         harm within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
         Directive.  The judge arguably failed to  apply  SG  (Iraq)  [2012]
         EWCA Civ 940 in that  very  strong  grounds,  supported  by  cogent
         evidence, were needed to depart from country guidance and the judge
         failed to make such an assessment.  In addition the judge failed to
         consider the reasonableness of internal relocation;

      4) It was argued that the judge failed to apply the  relevant  country
         guidance including AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq  CG
         UKUT 00212 (IAC) in the  consideration  of  whether  the  appellant
         could obtain a CSID.

Error of Law

 2. Miss Smith made detailed submissions  expanding  and  highlighting  the
    grounds of appeal summarised above.  Having  heard  these  submissions,
    Mrs Aboni quite  properly  conceded  that  it  was  difficult  for  the
    respondent to move beyond the first ground, as  it  was  accepted  that
    there was a failure by the First-tier Tribunal to adequately, or indeed
    at all, consider the substantive reasons the appellant  had  given  for
    claiming asylum.

 3.  Considered  cumulatively  with  the  errors   in   relation   to   the
    consideration  of  the  Section  8  matters  it  was  accepted  by  the
    respondent that the decision contained an error of  law  such  that  it
    could not stand and should be set aside.  As I was  satisfied  that  an
    error of law was made out, under ground 1,  I  need  not  consider  the
    additional grounds.

 4. Neither party required a reasoned decision in light of their agreement,
    a course open to the Tribunal pursuant to rule 40(3)(a) and (b) of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 5. Given that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  adequately  consider  the
    core of the appellant's claim, the  nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-
    finding required is such that the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, other than before Judge Broe for a fresh  hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                      Dated:  12 December 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was paid no fee award is applicable.

Signed   [pic]                      Dated:  12 December 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

