
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02071/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2018                              |On 05 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    [S T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Platt, Solicitor WTB
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant a national  of  DRC,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Malik of the First-tier Tribunal sent on 4  September
    2017 dismissing her appeal against the decision made by the  respondent
    on 9 February 2017 refusing her claim for asylum.   The  basis  of  the
    appellant's claim was that she was wanted by the  DRC  authorities  for
    having worked as a spy.  She had been imprisoned, subjected to rape and
    physical abuse before being released after two and a  half  weeks.   In
    support of her claim the appellant produced medical evidence  including
    a medico-legal report prepared by the Medical Foundation dated 21  July
    2017.  The judge did not find that the appellant had given  a  credible
    account.

2.   The principal ground raised by  the  appellant  concerned  the  judge's
    treatment of the medico-legal report; focussing on what the judge  said
    at paragraphs 38-39:

         "38. I accept the medico-legal report  states  some  of  the  noted
             scarring is highly suggestive consistent with the  appellant's
             account of detention, torture and rape and that  some  may  be
             equally consistent with other causes.  My role is to  consider
             the appellant's claim in the round to the lower  standard  and
             in this regard the medical evidence  is  consistent  with  her
             claim of having been beaten, such that it has  the  effect  of
             not negating her claim,  but  it  is  just  one  part  of  the
             appellant's evidence which needs to be considered  along  with
             rest.  Equally the circumstances in which the scaring/injuries
             were  acquired  are  dependent  on  the  truthfulness  of  the
             appellant.  They  may  have  been  acquired  in  detention  as
             claimed, in the circumstances as claimed, but  may  also  have
             been acquired in other circumstances.


         39.  The medico-legal report also found  the  appellant  meets  the
             diagnostic criteria of PTSD and a moderate depressive episode.
              Again  even  if  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD/depressive  episode
             reflects the appellant's symptoms, there  may  well  be  other
             causes for it and where  a  report  recounts  an  account  and
             contains nothing which does not depend on the truthfulness  of
             the appellant, the part which it can play in the assessment of
             credibility is negligible."

3.   The written grounds also complained that the judge failed  to  consider
    the relevance of the findings made in this medico-legal report that the
    appellant met the diagnostic  criteria  of  PTSD  to  "the  appellant's
    vulnerability as a witness when assessing credibility."

4.   I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Platt  and  Mr  Bates  which  helpfully
    addressed the most important points.

5.   I have concluded that the judge  did  materially  err  in  law  in  his
    treatment of the medico-legal report in a number of respects.  First of
    all, the  judge's  summary  that  the  medico-legal  report  found  the
    appellant's scars "consistent with" her account was inaccurate  insofar
    as the doctor found several of the scars to be "highly consistent" with
    her account.  Secondly, to say that "it has the effect of not  negating
    her claim" amounted to a failure to acknowledge its potential probative
    value.   Thirdly,  the  judge's  assessment  that  the   diagnosis   of
    PTSD/depressive disaster episode could only play a "negligible" role in
    the assessment of credibility "where a report recounts an  account  and
    contains nothing which does not  depend  on  the  truthfulness  of  the
    appellant" was simply incorrect in that the doctor's assessment of PTSD
    was clearly based on  an  assessment  independent  of  the  appellant's
    account of her history and had at least the potential to play more than
    a negligible role in the assessment of credibility.

6.   Any doubts I have that the above errors amounted to errors of  law  are
    dispelled by the fact that the judge  nowhere  considered  whether  the
    appellant's presenting account and medico-legal evidence  required  him
    to treat the appellant as a vulnerable  witness  and  apply  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note of  2010.  Mr Bates sought to argue that the
    allowances  this  Note  envisages  being  made   when   assessing   the
    credibility    of    a    vulnerable     witness     only     concerned
    discrepancies/inconsistencies whereas the judge had based  his  adverse
    findings on implausibilities and lack of detail.  I cannot accept  that
    the protections afforded by  this  Note  to  vulnerable  witnesses  are
    confined to treatment of discrepancies.  The judge counted against  the
    appellant her inability to explain various aspects of her  account  see
    e.g. paragraph 41; and  her  potential  vulnerability  was  capable  of
    having have some impact on her inability to explain  and  her  lack  of
    recall.

7.   For the above reasons I consider that the judge's decision is  vitiated
    by legal error and needs to be set aside.

8.   I see no alternative to the  case  being  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I would observe however that whilst it will be a matter  for
    the First-tier Tribunal judge to determine on the basis of the evidence
    as a whole the medico-legal  report  appears  to  me  to  have  certain
    shortcomings.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed:                                 Date: 30 March 2018
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
