
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02473/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 December 2018                   |On 10 January 2019               |
|                                      |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     D K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Kogulathas (counsel) instructed by Tuckers
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    To preserve the anonymity order deemed  necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Black  promulgated  on  03/10/2018,  which  dismissed   the
Appellant's appeal.


Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 20/02/1999 and is a national of Albania.  On
02/02/2018 the Secretary of State refused  the  Appellant's  protection  and
ECHR claim.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Black  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  05/11/2018
Judge Povey gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "3. The grounds are all arguable. The Judge arguably failed to  provide
    sufficient detail or reasons for why she placed little  weight  on  the
    experts report (at  [16]),  why  she  found  the  appellant's  evidence
    regarding her family not credible or why she rejected  the  claim  that
    there was family life between  the  appellant  and  her  father,  after
    living together for the past four years (at [17]). It was also arguable
    that the Judge erred in her approach to the standard of proof  and  the
    test of real risk in respect of the appellant's asylum claim (referring
    instead to the appellant being at no greater risk than any other single
    woman in Albania, at [16]).


    4. As such, the application for permission to disclose arguable  errors
    of law and  permission  to  appeal  is  granted.  All  grounds  may  be
    advanced."

The Hearing

5.(a) For the appellant, Ms Kogulathas moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
told me that the Judge's treatment of the expert report is  inadequate.  She
told me that the appellant relies on a report from Dr J Hanson. She took  me
to [16] of the decision, where the Judge rejects the  report.  She  told  me
that the Judge gives no  meaningful  reasoning  for  deciding  to  place  no
weight on that report. She told me that  the  author  of  the  report  is  a
recognised expert, yet the Judge gives no reasons for doubting the  author's
expertise. She  told  me  that  the  experts  report  is  supported  by  the
background materials.

(b)   Ms Kogulathas told me that the Judge applied  the  wrong  standard  of
proof.  At  [16]  she  told  me  that  the  Judge  looked  for  a  level  of
exceptionality, which placed the standard of proof at too high a level.

(c)   Turning to the third ground of appeal, Ms Kogulathas told me that  the
Judge fails to give adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's  account.
The appellant claims to have a well-founded fear of persecution  as  a  lone
woman returning to Albania. There was evidence from the appellant  and  from
the appellant's father supported by the expert report. She told me that  the
respondent did not challenge the  appellant's  credibility,  but  the  Judge
simply rejected the appellant's evidence & did not explain why.

(d)   Ms Kogulathas told  me  that  the  Judge's  article  8  assessment  is
inadequate. At [17] the Judge finds that  the  appellant  is  a  19-year-old
student who has lived with her father for four years, but the Judge  appears
to find that simply because the appellant's 18th birthday has  passed  there
cannot be article 8 family life. She told me that the Judge has  incorrectly
applied Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170.  She  referred  me  to  Rai  v  ECO
[2017] EWCA Civ 320 and told  me  that  family  life  exists  and  that  the
Judge's findings are not sustainable

(e)   Ms Kugalathas urged me to set the decision aside and remit  this  case
to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

6.(a) For the respondent, Mr Jones  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors. She told me that the Judge dealt with the expert  report  at
[16] and gives clear reasons for rejecting it. She  relied  on  JL  (medical
reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC). Ms Jones  told  me  that
the Judge rejected the expert report because the expert  relies  heavily  on
what he is told by the appellant, & between [14] and [16]  the  Judge  gives
good reasons for rejecting the appellant's account.

(b)   Mr Jones told me that  the  Judge  applied  the  correct  standard  of
proof. She took me to [11] to [15] of the decision  and  told  me  that  the
Judge, in giving reasons for rejecting the appellant's  account,  manifestly
applies the correct standard of proof. She then turned to the  third  ground
of appeal and told me that the Judge gave full, frank, and  concise  reasons
at [10], [13] and [18] for rejecting the appellant's account.

(c)   Ms Jones told me that at [12] and [17] the Judge gives  clear  reasons
for finding  that  article  8  private  life  does  not  exist  between  the
appellant and her father. She took me through the caselaw relied on  by  the
appellant and reminded me that the appellant entered the  UK  as  a  visitor
and has not been trafficked. She urged me to dismiss the  appeal  and  allow
the decision to stand.

Analysis

7.    The appellant is a 19-year-old single Albania woman. Her father  is  a
British citizen. On September 2014 she entered the UK as  a  visitor.  Then,
she was only 14 years old. She was on  her  way  to  visit  her  cousins  in
Dublin but decided that she wanted to live with her  father  and  stayed  in
the UK. The appellant says that her mother left Albania  in  September  2016
to start life afresh in Italy, where she now  lives.  The  appellant  claims
that she cannot return to Albania because, there, she will be  a  vulnerable
unprotected young lady,  liable  to  fall  prey  to  traffickers  and  other
exploitation. The appellant made her claim when she was 18 years old

8.    The appellant relies on a report from Dr Joanna Hanson. The report  is
10 pages long and has 52 paragraphs. The Judge's findings of fact  start  at
[13]. At [15] the Judge considers the appellant's credibility. In the  first
sentence he says that the appellant gives a  consistent  account,  but  then
rejects parts of the account because of the quality of documentary  evidence
and a delay in disclosure of an important part of the appellant's claim.  In
the final sentence the Judge says that the appellant lacks credibility.

9.    At [9] and [16] the Judge refers to Dr Hansen's report.  At  [16]  the
Judge dismisses the report in  two  short  sentences.  The  Judge  does  not
properly say why no weight is attached to that report. The Judge  says  that
the  report  I  based  on  speculation,  but  provides  neither  detail  nor
explanation for that bald statement.

10.   In Chengjie Miao v SSHD 2006 EWCA Civ 75  the  Court  of  Appeal  said
that in the absence of a good reason for doubting an expert's  expertise  or
the logical or factual foundation of his opinion,  the  FTTJ  was  wrong  to
dismiss it because it was merely an opinion. In Detamu v SSHD 2006 EWCA  Civ
604 and IAS 16.9.06 the Court of Appeal said that it was an error of law  to
give no weight to the report of an expert  who  had  clearly  indicated  his
expertise and the sources for his information. In FS  (Treatment  of  Expert
evidence) Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00004 the Tribunal held that Tribunal  Judges
have a duty to consider  all  the  evidence  before  them  when  reaching  a
decision in an even handed and impartial manner. In assessing  the  evidence
before them they must attach such weight as  they  consider  appropriate  to
that evidence. It may on occasions be appropriate to reject the  conclusions
reached by an expert. What is crucial is  that  a  reasoned  explanation  is
given for so doing.

11.   In M (DRC) 2003 UKIAT 00054 the Tribunal said that  it  was  wrong  to
make adverse findings of credibility first  and  then  dismiss  the  report.
Similarly, in Ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469, Forbes  J  found  that  an
Adjudicator had been wrong to use adverse credibility findings  as  a  basis
for  rejecting  medical  evidence  without  first  considering  the  medical
evidence itself.

12.   At [16] the Judge says

    "I conclude that there is no evidence in relation to this appellant  to
    show that she faces a real risk of trafficking or  gender  exploitation
    any more than any other single attractive or unattractive  lone  female
    in Albania."

13.   That sentence is ambiguous. It can be interpreted as meaning that  the
Judge sought a comparison instead of considering the appellant's claim  that
she faces a real risk of  persecution.  The  sentence  is  also  inaccurate.
There was evidence of risk to the appellant (from the  appellant,  from  her
father, from an expert and contained in  background  materials)  before  the
Judge. What the Judge does not do is adequately  analyse  the  evidence  and
explain why he rejects it.

14.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

15.   At [17] the Judge relies too heavily on Kugathas v  SSHD  (2003)  INLR
170. There is evidence that this appellant is  a  19-year-old  student,  who
has lived with her father since she was 14 years  old.  She  is  financially
and emotionally dependent  upon  her  father.  At  the  hearing  before  me,
parties' agents agreed that merely celebrating an  18th  birthday  does  not
bring established family life to an end. There is an inadequate analysis  of
the degree of dependency.

16.   In Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170 the Court of Appeal said that,  in
order to establish family life, it is necessary to show  that  there  is  a
real committed or effective support  or  relationship  between  the  family
members and the normal emotional ties between a mother  and  an  adult  son
would not, without more, be enough. In PT (Sri  Lanka)  v  Entry  Clearance
Officer, Chennai [2016] EWCA Civ  612  it  was  held  that  some  tribunals
appeared to have read Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR  170  as  establishing  a
rebuttable presumption against any relationship between an adult child  and
his parents or siblings being sufficient to engage Article 8. That was  not
correct.  Kugathas  required  a  fact-sensitive  approach,  and  should  be
understood in the light of the subsequent case law  summarised  in  Ghising
(family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012]  UKUT  160  (IAC)  and  Singh
[2015] EWCA Civ 630.  There was no legal or factual presumption as  to  the
existence or absence of family life for the purposes of Article 8  nor  was
there any requirement of exceptionality. It all depended on the facts.  The
love and affection between an adult and his parents or siblings  would  not
of itself justify a finding of a family life. There  had  to  be  something
more. A young adult living with his parents or siblings would normally have
a family life to be respected under Article 8. A child  enjoying  a  family
life with his parents did not suddenly cease  to  have  a  family  life  at
midnight as he turned 18 years of age. On the other  hand,  a  young  adult
living independently of his parents might well not have a family  life  for
the purposes of Article 8.

17.   As a result, I find that the decision is tainted  by  material  errors
of law and  cannot  stand.  I  set  it  aside.  I  consider  whether  I  can
substitute my own decision but because the Judge's  decision  is  set  aside
because  of  failures  in  fact-finding,  a  new  fact-finding  exercise  is
necessary. I therefore remit this case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
determined of new.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

18.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b)    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding  exercise  is  required.   None  of  the  Judge's
findings are preserved. A complete re-hearing is necessary.

20.   I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor  House
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge G A Black.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 3 October 2018.  The  appeal
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed
                       Date 21 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


