
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02447/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2019                            |On 11 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                    N L D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel, instructed by Messrs
                    Biruntha Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


1.   In a decision promulgated on 27 June 2018 I set aside a decision  of  a
    Judge in the First-tier Tribunal having found an error of  law  therein
    and issued directions.  I wrote:

         "1.  The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 4 January  1973,
             appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal O'Garro who in a determination promulgated
             on 27 February 2018 dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  appellant
             against a decision of the respondent dated  22  February  2016
             refusing to grant him asylum.

         2.   The appellant left Sri Lanka on 8 September 2010 with his wife
             and children and entered Britain as a Tier 4 Student with  his
             wife and children as his dependants.   He  was  granted  leave
             until 29 February 2012, that leave later being extended  until
             26 April 2014.

         3.   On 24 April 2012 the appellant had applied for leave to remain
             as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and that was  granted  until  15
             May 2019.  However, his leave was curtailed with no  right  of
             appeal on 14 December 2014 when his leave was set to expire on
             15 February 2015.

         4.   In February 2015 the appellant applied for leave to remain  on
             human rights  grounds  under  the  ten  year  route  but  that
             application was rejected.  On 28 February 2015 he applied  for
             asylum.

         5.   The basis of the appellant's claim to asylum was that  he  had
             worked as a cashier at the Commercial Ceylon Bank  Limited  in
             Sri Lanka where in August 2003 he had had a training agreement
             for a post of junior executive assistant.  At interview he had
             stated that his duties were:-

                  "... I opened savings accounts, residence foreign currency
                  accounts  in  between  2003-2009  ...  bank  accounts  for
                  developments loans or repayments  for  development  loans.
                  DFCC is not a retail bank.  They had to go via us".

             The facts relating to his employment had been accepted by  the
             respondent.

         6.   At his screening interview he had stated that he feared  being
             arrested by the police if he returned to  Sri  Lanka  "because
             they think that I was helping the LTTE to open an  account  in
             the bank and exchange money.  I was not helping the LTTE I was
             doing my job".  He emphasised that neither he nor  members  of
             his family were members of the LTTE.  He had no sympathy  with
             their cause.

         7.   The appellant stated  at  interview  that  one  of  his  Tamil
             colleagues from the bank had introduced a lot of new customers
             to open bank accounts and that he had never felt suspicious of
             them as they were smartly dressed  and  could  always  explain
             what the  bank  accounts  were  meant  for.   The  sums  being
             deposited were large sums and he believed  that  these  people
             had dealt with tea exports and house developments.

         8.   He said that he had  found  out  in  December  2014  that  the
             authorities were investigating bankers who had helped the LTTE
             during the  civil  war  and  that  one  of  his  managers  was
             imprisoned in November 2014 and the  appellant's  details  had
             been passed to the authorities in Sri Lanka.

         9.   In the letter of refusal the Secretary of State summed up  his
             statement by saying:-

                  "All these statements suggest  that  you  were  a  genuine
                  worker in the bank and you worked  to  the  best  of  your
                  abilities without having any  intentions  of  helping  the
                  LTTE member nor dealing with money laundering."

             The Secretary of State concluded  in  the  letter  of  refusal
             that:-

                  "Taking into consideration  that  you  are  Sinhalese  and
                  never  helped  LTTE  it  has  been  considered  that   the
                  accusations you are involved with the LTTE and their  bank
                  accounts is inconsistent with the  Sri  Lankan  background
                  information   and   your   alleged   circumstances   being
                  prosecuted by the Sri Lankan authorities, especially after
                  the new government came into force in 2015".

             The respondent also relied on a Bar Human Rights Committee and
             the International Truth and Justice  Project,  Sri  Lanka  for
             background information regarding the Sri  Lankan  government's
             intelligence with regard to their tracing of LTTE activity.

         10.  The appellant appealed against the refusal and his appeal  was
             first heard before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Wyman  on
             17 August 2006 and dismissed.  However, that determination was
             appealed and on 25 April 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge  Allen  set
             aside Judge Wyman's decision, it having been agreed that there
             were material errors of law in the determination in that Judge
             Wyman had not considered documents which  had  been  submitted
             before him particularly those relating to the Financial Crimes
             Investigation Department and newspaper articles.  Judge  Allen
             remitted the appeal to be heard afresh  on  the  asylum  issue
             excluding the Article 8 and Article 3 issues which  he  stated
             were not challenged from the judge's decision.  In effect,  he
             said that there should be a rehearing  on  the  basis  of  the
             asylum claim alone.

         11.  In these circumstances the appeal came before Judge O'Garro on
             24 January 2018.

         12.  Having set out the claim, Judge O'Garro detailed her  findings
             and conclusions in paragraphs 32 onwards.  In paragraph 38 she
             stated that she found the respondent had given cogent  reasons
             supported by appropriate objective  evidence  as  to  why  the
             appellant's claim was not accepted  but  emphasised  that  she
             would nevertheless make her own assessment of the  appellant's
             claim.  She referred briefly to the skeleton  argument  before
             her and set out in  paragraph  39  evidence  relating  to  the
             Financial Crimes Investigation Division.

         13.  In paragraph 40 she stated that the appellant was a cashier at
             the Commercial Bank but had provided no evidence that he had a
             senior  role  at  the  bank  which  meant  that  any   banking
             transaction the appellant did in  his  role  would  have  been
             subject to scrutiny.  She concluded that "therefore it is  not
             credible  that  he  would  be  perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities as being  engaged  in  terrorist  financing  which
             would attract the interest of the FCID".  She stated that  she
             had reached that finding because she did  not  find  that  the
             appellant provided any evidence to satisfy her that  his  role
             at the Commercial Bank of Sri Lanka was high  profile  and  he
             was engaged in major transactions involving  money  laundering
             or terrorist financing.  She placed weight  on  the  delay  in
             claiming asylum and concluded in paragraph 44 by stating  that
             she did not find that the appellant's claim was credible.  She
             then said:-

                  "I now turn to the documents the appellant relies on".

         14.  The judge considered a letter sent by  an  attorney-at-law  in
             Sri Lanka who represented the appellant's  father-in-law,  who
             said that his client had  been  asked  to  attend  the  police
             station  where  he  was  questioned  about   the   appellant's
             whereabouts and the  reasons  for  his  visit  to  the  United
             Kingdom.  She quoted from the letter which said:-

                  "Thus the FCID can summon any suspects to their office  in
                  Colombo or instruct the regional police station  to  carry
                  out investigations.  In this context your client has  been
                  accused of facilitating the Tigers  to  open  accounts  in
                  fictitious names at the  Commercial  Bank  and  authorised
                  payments from European banks accounts  to  the  individual
                  accounts in Sri Lanka".

         15.  The judge stated  that  she  could  not  understand  how  that
             attorney-at-law was able to get details of the allegations the
             police had against the appellant  as  surely  they  would  not
             disclose details of their investigation to anyone save for the
             appellant or his legal representative.  She stated she did not
             accept that any such investigation was going  on  as  claimed.
             She stated she would give no evidential weight to the  letter.
             She also considered the affidavit of the appellant's father-in-
             law which she did not accept because she said that the  police
             would not give out details of the investigation.  She also did
             not accept the newspaper reports stating it was  not  credible
             that the police would have given out information to the  media
             about the appellant and the details of the allegations against
             him.  Having applied the determination in GJ and Others (post-
             civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT  she  stated  that
             that determination which referred to high  levels  of  bribery
             and corruption in Sri Lanka added weight to her  concern  that
             the documents were not to be relied on.

         16.   She  therefore  dismissed  the  appeal  as  she   found   the
             appellant's claim was not credible.

         17.  Grounds of appeal argued that the judge  had  not  taken  into
             account a material consideration in that the FCID  would  have
             considered whether the transactions made by the appellant were
             money laundering or terrorist financing  and  would  therefore
             not have only been concerned  with  senior  positions  in  the
             bank.  The grounds also question the judge's  conclusion  that
             the police would not  have  informed  the  solicitor  for  the
             appellant's father-in-law about the basis of  their  concerns.
             They also argued that the judge had not given reasons why  she
             did not  accept  the  newspaper  reports  and  the  associated
             emails.

         18.  In her submissions Ms Jegarajah argued that  there  were  many
             matters which had been accepted  by  the  Secretary  of  State
             initially particularly with  regard  to  the  work  which  the
             appellant had undertaken in Commercial Ceylon Bank Limited and
             moreover that he had been trained to recognise  incidences  of
             money laundering.  The Secretary of State had also appeared to
             accept that the letter from the lawyer was genuine and  indeed
             the affidavit from the appellant's father-in-law.  She  stated
             that there was nothing incredible about the way in  which  the
             attorney-at-law had been  instructed  or  in  the  information
             given by the police to him - the lawyer had attended with  the
             appellant's father-in-law and was  therefore  able  to  record
             what had actually been said to the appellant's  father-in-law.
             She emphasised that the Protection of Terrorism Act  had  been
             in force long before the FCID had been set but  in  any  event
             the preparations for setting up the FCID had  begun  in  2015.
             She referred also to  the  appellant's  witness  statement  in
             which he had said that in December 2014 he was told  that  the
             manager had been arrested and his details had been sent to the
             passport authorities and it  referred  to  his  wife's  cousin
             having an ability to ascertain what interest  the  authorities
             had in him.

         19.  Mrs Jegarajah referred also  to  the  newspaper  cuttings  and
             pointed out that these had been produced after Judge Allen had
             made it clear that it would be appropriate  for  there  to  be
             further evidence submitted.  Moreover,  she  stated  that  the
             judge had not dealt with the  second  letter  which  had  been
             produced from the appellant's father-in-law's attorney.

         20.  She asserted that the judge had not  properly  considered  the
             evidence  and  had  not  given  reasons  for   rejecting   the
             documentary evidence produced.

         21.  In reply Mr Tarlow, who had  been  prevented  for  operational
             reasons from preparing for the hearing (although  I  put  back
             the hearing for some time to enable him to read  the  papers),
             stated that in essence this was a case of prosecution and  not
             persecution and stated that in any event this was the case  of
             a man who would not have had  the  authority  to  do  anything
             without referring to a manager.  He stated  that  clearly  the
             case had moved on since it had been before the judge but  when
             pressed was unable to assert that the judge had not  erred  in
             her consideration of the documentary evidence.

         22.  It was the assertion of Ms Jegarajah in reply that surely  the
             reality was that the appellant would face persecution  because
             it would be  considered  that  he  had  facilitated  the  LTTE
             because of his imputed political opinion.  He would  therefore
             face questioning which in itself would amount to  persecution.
             This was therefore a Refugee Convention case.

         Discussion

         23.  I am  concerned  about  the  approach  of  the  judge  to  the
             documentary evidence and her reasons for stating that she  did
             not find that it was credible and indeed  the  fact  that  she
             considered  the  documentary  evidence  after  having  made  a
             finding that  the  appellant  was  not  credible  rather  than
             holistically looking at the claim and the documentary evidence
             holistically - the genuineness  or  otherwise  of  documentary
             evidence is when established  a  factor  of  when  considering
             whether or not a claim is credible rather than the  other  way
             round.  I therefore consider that there is an error of law  in
             the approach of the judge such that it is appropriate  that  I
             set aside her decision.

         24.  I note that Mr Tarlow was ambivalent about the genuineness  of
             the documentary evidence but was clear that in  any  event  he
             considered that what  the  appellant  would  suffer  would  be
             prosecution rather than persecution.

         25.  I consider that having set aside the decision of the judge  in
             the First-tier Tribunal it is appropriate that given that this
             appeal has already been remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             that the appeal should remain in the  Upper  Tribunal.   There
             will therefore be a further hearing in the Upper Tribunal.  It
             will be for the Secretary of State to consider the documentary
             evidence further and if it is accepted  that  the  documentary
             evidence is genuine, then the appeal will proceed on the basis
             that the evidence is genuine.  If  not,  submissions  will  be
             heard regarding the genuineness of the  evidence  particularly
             in the context where there is affidavit evidence, letters from
             the attorney, email evidence and newspaper cuttings which  are
             relevant.  If any further evidence can be  obtained  by  those
             representing the appellant  relating  to  prosecution  of  the
             manager in the bank to whom the appellant reported.   Skeleton
             arguments should be  prepared  by  both  parties  relating  to
             firstly  whether  or  not  the  fact  that  the  appellant  is
             questioned  on  return  would  mean  that  there  would  be  a
             reasonable likelihood  of  his  being  ill-treated;  secondly,
             whether or not if he were prosecuted for an offence  of  money
             laundering he would be likely to  face  persecution;  thirdly,
             the  likelihood  of  the  appellant,  as   a   Sinhalese   who
             personally, and whose family had no background of sympathy for
             the LTTE, would be likely to be considered to have a political
             opinion in support of the LTTE.

         Notice of Decision

         The determination of the judge in the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
         aside.

         Directions

          1. The appeal is to  be  listed  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Time
             estimate three hours.  Submissions only.

          2. Skeleton arguments to be produced dealing with the matters set
             out in paragraph 25 above.

          3. A bundle of documents incorporating all documents on which the
             appellant wishes to rely  including  all  relevant  background
             documentation shall be served by the appellant  fourteen  days
             before the hearing."

2.   In my decision it  will  be  noted  that  I  set  out  the  appellant's
    immigration history, the details of his claim and the  history  of  the
    appeal which had been remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Allen in April 2017.  As the  appeal  had  already  been
    remitted once I considered it appropriate that the appeal should remain
    in the Upper Tribunal.  In paragraph 18 of my decision I  set  out  the
    matters which Ms Jegarajah argued had been accepted by the Secretary of
    State and in paragraphs 23 onwards I  not  only  gave  my  reasons  for
    setting aside the decision but also in paragraph 25  gave  reasons  for
    the directions  that  I  was  making  and  secondly  required  skeleton
    arguments from both parties dealing  with  issues  which  I  considered
    pertinent to the appeal.  The matter came back before me on 22  October
    2018.  Neither party had complied with the directions  and  the  appeal
    had therefore to be further adjourned.

3.   On 15 November 2018 the respondent  filed  a  skeleton  argument  which
    stated that it was not the respondent's policy to verify documents such
    as affidavits, email evidence and newspaper articles as  there  was  no
    general duty of enquiry upon the  examiner  to  authenticate  documents
    produced in support of the protection claim.  It stated that  I  should
    consider  the  documents  applying  the  principles  set  out  in   the
    determination in Tanveer Ahmed and emphasised that reliance was  placed
    on the reasons for refusal letter of 22 February  2016.   The  skeleton
    argued that there would be no reason why the appellant would be stopped
    at the airport or  questioned  or  monitored  in  his  home  area.  The
    categories of persons at risk of persecution or serious harm  were  set
    out in the judgment in GJ and Others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG (Rev 1) [2013] UKUT 319 and these showed that  it  was  highly
    unlikely that the appellant would be questioned on return as there  was
    no evidence to suggest that he was either on a stop  list  or  a  watch
    list.  Even if he returned  to  his  home  area  his  activities  would
    clearly not  reveal  any  sympathy  for  the  LTTE  or  any  activities
    connected to  them.  It  was  further  argued  that  even  if  he  were
    questioned on return that would not indicate a reasonable likelihood of
    his being  ill-treated  and,  as  he  did  not  fall  within  the  risk
    categories he would not be subject to ill-treatment because he was  not
    someone who was working for Tamil  separatism  or  to  destabilise  the
    unity of the Sri Lankan State.  His past history would only be relevant
    if he was perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
    present  risk  to  the  unity  Sri  Lankan  State  or  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government.  The skeleton went on to say that:

         "It is asserted that the appellant as  a  Sinhalese  man,  with  no
         affiliation to the LTTE, would not be perceived as a  present  risk
         by the authorities because the authorities would  know  from  their
         sophisticated intelligence that he came to the UK as a student  for
         economic reasons and the UK are now seeking to return him."

4.   It was also argued in the skeleton argument that if the appellant  were
    prosecuted for an offence of money laundering that would not mean  that
    he would face persecution rather  than  prosecution.  That  was  not  a
    terrorism related offence.  It  was  pointed  out  that  there  was  no
    documentary evidence in relation to the prosecution of the  appellant's
    line manager or whether any such prosecution was successful in  finding
    links between the bank and the LTTE that would lead to imprisonment  or
    ill-treatment.   There  was  no  objective  evidence  suggesting   such
    prosecution would mean the authorities were corrupt and  therefore  the
    appellant might be detained or ill-treated on the basis that  he  might
    be thought to have connections with the LTTE.  It would  be  more  than
    likely that he would be treated as a normal prosecution case  where  he
    would be able to adduce evidence to protest his innocence  against  any
    claims and if detained that would be a consequence of that  prosecution
    as opposed to any political affiliation.

5.   The skeleton argument went on to  argue  that  the  likelihood  of  the
    appellant as a  Sinhalese  who  personally  and  whose  family  had  no
    background sympathy for the LTTE would be  considered  to  support  the
    LTTE was remote.  There was nothing to suggest that that was  the  case
    or any reason why such  a  conclusion  should  be  drawn.  If  he  were
    monitored on return  no  such  links  would  be  established.   It  was
    therefore argued that he did not fall into any of the risk  categories.
    Moreover, given that his fears arose out of events  in  2014  and  that
    four years later there was insufficient evidence to suggest an  ongoing
    interest in the appellant due to perceived LTTE  links:  there  was  no
    arrest warrant, court order or evidence that he was on a stop or  watch
    list.  There was nothing to show that he would be at risk.   There  was
    no stream of evidence which would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant and his family who had never shown  sympathy  with  the  LTTE
    would all of a sudden begin to support them.

6.   The appellant had  not  lodged  any  direct  evidence  of  the  charges
    against his line manager. Rather Ms Jegarajah produced a  small  bundle
    of documents including the appellant's contract of employment, an email
    to the newspaper in which the article  had  been  published  which  had
    elicited a response from  the  Cheaf  (sic)  Editor  stating  that  the
    newspaper was  one  of  independent  journalists  who  have  access  to
    different sources to receive news and that they did  not  reveal  their
    sources as it would be against their Code of Conduct.  The letter  went
    on to say:-

         "I can only confirm that the news about your client has reached  to
         our reporter who has access to the Crime Investigation  Department.
         We also verify the veracity of the news before we publish it.  Thus
         according to our opinion this news bulletin was genuine.  I  cannot
         reveal any further information in this regard."

7.   Ms Jegarajah produced an  article  headed  "Tamil  Tigers  and  Sinhala
    Tigers Reborn" which referred to 25 Sinhala men who had  been  arrested
    by the Terrorism Investigation Unit and detained  and  said  that  "the
    accusations levelled at them sounded dastardly in the extreme  to  most
    ordinary Sinhala ears".  It  stated  that  those  men  belonged  to  an
    organisation called the Viplevakari  Vimukthi  Peramuna  (Revolutionary
    Liberation Front) which was a Sinhala counterpart of the LTTE.  The men
    had confessed to obtaining arms training from  the  LTTE  and  planning
    terrorist attacks in the south and  that  journalists  had  been  shown
    video clips  of  their  confessions.   It  was  stated  that  the  main
    objective of the organisation was to "lure youths with behavioural  and
    personality disorders and to organise them into  a  militia  to  attack
    innocent civilians in the south" and it was stated the organisation had
    already carried out thirteen operations including several  bomb  blasts
    in the south.  It was said that "the accusations seemed too  horrendous
    and  too  detailed  to  be  lies".   She   also   produced   a   "media
    accreditation" card for a Mr Thusitha Pathirana which described him  as
    Chief Editor of the  Independent  Newspaper.   Finally,  there  was  an
    affidavit from a Warnakulasooriya Patapendige Sasika Madhuranga Fonseka
    who said that he was a cousin of Mr Arun Pathiraja of Wattegadara  Road
    which stated that Mr Pathiraja had worked as  a  bank  manager  at  the
    Commercial Bank in Colombo and that he could confirm that Mr  Pathiraja
    had been arrested in November 2014 and charged with assisting the Tamil
    Tigers with money laundering and had been convicted by the  High  Court
    of Colombo but he had appealed and his appeal was pending at the  Court
    of Appeal.  He was still in prison in Boossa Prison in Geel District.

8.   In  her  submissions  Ms  Jegarajah  emphasised  that  the  appellant's
    contract of employment showed that he was a  junior  executive  officer
    and  not  a  cashier.   Ms  Jegarajah  started  by  referring  to   the
    documentary evidence which indicated that the  Sinhala  Tigers  existed
    and said that Sinhalese who supported the Tamil Tigers were not a group
    to which  reference  was  made  in  GJ.  The  reality  was  that  their
    involvement in Tamil separatism was real and a matter of concern to the
    authorities.  Therefore the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  Sinhalese
    should not be taken as meaning that he would not be  considered  to  be
    likely to be involved with Tamil separatism or to threaten the unity of
    the Sri Lankan State.

9.   She referred to the newspaper report which was translated at  pages  14
    to 17 of the bundle and which referred  to  the  resuscitation  of  the
    Tiger movement and then referred to financial crimes investigators  who
    believed that ND was behind a recent transfer of  85,000,000  funds  to
    Sri Lanka "for reviving bankrupt Tiger politics" and that despite raids
    the police had failed to trace him and believed that he  had  fled  the
    country with his family. A Defence Ministry spokesman had stated  at  a
    press briefing that police had already taken action to "bring down  Sri
    Lanka not only him but also all Sri Lankan  nationals  abroad  who  had
    abetted Colonel Nagulan  Irivalan".  The  article  in  the  Independent
    stated  the  Financial  Crimes  Investigation  Division  had  commenced
    detailed investigations in respect of ND of whom it was  reported  that
    he had close links with the Tiger movement and had  offered  assistance
    to Tiger members in the opening of bank accounts with false information
    "permitting the cumulation of substantial funds in those  accounts  and
    effecting transfers from them into other accounts".  It was stated that
    the Financial Crimes Investigation Division had raided the house of  ND
    to arrest and interrogate him and that he had some  time  in  the  past
    left the  country  with  his  wife  and  two  children.   Ms  Jegarajah
    emphasised that clearly there was a  joint  investigation  between  the
    Terrorism  Investigation  department  ID  and  the   Financial   Crimes
    Authority in relation to LTTE members seeking to  resurrect  the  LTTE.
    She then referred to the lawyer's letter from Mr Rajagulendra who  said
    that the appellant was wanted by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  for  his
    alleged links with the LTTE and that he had been asked  to  attend  the
    Kandana Police in June 2015.  He referred to his client as Mr  Jayakody
    Archchige Don Bernard Basil Silva (the appellant's  father-in-law)  who
    had been to the police  station  and  had  been  questioned  about  the
    appellant's whereabouts and the reasons for his  visit  to  the  United
    Kingdom and said that it had been indicated to him that  the  appellant
    had committed a financial crime by helping the Tigers but that detailed
    investigations had not been conducted.  He said that he  had  contacted
    the officer in charge of the Kandana Police but  they  had  refused  to
    detail their investigations.

10.  Ms Jegarajah pointed out that Mr Rajagulendra, the appellant's  father-
    in-law's lawyer,  went on to say that he had again attended the  police
    station with Mr Silva in December 2015  and  set  out  the  distinction
    between the Financial Crimes Investigation  Division  who  investigated
    money laundering, terrorist financing and financial directions and  the
    Presidential Commission of Enquiry  to  investigate  and  enquire  into
    serious acts of frauds, corruption, abuse of power, State resources and
    privileges which carried out investigations into politicians.   He  had
    indicated that the police had claimed that the appellant had  committed
    financial crimes against national security.  He said also that Mr Silva
    had been asked to provide an affidavit pledging that he  would  produce
    the appellant to the nearest police station  upon  his  return  to  Sri
    Lanka and that he had been  further  informed  that  the  police  would
    inform the Commissioner for Immigration and Detention to take steps  to
    arrest the appellant on his arrival at Colombo  International  Airport.
    Therefore it was clear, he stated, that the appellant  was  wanted  for
    links with the LTTE.

11.  Ms Jegarajah also referred to an affidavit by Mr Silva who stated  that
    he confirmed that according to his knowledge the  appellant  never  had
    direct or indirect links with the LTTE and that he was shocked to  hear
    of the allegations made  by  the  police  officers  that  he  had  been
    involved "with the overseas network of the LTTE and confirmed that they
    had never supported the ideology of the LTTE. He  categorically  denied
    all the allegations traced by the police and had confirmed that his son-
    in-law would never have assisted the Tigers  for  pecuniary  gain.   He
    also said that to  his  knowledge  the  appellant  had  no  direct  and
    indirect links with the Tamil diaspora  and  that  he  would  make  the
    necessary arrangements for the  appellant  to  surrender  to  a  police
    station as soon he arrived in Sri Lanka.  He stated he was  aware  that
    the appellant could be arrested at the  airport  as  he  was  seriously
    wanted by the police.  Ms Jegarajah  argued  that  the  respondent  had
    verified  the  lawyer's  letter  and  that  the  lawyer  was  not   the
    appellant's lawyer but his father-in-law's lawyer.  The allegation  had
    been shown by the lawyer to be setting  up  false  bank  accounts  from
    Europe to Sri Lanka to resurrect the LTTE.

12.  Moreover, she referred to the affidavits from the  appellant's  friends
    and referred to a newspaper cutting of 9 June 2015,  a  further  report
    from the Independent of 10 June 2016 - the day after the earlier report
    - which stated  the  Terrorist  Investigation  Department  were  making
    arrests because of a police discovery of an alleged LTTE suicide jacket
    and explosives near Jaffna.  She also then referred to the emails  from
    the appellant's friends NC, I and IM who stated that they had read news
    about the appellant which was scary, one of which, from NC, who  having
    heard that the appellant had denied any involvement said  "if  you  did
    not do anything you do not want to be worried take care".  Another from
    SS referred to an article in the Independent which had referred to  the
    LTTE connected person called ND and has the enquiry "N is that you?   I
    tried to find out really on it, it's about you or someone else?   As  a
    friend just let you know that it's a big problem for in future".  A  GP
    had also made enquiries saying that  the  article  was  about  ND  "who
    worked at bank".

13.  Ms Jegarajah went on to say that the lawyer's letter showed that  there
    was clearly an investigation and that there  was  a  national  security
    issues involved which alleged that false bank accounts had been set  up
    from Europe to send money to Sri Lanka.  She said that it was only when
    the appellant found out from his friends about what they had seen  that
    he had decided to claim asylum.  She said there was no  evidence  about
    the trial of the appellant's line manager as this was a  high  security
    matter.

14.  In her submissions Ms Willocks-Briscoe first referred to  paragraph  47
    of the letter of refusal which read:

         "47. During the asylum interview you stated  that  your  father-in-
             law, whom you lived with in Sri Lanka, had his house raided by
             three police officers on 23 June 2015 and was questioned about
             you and your alleged links with the LTTE:

                  '... they have searched the house, especially my room  and
                  my computer' (AIR Q58).  Even though  he  denied  all  the
                  accusations in December 2015  he  was  questioned  by  the
                  police about your whereabouts and it had been decided that
                  if you come back to Sri Lanka, you will be arrested at the
                  airport (AIR  Q71),  but  when  asked  whether  your  name
                  appears on a computerised "stop" list  accessible  at  the
                  airport you stated  "I  do  not  know"  (AIR  Q72).   Your
                  solicitor provided us with a copy of an  email  which  was
                  sent to G R Law Chambers@gmail.com - alleged  Attorney  at
                  Law in Sri Lanka - Mr Jayakody Archchige Don Bernard Basil
                  Silva  who  represented  your   father-in-law.    The   UK
                  solicitor explained the Silva's interrogations and  got  a
                  reply the next day (28/01/16), stating:

                  "... your  client  had  been  wanted  by  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities for his  alleged  links  with  the  Liberation
                  Tigers of Tamil Eelam.  My client has been asked to attend
                  Kandana Police in June 2015.  A policeman from the Kandana
                  Police  Station  has  visited  Mr  Silva's  residence  and
                  divulged this message.  He did not know the reason for the
                  investigation.  He had been to the police station  on  his
                  own.  He had been questioned  about  his  son-in-law  ND's
                  whereabout and the reason for his  visits  to  the  United
                  Kingdom.  The police have indicated that your  client  has
                  committed financial crimes by helping  the  Tigers.   They
                  did  not  conduct  detailed  investigations  ...Before   I
                  provide the details of the investigations I would like  to
                  bring to your attention that after the  transformation  of
                  powers ..."

    There was a reference then to an article headed "Sri Lanka -  over  900
    complaints on corruption to PRECIFAC dated 12/09/15 which then referred
    to the Presidential Commission Enquiries  to  investigate  and  enquire
    into serious acts of frauds.

15.  The letter of refusal then referred to Secretary of the Commission  who
    had said that 50 complaints out of 250 which had been referred  to  the
    Commission Investigation were being investigated. The letter of refusal
    pointed out that the article confirmed that only  investigations  which
    occurred between 2010 and 2015 were  investigated.  The  letter  stated
    that this:

         "... means that as you resigned from your role in August 2010,  you
         would not have been taken into consideration of committed fraud  or
         money laundering, nor being involved with the LTTE as you are of  a
         Sinhalese ethnicity worked genuinely in the bank  was  not  a  ring
         leader for LTTE nor involved at all with  the  group.   Furthermore
         you stated that you were never arrested nor detained in  Sri  Lanka
         by the authorities.  Only your father-in-law's flat was  raided  in
         December 2015 and after being  questioned  no  arrest  warrant  was
         issued for you.  Although you provided us with the affidavit  which
         was produced for your father-in-law on 04/12/15 the document states
         all the true information about your innocence, as you have  claimed
         to be and clearly stated you never had direct links with  the  LTTE
         groups.  All the copies of the documents  you  have  provided  were
         considered in line with the case law  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  IAT  2002
         UKAIT 004309 This means that they have not been viewed in isolation
         as a solicitor did not provide us with the originals the  affidavit
         was unheaded, the issue  date  was  inserted  at  the  end  of  the
         document in a bracket and the document had been written in  English
         where English is not an official language in Sri Lanka.  The  email
         between your solicitor and the Attorney at  Law  are  not  evidence
         that the communications are genuine or sent on the acclaimed  dates
         or that the sender and recipient are who you said  they  are.   The
         documents although only copies  have  been  verified  by  the  Home
         Office Intelligence  Unit  in  Colombo  and  although  in  previous
         instances the documents issued by the police were  verified  to  be
         false the Attorney at Law confirmed the issuance of the letter.  In
         your circumstances since the original letters were not received  it
         is not accepted that provided copies are genuine.  However even  if
         the submitted copies were genuine on return to Sri Lanka  you  will
         be able to explain your situation as implication will not  be  made
         nor prosecution would apply to you, due to the  power  of  the  new
         government."

16.  It is of note that the letter went on to say  that  it  was  considered
    that the "you would be of no interest to the Sri Lankan authorities for
    the work you did at the bank. You would only done your job in the  bank
    and no-one would have suspected that you would help the LTTE."

17.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe speculated,  moreover,  that  with  regard  to  the
    documents someone with the same name or a similar name to the appellant
    could have been referred to and said it was  for  me  to  decide  if  a
    document is reliable.  She then referred to the newspaper article which
    referred to recent activity but the reality was the appellant had  left
    his employment in 2010.  The appellant's evidence began with the arrest
    of the bank manager and this was not reflected in  the  articles  which
    refer to someone arrested and released.  Moreover  the  indication  was
    that information was not being released about the charges  against  the
    line manager  but  there  was  no  name  or  author  who  compiled  the
    information regarding the account  which  was  reported.   It  was  not
    mentioned in State media.  It said that the department had made a press
    briefing but no mention of the appellant had been provided.   The  only
    thing that came out of the appellant's father's affidavit was  that  he
    had been questioned about his daughter-in-law's whereabouts.  There  is
    no suggestion of any extant court proceedings against the appellant nor
    an arrest warrant.  There is nothing to indicate that he was a  serious
    suspect.  There was nothing in the lawyer's letter to indicate  how  he
    had obtained the information about which he wrote.  She emphasised  the
    lack of information  regarding  the  bank  manager's  case  nothing  to
    indicate that the bank manager had been convicted.   She  asked  me  to
    find there was no interest in the appellant.

18.  In reply Ms Jegarajah said that what she referred to was a  high  level
    operation concerning charges of money laundering.  She  stated  that  I
    should place weight on "lawyer to lawyer"  correspondence  and  finally
    added that there was no reason for the appellant to decide to  live  in
    Britain when he could have a good  life  in  Sri  Lanka.   The  further
    correspondence to which Ms Jegarajah referred was that dated 9  January
    2018 from the appellant's solicitors here to G R  Law  Chambers  -  the
    solicitors who represented the  appellant's  father-in-law  -  who  had
    asked for a detailed letter about the matter, the detailed letter  from
    Mr Rajagulendra of that firm which referred to the affidavit  submitted
    by the appellant's father-in-law and stated that the appellant's father-
    in-law had informed them that a police team has  visited  his  home  in
    June 2017 and they made it clear that it was "just a  formal  visit  to
    confirm whether his son-in-law, N D, had returned to the island.   They
    had left when they had been informed that he had  not  returned".   The
    Attorney went on to state that three  officers  from  the  FCID  and  a
    police officer had visited.  He had been informed  by  the  appellant's
    father-in-law, that his home had been visited on 6 July and he had been
    interrogated about the appellant. He said "This time  they  were  harsh
    with my client.  They had told him that your  client  should  not  hide
    away from them for  long  periods  and  return  to  Sri  Lank  to  face
    investigations".  Having said that the  appellant's  father-in-law  had
    been terrified by the approach, the Attorney went on to say that he had
    contacted the officer in charge of the  Kandana  Police  and  clarified
    about the harassment of his client and their  failure  to  contact  him
    prior to the enquiries and the OIC of the Kandana  Police  had  replied
    that it was a decision of the FCID  and  that  he  had  to  obey  their
    instructions.  The lawyer said "no further visits were made after  this
    incident".

19.  I note the appellant's witness  statement  which  stated  that  he  had
    spoken with a Mr Kumudu Ranasinga, who is the person who initially  had
    told him that the manager, Arun Pathiraja, had  been  arrested  and  he
    believed the appellant's details had been passed onto the  authorities.
    He said that Mr Arun Pathiraja remained in prison and  stated  that  he
    had asked for clarification of the position of the four other employees
    for the bank who had the same role as he and he had been informed by Mr
    Ranasinga that two of the employees were also imprisoned and the  other
    two employees had had left the bank and Mr Ranasinga did not know where
    they were.

20.  In his affidavit the  appellant  also  refers  to  his  contacting  his
    wife's cousin Rohan Jeyakody who is in the army but had  been  told  he
    had been unable to help him.  He also refers to his completion  of  his
    MBA here and says that when his visa expired he did not  claim  asylum,
    he had no significant fear of his return to Sri Lanka.

Discussion

21.  The appellant is Sinhalese and neither he nor his wider family had  any
    involvement with or sympathy for Tamil  separatism.   There  is  simply
    nothing to indicate that with that background he would be suspected  of
    being a supporter of the LTTE.   Ms  Jegarajah  drew  my  attention  to
    "Sinhala Tigers" who were Sinhalese who were involved in  very  serious
    terrorist activity.  Her argument was that that  indicated  that  there
    were Sinhalese people who would support the Tigers.  There  is  nothing
    however to indicate that this Sinhalese appellant would be likely to be
    considered to have done so.  He clearly  did  not  see  anything  which
    would link him to the Tigers  or  even  to  money  laundering  when  he
    finished his qualifications here and considered going back to Sri Lanka
    in 2014.  Moreover, of course he retired from the bank in 2010.   There
    was nothing before he left to cause him concern.  Moreover there is  no
    arrest warrant issued against him and no evidence of his being  on  any
    stop list.  Clearly there have been no attempts to start  any  form  of
    extradition  proceedings  against  him  despite  the  fact   that   the
    authorities in Sri Lanka, it has claimed, know where his family live.

22.  I have considered the newspaper reports in the light  of  the  guidance
    in Tanveer Ahmed.  As will be seen from my decision setting  aside  the
    determination of the Judge in the First-tier I considered it  important
    there be  further  evidence,  if  possible  obtained,  regarding  those
    newspaper reports.  The reality is that I do not have before me  copies
    of the newspapers or even the originals of the cuttings  and  the  only
    further documentation that was  obtained  after  I  had  adjourned  the
    appeal was the letter from the Chief Editor which is a further document
    which I must consider in the light of Tanveer Ahmed.  I can  only  come
    to the conclusion that  the  newspaper  cuttings  do  not  support  the
    appellant's claim and are not genuine.

23.  I am reinforced in that belief when  I  consider  the  email  from  the
    Chief Editor which I cannot accept is genuine particularly  given  that
    the Chief Editor whose card correctly  spells  the  word  Chief  cannot
    spell correctly the word Chief  under  the  signature  of  the  letter.
    Indeed the English of  the  letter  is  poor  for  an  editor.   It  is
    unfortunate that  the  appellant's  representatives  had  not  provided
    original documents let alone copies of the  newspapers  in  which  they
    claimed that the articles were written - there appears to be no  search
    of archives if such existed in Sri Lanka but I cannot conclude applying
    the low standard of proof that these articles are genuine.

24.  I must of course consider all documentary evidence within  the  context
    of the other parts of the evidence and the  various  emails  that  were
    sent out to the appellant. Copies of which were provided refer  to  the
    articles but  I  consider  that  there  would  have  no  difficulty  in
    arranging for emails to be sent to back up  false  documents.   I  have
    considered the second letter from the lawyer which indicates  that  the
    appellant should have no concerns on return as well as  of  course  the
    affidavits from the appellant's father-in-law and the earlier  lawyer's
    letter, which was quoted at length in the letter of  refusal,  and  not
    that there is nothing  to  indicate  the  veracity  of  the  assertions
    therein. It is, of course, of note that the appellant's father-in-law's
    affidavit is in English and  therefore  presumably  drafted  for  these
    proceedings.  The first  letter  from  his  lawyer  in  father-in-law's
    lawyer in Sri Lanka refer to what he had been told by  the  appellant's
    father-in-law and although he later had asserted that  he  had  visited
    the police station with his client that  at  best  indicated  that  the
    appellant might be asked to give information about the activities about
    his line manager.

25.  I consider that no weight  should  be  placed  on  those  documents  as
    showing  that  the  appellant  is  himself  wanted  in   any   criminal
    proceedings.  I have set out the pertinent parts of the document  above
    but I do not believe that they can be accepted as  evidence  that  this
    appellant would be charged  with  criminal  activity  in  supporting  a
    terrorist organisation.

26.  It may be that there are proceedings against the appellant's some  time
    line manager but even  that  I  consider  has  not  been  proved.   The
    assertion that the charges are so serious that no evidence of  them  or
    of the trial apart from the brief letter from a man who says that he is
    a cousin of the bank manager  lacks  credibility.   Even  if,  however,
    there were charges  against  the  appellant's  line  manager  there  is
    nothing to indicate that the appellant has been  charged  or  would  be
    charged as an accomplice.  If there are proceedings  against  the  line
    manager it is possible that the appellant might  be  asked  to  make  a
    statement or be a witness at  trial,  but given the long delay  between
    his leaving his job at the bank and coming to  Britain  and  then  this
    matter having flared up (albeit that Ms Jegarajah urged  me  to  accept
    that there had been a resurgence and interest in corruption  cases  and
    financial misdemeanours after  the  change  of  government)    that  is
    unlikely and, of course, it is not persecution . In any event, I cannot
    consider that given that there is not even an indication of  an  arrest
    warrant against the appellant that he would be likely to  face  charges
    of any sort on return.  I notice of course that he does not assert that
    he has been placed on any stop list.

27.  For these reasons I find that not only does the appellant  not  have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason but also there
    is nothing to indicate that he would face Article  3  ill-treatment  on
    return.  I would add that  I  have  read  the  papers  considering  the
    appellant's mental health and indeed about his daughter's education but
    the reality is that there is  nothing  that  would  indicate  that  his
    removal would be a breach of his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

DECISION

28.  For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by dismissing
    the appeal.

Signed:  [pic]    Date: 25 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

