

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02602/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 27th October 2017                     |On 07th November 2017             |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                             NOORE ALAM JAHANGIR
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr R Wilcox, instructed by Blackrock solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                 DIRECTIONS


   1. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent refusing
      his claim for international protection  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Manyarara for reasons set out in a decision promulgated
      on 27th April 2017. He sought permission in grounds which run to  just
      over 4 pages. In essence, he relies upon the following grounds:
   a) The judge erred in  giving  no  importance  to  documentary  and  oral
      evidence; gave "very light weight"  to  documents;  his  evidence  was
      entirely consistent with the documentary evidence on the situation  in
      Bangladesh;
   b) The documents relied upon are genuine;
   c) The judge erred in referring, twice, to  the  appellant's  country  of
      origin as Pakistan whereas he is from Bangladesh;
   d) In paragraph 19 the judge refers to Mohammad Abdus Salam  giving  oral
      evidence whereas he did not;
   e) Every person with the slightest link to a political  opposition  party
      is in real risk of persecution;
   f) The judge "totally" failed to take into consideration his  established
      family and private life.


   2. Dr Wilcox sought permission to amend the grounds  of  appeal  to  rely
      upon a failure on the part  of  the  judge  to  take  account  of  the
      appellant's involvement and leadership role in Jassus UK,  a  cultural
      entity within the BNP. He referred to the list that had been  produced
      by the appellant was a list which showed membership of Jassus, not the
      BNP. Furthermore, he asserted that the judge had  erred  in  mistaking
      the appellant's claimed role in  the  BNP  as  a  claim  to  be  in  a
      leadership position  within  the  organisation  rather  than  a  local
      leadership position within the student wing where  he  came  from.  Mr
      Nath opposed the amendment at such short notice. I  refused  to  grant
      him permission to amend the grounds - the grounds relied upon had been
      drafted in May 2017 (not by counsel but by the appellant's  instructed
      solicitors) and the Notice of hearing had been sent on  8th  September
      2017. There had been plenty of time to  amend  the  grounds  and  such
      short notice was incompatible with enabling the respondent to  address
      detailed amended grounds.


   3. Dr Wilcox submitted that although he had sought to amend the  grounds,
      his submissions, both oral and as set out in  the  skeleton  argument,
      were an amplification of the errors of fact made by  the  judge  which
      were typified by the mistake made as to who had  actually  given  oral
      evidence. Although Dr  Wilcox  did  not  withdraw  reliance  upon  the
      references  to  Pakistan  he  did  not   place   weight   upon   this,
      acknowledging that this may well be classified as a  "cut  and  paste"
      error.

   4. Mr Nath submitted that the evidence overall had been set out correctly
      in the First-tier Tribunal decision and the incorrect  naming  of  the
      person who gave oral evidence was akin to giving the country of origin
      as Pakistan rather than Bangladesh.

   5. The grounds are, to a large extent, exhortations to reach a  different
      conclusion rather than identification of potential or real  errors  of
      law. I  have  not  permitted  an  amendment  to  the  grounds  seeking
      permission but I accept that Dr Wilcox's submissions with  regards  to
      the witness giving  evidence  are  amplification  rather  than  a  new
      ground. The incorrect identification  of  Mr  Salam  as  having  given
      evidence, when he did not, is more than a  "cut  and  paste"  type  of
      error.  Although the incorrect identification, twice, by the judge  of
      the appellant coming from Pakistan would not of itself  be  sufficient
      to amount to an error of law, the combination of that with  the  error
      in who gave evidence is indicative of a lack of  anxious  scrutiny  by
      the judge.

   6. This is an asylum appeal. It is incumbent upon a judge to have  proper
      regard to the evidence  before  him/her.  The  wrongful  stating  that
      someone gave evidence when they did not is a failure by the  judge  to
      have proper or adequate regard to the evidence before  him  and  is  a
      material error of law. I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge.

   7. There has been a fundamental failure to  have  proper  regard  to  the
      evidence and the findings made are unsafe. It is not the role  of  the
      Upper Tribunal to be a primary fact finder. I remit the appeal  to  be
      heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  decision
to be made.








[pic]

                                    Date 31st October 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
