
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02200/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2018                            |On 6 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     B F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Loughran, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
(11/10/18)
     Mr M Mathews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (19/01/19)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge David C Clapham SSC promulgated on  29  March  2018
    dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent made  on  30
    January  2018  to  refuse  his  claim  for  asylum   and   humanitarian
    protection.

 2. The appellant's case is  that  he  entered  the  military  in  Algeria,
    spending three years in military academy followed by a  secondment  for
    five and a half years to the police to train their  officers  and  then
    being sent back to the military, the appellant retiring in  2007.   His
    retirement pension was small and  those  who  retired  later,  in  2011
    onwards, were treated  more  favourably.   This  led  to  retired  army
    officers in the same position as the appellant setting  up  a  national
    coordination committee for  retired  military  personnel  who  organise
    demonstrations to protest their position.

 3. The appellant started to demonstrate in 2013 and he attended two  major
    demonstrations on 18 April 2017 and one on 21 May 2017.   He  had  also
    been involved in numerous smaller gatherings in other cities  and  that
    he was a  coordinator,  being  a  point  of  contact  between  regional
    coordinators and others.

 4. Following his  attendance  at  the  first  demonstration  in  2017  the
    appellant received a threat over the telephone which he believed to  be
    that of someone in a position of authority and he was told to stop  his
    activities.  After his attendance at the second large demonstration  he
    received a second telephone threat.  The third threat following  on  11
    July 2017 and that one involved a  threat  of  harm  to  his  wife  and
    children.  In light of that he and his family left Algeria, fled to the
    United Kingdom and claimed asylum.

 5. The respondent did not accept  the  appellant's  account  of  what  had
    happened in Algeria nor did he accept that the appellant was a  retired
    military officer.

 6.  The  judge  found,  having  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and
    submissions  from  his  representative,  the   respondent   not   being
    represented at the hearing, that:-

      1) the appellant was a retired military officer [27];

      2) he was even prepared to accept that the  appellant  may  have  been
         involved in  an  attempt  to  improve  the  pensions  for  military
         officers at [31];

      3)  there was no adverse interest in him on the part of  the  Algerian
         authorities, it being more likely that they would have attempted to
         arrest him, rather than making threatening phone calls;

      4) if the appellant were genuinely of interest to the  authorities  he
         could not have left the country without difficulty;

      5) it would not have been difficult for the Authorities to locate  the
         appellant as a retired military officer who was  in  receipt  of  a
         pension [33] or that his account is not therefore made out.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred;

      1) in failing to make a finding on a material matter which is  whether
         he had coordinated and attended demonstrations in Algeria;

      2) in failing to consider the risk to those who demonstrate  illegally
         or without permission in Algeria.

 8. Miss Loughran submitted that there was no proper evidence on which  the
    judge had made an assumption about the appellant being  able  to  leave
    the country.  She submitted further that there needed  to  be  a  clear
    finding about whether  the  appellant  was  organising  demonstrations,
    given the evidence of what happened to people who were  undertook  such
    activities.

 9. Mrs O'Brien submitted that the judge had made clear findings as to  the
    demonstration and the real issue was that the judge had found  adequate
    and sustainable reasons that the appellant had not shown that he was at
    real risk.  She drew attention to paragraph 34 of  the  refusal  letter
    which clearly raised the issue of the appellant being able to leave the
    country.

10. In response, Miss Loughran submitted that there was clear evidence that
    those who demonstrated were  prosecuted,  demonstrations  being  banned
    indefinitely in Algeria and that there was a well-founded risk  to  the
    appellant of serious harm.

11. I am satisfied that the judge erred in not making findings whether  the
    appellant had in fact coordinated demonstrations and  or  had  attended
    them.  As Judge Hollingworth noted when granting permission  the  judge
    should have set out  a  more  detailed  analysis  in  relation  to  the
    departure of the appellant and that a fuller analysis was  required  in
    relation to the issue of warrants.

12. I consider that the judge did not  properly  explain  by  reference  to
    evidence why he concluded that the appellant being able  to  leave  the
    country was an indication that he was not being sought.   Further,  the
    judge appears not to have taken  into  account  the  detailed  evidence
    given by the appellant in interview and in his witness statements as to
    why he believed the person who made the threats was in fact  acting  on
    behalf of the Government.

13. It is dangerous to  make  assumptions  about  how  the  authorities  in
    Algeria are likely to respond  to  demonstrations  by  former  military
    officers who clearly, in the past, had been loyal to the state and  who
    had suffered significant casualties in the campaigns  against  Islamist
    factions.   It does not necessarily follow that they would  respond  to
    demonstrations  by  such  individuals  as   they   would   respond   to
    demonstrations by those politically opposed to the regime on  religious
    or party-political grounds.   It may well be that they wish to  disrupt
    the activities of the demonstrators by means other than arrests.

14. For these reasons, I  am  satisfied  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law in that insufficient
    reasons were given for the findings on key  facts.   The  decision  was
    therefore set aside and directions given for a further hearing.

15. The hearing was then adjourned for the appeal to be remade at a hearing
    which took place on 19 January 2019

16. The appellant gave evidence through an interpreter, adopting his  first
    and second witness statements.  When cross-examined, he  said  that  he
    had retired in 2007; that in 2011 some of his fellow officers began  to
    complain about their retirement conditions; that he became involved  in
    2013; and, had attended demonstrations from January 2013.

17. He said that he became a coordinator at  the  provincial  level,  there
    being only one in each province, his being Wahran (also known as Oran).
     He said there were also area national coordinators.

18. The appellant said that when he had started in 2013 they did not have a
    coordinator and that they may have had one previously.  It is  normally
    the previous coordinator who chose the new one.

19.  The  appellant  said  that  there  were  gatherings   prior   to   the
    demonstrations in April and May 2017, that about 600 or so  people  had
    attended the gatherings.  He said most  of  the  time  the  authorities
    prevented them from taking place and that the authorities had  attended
    during the gathering and asked everyone to leave.

20. The appellant said he had made an application for a visit visa in March
    2017 although not planning to use it until August 2017.  He  said  that
    he had applied for it beforehand  as  the  visa  application  procedure
    takes a long time and he had  to  apply  early  as  in  in  the  summer
    applications take a while to go through the embassy.  He  said  he  had
    not applied for a British visa before but for the rest of  Europe  many
    times.  He said it was general knowledge that it took time.

21. The appellant said he had not  had  any  contact  with  people  in  the
    movement and that their complaints had not yet been resolved.  He  said
    that there continued to  be  demonstrations,  gatherings  and  arrests.
    When asked how he knew this, he said the  media  does  not  allow  free
    speech.  It was put to him that there was  evidence  of  demonstrations
    held by other organisations since he left Algeria and it was put to him
    that there was no evidence of demonstrations held by  his  group  since
    2017.  He said they still exist and they demand their rights.  He  said
    that he knew that as the organisation does exist on the internet and on
    YouTube.  He said that his life had been at risk and he  did  not  know
    what evidence he needed to provide to the court.  He said he decided to
    seek asylum two weeks before he came here and he received threats.   He
    said that he still receives his pension.

22. Turning to the three threatening telephone calls,  the  appellant  said
    that the caller was the same one  for  all  three  occasions,  had  not
    identified themselves but that he knew that they were from intelligence
    forces.  He said he did not tell anybody about the  threats,  not  even
    anyone in the organisation.

23. The appellant said that two national  coordinators  and  three  members
    from different provinces and some demonstrators had been arrested.   He
    said that these were arrested from different locations  such  as  train
    stations and bus stations.  These people had not been asked  to  attend
    the police station.  He said these arrests had taken place  during  the
    preparation of the demonstrations which were then held in April and May
    2017.  He said a demonstration had been scheduled for July and  between
    June and that time they had arrested many people and  he  knew  he  was
    going to be next which is why he came to the United Kingdom.   He  said
    they  arrested  the  leaders  and  the   coordinators   to   stop   the
    demonstration from happening.  It was put to him that he had  not  said
    this before and that he was exaggerating.  He said he was not doing so.
     He said that the arrests had taken place in the capital and  he  lived
    450 kilometres away.  He said after that the  arrests  started  he  was
    100% sure that if he stayed he was going to be arrested.

24. He accepted that the only person  named  as  being  arrested  was  Amar
    Hassani, the leader of the organisation.  He said they could  not  hide
    the arrest of Amar Hassani, also known as Al Berri, as he is well-known
    and, as an MP was involved, he was exceptionally released.

25. He said that all the arrests had taken place and they  had  hidden  the
    evidence which is how  things  worked  in  Algeria  as  it  was  not  a
    democratic country.

26. Re-examined, the appellant said that he was no longer an active  member
    of the movement and he did not want people to know  that  he  was  here
    which is why he had had no contact with them.  He did not want them  to
    know that he was seeking asylum.  He considered that  he  had  betrayed
    his country.  He had then been a high-ranked officer, had a  good  life
    and had had no need to leave the country.  He said he did  so  when  he
    realised his life was at risk, leaving his house, his mother who is 79,
    all his belongings.  He said his mother is very sick and dying now  and
    he had been forced to leave for his own safety.

27. In response to my questions, the  appellant  said  that  communications
    between the coordinators were first via phone  though  that  they  also
    socialised together as former military  officers  and  information  was
    circulated by the national coordinators to him and passed on  by  phone
    and social media.   The  coordinators  had  helpers  who  informed  the
    members by phone, information being passed by word of mouth.   He  said
    they also  had  some  special  pages  on  Facebook  where  they  posted
    information but that although he had  used  Facebook  when  he  was  in
    Algeria he no longer did so.  He said he was worried  that  they  would
    know he was here and that he had claimed asylum and  he  did  not  want
    them to have any suspicion.

28. Asked how he knew that they had been arresting  people  that  were  not
    reported, he said it was well-known that if  somebody  disappears  from
    the movement he is with the security forces.  I  asked  if  he  thought
    that they may have just stopped being involved with the  movement.   He
    said that they were physically not there and when someone gets arrested
    they just deny it.

29. In further cross-examination  the  appellant  said  he  still  accesses
    Facebook but not the pages connected to  the  movement.   He  does  not
    communicate with those people.   He  said  that  they  had  not  posted
    crucial information on Facebook and discussing that in their  meetings.



30. In submissions Mr Mathews submitted that there was  now  evidence  that
    the  organisation  he  had  spoken  of  does   exist   but   that   the
    demonstrations were relatively small.  There were three reports of  the
    same meeting (Note to self: Check items 8 and 14) which showed at worst
    that teargas was used against the demonstration and several people were
    wounded.  He submitted that although the leader was arrested  and  sent
    to prison for a year, there was nothing to show general risk  to  those
    involved or that anyone other than the leader  had  been  arrested  and
    convicted.  There is no evidence that ordinary veterans were  subjected
    to arrests or threats or that hundreds had been arrested.

31. Insofar as people had been arrested at the demonstrations they were all
    released the same day and that the US State Department Report indicated
    that there had been no disappearances in Algeria albeit that  arbitrary
    arrest was common in Algeria.  He submitted it was odd that  there  was
    no external confirmation of people disappearing and that the  US  State
    Department indicated that people have access to a lawyer when arrested.



32. Mr Mathews submitted there was nothing to show the continuing existence
    of the organisation since 2017 and despite  it  being  said  that  they
    communicated via Facebook no evidence of this had been produced despite
    it being easy to provide.  He submitted  that  the  appellant's  belief
    that the organisation continues is simply an assertion as he has had no
    contact with its organisers since he left.

33. Mr Mathews submitted that  the  claims  to  have  been  threatened  are
    without substance but in any event there was no evidence to  show  that
    anyone other than the local leader was at risk of arrest  and  that  he
    had exaggerated the events of 2017 significantly.

34. Mr Mathews submitted that the appellant's account of  the  threats  was
    unreliable and that even had the threats occurred, this did not  amount
    to persecution and there was no continuing risk.

35. Miss Loughran submitted that the evidence of the phone call threats was
    consistent with threats made to journalists and that it should be borne
    in mind that Algeria was a culture where the oppression of  dissent  of
    any sort was the norm.  She accepted that there was no evidence outside
    the evidence of the leader being arrested and what the appellant  fears
    is extrajudicial ill-treatment.

36. In assessing the appellant's credibility and his claim as  a  whole,  I
    have had regard to the entirety of  the  evidence  put  before  me  and
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  I bear in mind the  findings  of  fact
    made by the First-tier Tribunal.

37. In evaluating the evidence of what has occurred in Algeria  I  bear  in
    mind the clear evidence that there are severe restrictions on the media
    and in what can be reported.  The Algerian government takes significant
    steps to avoid NGOs and particularly international  NGOs  entering  the
    country to undertake  examinations  of  conditions  in  detention.   It
    should also be borne in mind that in Algeria the culture of  repression
    goes back over a considerable period and that there were disappearances
    during the struggle against the Islamic extremists  which  resulted  in
    atrocities perpetrated by both sides - see in particular "Algeria 2017:
    the return of the "murderers"? Algeria-watch 11/06/2017 (inventory  III
    page 11)

38. There is evidence from several sources that the organisation  of  which
    the appellant claimed to be a member, does exist.  It is  evident  that
    from around 2011 a group of retired officers began to come together  to
    raise concerns about the treatment they received in terms  of  pensions
    and other benefits compared to those who retired after them.  This  led
    to a number of gatherings and later demonstrations in  April,  May  and
    (check this) July 2017.  The leader of the  organisation  was  arrested
    and sentenced to imprisonment for a year from September 2017.

39. The context of these demonstrations is set out in  "Algeria  2017:  the
    return of the "murderers"? Algeria-watch 11/06/2017 (inventory III page
    11) is a  behind  the  scenes  conflict  for  power  between  different
    factions within the state.

40. The suppression of the demonstrations is entirely consistent  with  the
    background evidence regarding how the Algerian regime does not tolerate
    any demonstrations or dissent or challenge to its policies.

41. There is, however, little evidence of what  has  happened  to  ordinary
    members of the organisation.  I remind myself that it is  dangerous  to
    assume that because an event is not reported that it  did  not  happen.
    There may be many reasons why an event is not reported.  In  a  country
    like Algeria where there are severe restrictions on the press and where
    social media are monitored, it is possible that  not  all  arrests  are
    reported.  The absence of evidence does not of  course  prove  that  an
    event did not occur.

42. Turning to the appellant's own evidence, I consider that his account of
    how the movement was organised, being  at  a  provincial  level,  makes
    sense.  It does not run contrary to the  background  evidence  and  its
    combination of retired officers  who  socialise  together  and  discuss
    matters together with messages  passed  on  by  telephone  and  limited
    information passed on Facebook pages makes sense.  It is  also  evident
    from the background  material  that  Facebook  is  used  to  coordinate
    certain activities in Algeria.  It has also  led  to  arrests  (see  US
    State Department Report at Inventory III, page 32).

43. It is striking that none of  the  accounts  of  the  demonstrations  or
    gatherings indicate that there were widespread arrests.   There  was  a
    degree of violence and the demonstrations were brought to an end partly
    by the use of teargas but it  is  difficult  to  characterise  what  is
    described as excessive violence.  Similarly, there is  no  evidence  to
    support the appellant's account of a large  number  of  disappearances.
    It may well be that the appellant was exaggerating at  this  point  but
    equally I bear in mind that in a country like Algeria where  the  state
    has used coercion in the past and where in the recent past  there  have
    been disappearances, it is perhaps very easy to  attribute  someone  no
    longer participating in a movement or disappearing from view  as  being
    abducted or arrested by the state.  One  has  only  to  think  how  his
    former colleagues would consider what had  happened  to  the  appellant
    given that he has effectively disappeared from Algeria and  has  stayed
    out of contact with them.

44. There is only the appellant's evidence for the threats  being  made  to
    him by telephone.  There is a pattern in  the  background  material  of
    threats being made in an attempt to silence people.

45. I do not consider that the use of this sort of threat  is  inconsistent
    with an approach whereby demonstrations were broken up.  It is just  as
    effective  to  intimidate  the  coordinators  into  making  sure   that
    demonstrations do not take place and to disrupt the network.  There  is
    no reason why an experienced state apparatus  should  choose  only  one
    means to prevent protests and one might have thought that  in  Algeria,
    where the state has in the past treated dissenters  and  in  particular
    Islamic fundamentalists, the threats against an individual  and  family
    may well be particularly effective.  In assessing who made the threats,
    it is difficult to see that, if they  did  exist,  they  were  made  by
    somebody other than the state.

46. There is, however, little evidence of  the  movement  continuing  after
    2017.  There is some indication that demonstrating about  pensions  has
    become involved with a wider group of protestors organised by the trade
    unions - see  "Algeria:  Global  unions  condemns  detention  of  1,000
    protestors" page2, Inventory III.

47. It is, however, of note that the appellant has provided no evidence  of
    continuing activity despite the  fact  that  he  may  have  access  via
    Facebook to the pages relating to the  organisation.   The  explanation
    given - that he was in effect ashamed of having left  his  country  and
    being seen as betraying it through seeking asylum and that  this  would
    be known - has  a  ring  of  truth  about  it.   The  appellant  became
    emotional about this when giving evidence and I have no doubt as to his
    sincerity on this point.  But there is nonetheless a lack  of  evidence
    of continuing activity.

48. Taking all of these facts into account and viewing the  evidence  as  a
    whole, I found the appellant to be  a  credible  and  reliable  witness
    notwithstanding a few doubts arising from a  limited  exaggeration.   I
    make the following findings of fact:-

      1) the applicant was involved in the movement of veterans from 2013;

      2)  that  he  was  the  provincial  coordinator  for  the  Wahran/Oran
         province;

      3) that he participated in the demonstrations as claimed;

      4) that he received the threats to him and his family, the authorities
         seeking to disrupt the movement.

49. I draw no inferences from the manner in which the appellant was able to
    leave the country without hindrance; and that was a matter  upon  which
    Mr Mathews expressly no longer sought to rely.

50. Given the effect on the appellant from  the  threats  to  him  and  his
    family, which were  sustained  over  a  period,  I  am  satisfied  that
    although no physical harm was inflicted, the mental effect was,  as  he
    has described, sufficiently serious to constitute  persecution  in  the
    past.

51. I now turn to assessing the risk on  return.   The  appellant  will  be
    returning on his own passport albeit after an extended absence.   That,
    and the fact that he had overstayed a British visa,  would  be  readily
    apparent  to  anybody  considering  the  passport.   But  there  is  no
    indication that the appellant is on a watchlist or would be arrested on
    the point of arrival.  It is also difficult to gauge whether the  state
    would maintain any interest in him given that from their point of view,
    the threats made to him to stop his activities had worked.

52. The appellant was  asked  in  interview  (Q.77)  why  he  would  be  of
    continuing interest. He replied that in their view they would know that
    he would be involved  with  the  organisation  secretly.  He  was  not,
    however, able to say if the authorities had been looking for  him,  but
    he thought that by the way they operate, they would actually be looking
    for him.

53. I accept that the appellant has a very real subjective fear of  serious
    ill-treatment on return  to  Algeria  and  I  note  the  evidence  that
    detention conditions breach Article 3 but  that  does  not  answer  the
    question of whether he is likely to  be  arrested  and  ill-treated  on
    return.  It is  evident  that  the  authorities  maintained  sufficient
    interest in him to make threats to him to desist  from  his  activities
    and it is not likely that they did not notice in the circumstances  his
    disappearance from the country or at the very least him ceasing  to  be
    involved with the movement.

54. That said, I bear in mind paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules:

    339K. The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution or
    serious harm, or to direct threats of such persecution  or  such  harm,
    will be regarded as a serious indication of the  person's  well-founded
    fear of persecution or real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.

55. Although it is difficult to quantify  the  risk,  particularly  with  a
    state such as Algeria which tends to behave to an  extent  arbitrarily,
    but viewing the evidence as a  whole  and  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    threshold of reasonable likelihood is low, I am persuaded that there is
    a risk that the appellant faces, in the particular circumstances of his
    case, persecution either through  threats,  or  through  detention  and
    consequent ill-treatment.   I  am  satisfied  that  that  would  be  of
    sufficient severity to engage both the Refugee Convention and Article 3
    of the Human Rights Convention and  it  would  be  on  account  of  his
    perceived political opinion.  Accordingly,  for  these  reasons,  I  am
    satisfied that removing the appellant to Algeria would be in breach  of
    the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  pursuant  to  both   the   Refugee
    Convention and Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

56. In the circumstances and  as  the  issue  has  been  conceded  by  Miss
    Loughran, it is unnecessary for me to consider Article 8.

Summary of Conclusions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2) I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights
    grounds.

 3) I formally dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds as the
    appellant qualifies as a refugee.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 4 February 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
