
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA022972017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6 July 2017                            |On 21 July 2017                   |
|Determination prepared 6 July 2017        |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     VCS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Seehra, of Counsel, instructed by Messrs Nag
                    Law Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Phull,  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 26 April 2017  allowed  the  appeal  of  VCS  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 16 February 2017  to  refuse
    to grant asylum and humanitarian protection.  Although the Secretary of
    State is the appellant before me I will for ease of reference refer  to
    her as the respondent as she was  the  respondent  in  the  First-tier.
    Similarly I will refer to VCS as the appellant as he was the  appellant
    in the First-tier.

2.   The appellant entered Britain as a dependent partner in  February  2010
    and had leave to remain in that capacity until March 2011.  That  leave
    to remain was extended until April 2012.  In June 2012 he  returned  to
    Sri Lanka and then came back to Britain before returning to  Sri  Lanka
    again in October that year.  He then applied for an extension  of  stay
    and this was granted until February 2015.  His visa was then  curtailed
    and he was instructed to leave Britain by 5 January 2015.   However,  a
    further visa was granted expiring on 15 May 2016.  An  application  for
    leave to remain as a dependant on a family and private life  basis  was
    refused on 14 December 2015.  On 17 May 2016 the appellant was  advised
    of removal directions and on 26 August that year he claimed asylum.

3.   The basis of his claim to asylum was that his brother had  been  killed
    while at college in Kandy in June 2005 and that  his  father  had  been
    told by a friend of  his  brother  called  John,  after  his  brother's
    funeral that he had been taken from his boarding house by people  in  a
    van on suspicion of links with the LTTE.  The appellant  asserted  that
    his father had lodged a complaint in June  2005  with  the  police  but
    there was no response.

4.   His father had also lodged a complaint in  July  2005  with  the  Human
    Rights Commission in Kandy but  they  had  not  responded.   A  further
    complaint was made to the LLRC in 2011 together with  documents  signed
    by the appellant.  His family had then been visited  twice  by  unknown
    people asking about  his  brother's  connections  with  the  LTTE.   He
    asserted that his father was taken  into  custody  for  three  days  by
    unknown people in November 2011.

5.   He had not encountered any difficulties in June 2012 but said  that  he
    had been taken into custody by unknown people on 22 October  2012,  and
    held for two days, beaten, slapped and threatened and had  passed  out.
    He had awoken in hospital and, when discharged gone to Colombo and then
    returned to Britain.

6.   The Secretary of State considered  the  appellant's  claim  and  stated
    that it was not found to be credible.  Very detailed reasons were given
    for that conclusion by the Secretary of State in paragraphs 12  onwards
    of the determination.  It was pointed out that there was no reason  why
    the appellant's family would believe his brother's friend  John  rather
    than people in the boarding house who had given no indication that  the
    appellant's brother had been taken by men in a white  van  rather  than
    drowned while swimming. In any event the appellant had not believed his
    brother had any links with the LTTE and there was nothing  which  would
    have led him to consider that he would have been a target or would have
    been arrested.  Moreover the appellant had not known who  had  abducted
    him, claiming only that it was "unidentified people".  He had stated at
    interview that "until they came to our house, threatened us we did  not
    know who kidnapped him".  It was stated that  it  was  unclear  why  he
    believed his brother had been  involved  with  the  LTTE  and  abducted
    because of that involvement.  Having referred  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant could give no details of his brother's friend, John,  it  was
    then stated that it was not accepted that his brother had  been  killed
    due to his involvement with the LTTE.

7.   In paragraph 15 of the letter of refusal onwards  it  was  stated  that
    the appellant had claimed to have been involved in the  complaint  made
    to the Human Rights Commission in Kandy in July 2005 but had then  said
    that although he had been there his father had handled  everything  and
    therefore it was unclear why he had stated that he had played an active
    role in the complaint.  It was also stated that the appellant had  said
    that his report had been recorded and the police had  told  his  father
    they would search for evidence  to  find  out  who  had  kidnapped  his
    brother, which would suggest that they did in fact take the report  and
    then try to do something.

8.   It was then stated  that  if  immediately  thereafter  the  appellant's
    father had gone to the Human Rights Commission in Kandy that would  not
    have left a reasonable time to allow  the  police  to  investigate  the
    matter.  Again, it was pointed out that  the  Human  Rights  Commission
    were said to have recorded the report but had not taken any action  but
    there was evidence, however, that they had recorded  208  reports  that
    year.  It was stated that it was surprising that the appellant's father
    had waited until 2011 before reporting the  matter  to  the  LLRC,  the
    Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission.

9.   With regard to the assertion that  his  father  had  been  abducted  in
    November 2011 it was noted that it was not the police who had  abducted
    his father but unknown people and that his father had not reported this
    to the police and that was why he had gone to the LLRC.  It was  stated
    that it was not reasonable to accept that the  appellant's  father  had
    not gone to the police as he felt they had not  taken  action  about  a
    different matter six years before.  It was noted that he had said  that
    his father had been abducted when he was threatened "to disclose  about
    your younger brother" who had died over six years previously but it was
    stated it was unclear why this  group  of  unknown  people  would  want
    information on a person who may have supplied information to  the  LTTE
    while on study leave over six years before.

10.  It was noted that the LLRC had concluded its work on 15  November  2011
    and the report had been handed to the President on  20  November  2011.
    As the appellant had not stated a date in November that his father  was
    abducted it was not reasonable to consider that a group who wanted  one
    individual to withdraw his complaint would wait until  the  report  was
    about to be concluded before trying to force his father to withdraw it.
     With regard to his father's death it was noted  that  his  father  was
    said to have suffered from diabetes and poor health and that if he  had
    been abducted the authorities were  not  contacted  to  help.   It  was
    therefore not accepted that the appellant's father was abducted.

11.  With regard to his own claim to have been abducted  and  tortured  when
    he returned in October 2012 but it was noted that his older sister, his
    brother-in-law and his younger brother had been present when he claimed
    to have been abducted but they had not alerted the authorities.  It was
    stated that it was unclear why others would be looking for  information
    in 2012 about his brother's involvement in 2005.  It was therefore  not
    accepted  that  the  authorities  would  be  looking  for   information
    ......... who had died seven years previously.  It was noted  that  the
    appellant had not been stopped when leaving  the  country  nor  had  he
    contacted the police and it was stated that it was  not  reasonable  to
    accept that he would be arrested by the authorities.

12.  The various categories set out in the country guidance case of GJ  (Sri
    Lanka) were considered but it was considered that there was no basis on
    which the appellant would qualify for asylum under the  categories  set
    out therein.

13.  With  regard  to  the  provisions  of  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 it was  noted  that
    the delay in the appellant's claiming of asylum was not noted.  It  was
    considered that that further damaged his credibility.  It was therefore
    considered that the appellant would not be at risk on return.

14.  Judge Phull set out the burden and standard of proof in paragraph 4  of
    the determination and asserted that she  had  taken  into  account  the
    respondent's bundle of documents as well as the bundle of documents  of
    the appellant and said that  she  had  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant but she  would  not  set  that  oral  evidence  out.   Having
    summarised his claim and the submissions  of  both  representatives  in
    brief she set  out  her  findings  and  conclusions  in  paragraphs  18
    onwards.  She first stated in paragraph 18 that "the respondent alleges
    that the appellant would not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka for  his
    imputed political opinions".

15.  In the following paragraphs she said:

         "19. I take a  different  view  to  the  appellant  [sic]  for  the
             following reasons."


    She then stated as follows:


             "In his asylum interview the appellant said that someone  took
             his brother in a van (Q35).   The  death  certificate  of  the
             appellant's brother is at page 11 together with the  newspaper
             announcement of his death (page 9) and the  deceased  memorial
             booklet (at page 37 to 41, AB).  In a letter  dated  28  March
             2017, Trini Gordan  Rayen,  attorney  at  law  says  that  her
             services were sought by, 'your client's late father after  the
             body of the late SSR  was  recovered  from...  Mahaweli  Ganga
             (river) on 13 June  2005.   I  assisted  both  their  client's
             father and your client during the  inquest  conducted  by  the
             coroner/judicial medical officer  and  subsequently  in  their
             attempt to raise this death with the local  police  and  human
             rights organisation, when it was realised that the police  was
             unwilling to be helpful.  I can also confirm  that  when  your
             client's father decided to submit a complaint to the  LLRC  in
             May 2011, I assisted him to draft his statement and also  that
             of your client...'


         20.  A copy of a letter written by the appellant's  father  to  the
             LRRC is at page 27 to 28, AB and a letter from  the  appellant
             to the LLRC at page 29, AB.  Having considered the evidence in
             the round and on the basis of the appellant's  evidence  I  am
             satisfied that his brother was abducted  in  a  van  and  then
             died.  I  find  that  the  objective  evidence  in  particular
             pertaining to Sri Lanka Tamils against  genocide  confirms  in
             their 2012 report that, '... Sri Lanka's white van's [sic]  is
             a dual criminality of the Sri Lankan state and the Rajapaksa's
             administration; ...  TAG's interviews and testimonies indicted
             that in the dormant state, the white  van  network(s)  can  be
             activated by directives from the command hierarchy, especially
             the  top  echelons  of  the  defence  establishment  ...   For
             example, Gotabhaya Rajapaksa's ... threats targeted at Fonseka
             Vithyadaran and more recently Frederica Jansz,  predicated  on
             the sustained operability of white van  networks,  dormant  or
             active, to target any means of the  state  as  needed.   There
             exists reasonable evidence of his clandestine power to  abduct
             and eliminate people who are perceived  as  a  threat  to  his
             command and reputation'.


         21.  The International truth and  justice  project  report  from  6
             January 2016 says, '... being white vanned  has  become  short
             hand in Sri Lanka for abduction by the security  forces.   The
             vehicles usually hiaceny [sic] white in colour belong  to  the
             country's police and military intelligence services.   Usually
             between 3 and 5 plain clothes officers are involved ...'


         22.  I find that there is a reasonable likelihood on the  basis  of
             all the documentary and oral  evidence  that  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities abducted the appellant's brother for his perceived
             or actual involvement with the LTTE and the death  certificate
             together with the request certificate  confirms  that  he  was
             subjected to a sudden death.   I  find  and  accept  that  the
             appellant's father wrote to the LLRC in 2011  because  he  had
             not received a response from the police or  the  human  rights
             commission.  I accept the evidence that the appellant's father
             did not write a letter to the LLRC any earlier because he  was
             waiting for a response from the two organisations and contrary
             to Ms Brown's allegations,  the  objective  evidence  confirms
             that the LLRC was only set up on 15 May 2010.  I am  satisfied
             with the explanation given by the appellant  that  his  father
             made the  complaint  to  the  LLRC  after  it  had  come  into
             existence and when a response from the other two organisations
             was not forthcoming.


         23.  In terms of the problems encountered by the appellant  on  his
             return to Sri Lanka in  2012,  I  find  as  follows.   In  his
             interview the appellant said  unknown  people  took  him  into
             custody for enquiries.  He was taken in a van and he was asked
             questions about his brother's connection  with  the  LTTE  and
             mistreated,  slapped  and  beaten  (Qs  80   to   111   asylum
             interview).  I have also taken into  account  the  appellant's
             evidence that his father was arrested following the  death  of
             their brother.  I have already accepted that the LLRC was only
             set up in 2010.  I find the objective evidence  confirms  that
             the LLRC concluded its work on 15 November 2011.  I find  that
             the appellant's evidence has consistently been that his father
             lodged a complaint with the LLRC in 2011.


         24.  I find that  the  appellant's  account  that  his  father  was
             abducted is supported by the Upper Tribunal decision in  GJ  &
             Others which held that individuals have given evidence to  the
             LLRC implicating the Sri Lankan security forces, armed  forces
             of the Sri Lankan authorities in alleged  war  crimes  are  at
             risk of persecution and require international  protection.   I
             therefore find it is plausible  the  authority  knew  who  the
             complainants went to the LLRC, including the appellant and his
             father, which resulted in their abduction.


         25.  I have found earlier  in  this  decision  that  the  objective
             evidence supports the white van phenomenon.  The appellant has
             stated that unknown men in a  white  van  also  abducted  him.
             They wanted to know details  about  his  brother's  activities
             with the LTTE and he was mistreated, slapped and beaten.   The
             respondent argues that it is not reasonable to accept that the
             authorities would be looking for information on a  person  who
             had died 7 years previously because the  government's  present
             objective is to identify Tamil  activities  in  the  diaspora.
             The appellant himself had not mentioned any  involvement  with
             any group whilst in the UK.


         26.  I have had regard  to  the  case  of  GJ  and  find  that  the
             appellant falls within category  C  i.e.  that  he  has  given
             evidence to the  LLRC  implicating  the  Sri  Lankan  security
             forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan in alleged  war  crimes
             namely the kidnap and murder of his brother which is known  to
             the Sri Lankan authorities and the result was the  appellant's
             detention and mistreatment in the past.


         27.  I find that it is plausible that having a  sibling  linked  to
             LTTE connections would  be  of  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities on return.   I  find  it  is  plausible  that  the
             authorities would seek to make enquiries about the appellant's
             involvement and what he knew about his brother's activities.


         28.  I therefore find that the appellant satisfies to the  required
             standard that he has a fear of persecution from the Sri Lankan
             authorities.  I am satisfied that as with GJ he  was  able  to
             leave the country using his own  passport.   I  find  that  he
             falls within the categories identified  in  GJ.   I  find  the
             objective evidence satisfies that  persecution  Sri  Lanka  is
             carried out with impunity.  I find he cannot relocate  to  any
             other part of the country because it is the  authorities  that
             he fears and they would be unwilling or unable to protect him.


         29.  I therefore find the appellant is a refugee.  As I  found  the
             appellant is a refugee he does not  qualify  for  humanitarian
             protection.


         30.  Since I found that  the  appellant  satisfies  that  he  is  a
             refugee by analogy I find he is at risk of  persecution  under
             articles 2 and 3.  I find it is not necessary here for  me  to
             consider his claim under article 8 under the rules  and  under
             the ECHR.


         31.  In making this decision I have had regard to Section 8 of  the
             Asylum and Immigration (the treatment of  claimants  etc)  Act
             2004 with regard to all aspects of the Appellant's credibility
             in this case."


16.  She therefore allowed the appeal.

17.  The lengthy grounds of appeal  submitted  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    stated that the judge had not given reasons for her conclusions nor did
    she appear to have engaged in any way with either the letter of refusal
    or the submissions of the Presenting Officer.  She had  considered  the
    documents but had not looked at them in the round under the  principles
    set out in the decision  in  Tanveer  Ahmed.   Moreover,  she  had  not
    considered the appellant's immigration history considering  the  impact
    that would have on his credibility under the provisions of Section 8 of
    the 2004 Act.

18.  Mr Whitwell relied on those grounds.  He emphasised that the  terms  of
    the refusal letter had not been considered by  the  Immigration  Judge,
    who had merely stated that she believed what the  appellant  had  said.
    She had not given anxious scrutiny to the claim.  Moreover, she had not
    stated why the appellant would fall under the provisions in the country
    guidance case of GJ and  in  particular  those  set  out  in  paragraph
    356(7)(c).  There was nothing to indicate that the appellant would fall
    into that category and he had not given evidence himself to  the  LLRC.
    He referred to the evidence that  the  appellant  had  put  in  of  his
    involvement with that organisation stating that it  was  extremely  odd
    that a typed letter in English which was not  signed  would  have  been
    submitted or given any credence.  Moreover, he  emphasised  that  given
    the details of the appellant's history the fact that he had not applied
    for asylum in 2012 was relevant and for the did not  engage  with  that
    and with the delay in claiming asylum.

19.  In reply Miss Seehra relied in part of  a  skeleton  argument,  arguing
    that the judge had before her a  letter  from  a  Sri  Lankan  attorney
    uthority upon which I was invited to place weight.  The fact that  that
    letter had only been submitted by the appellant's  representatives  the
    day before the hearing did not mean that the  Secretary  of  State  was
    unable to attempt to verify it.  The  Secretary  of  State  could  have
    applied for an adjournment in order to do so.  The burden  lay  on  the
    Secretary of State to show that the document could not  be  relied  on.
    It was up to her following the judgment in GJ (Sri Lanka)  to  consider
    the documentation and to take steps to verify it.

20.  Having referred to the judgment in Karanakaran  [2000]  INLR  122  (CA)
    she stated that the judge had taken a proper approach to  the  evidence
    and was entitled to place weight on the assertion of the appellant that
    both he and his brother had been taken  by  men  in  white  vans.   She
    referred to a report of Tamils Against Genocide in 2012  entitled  "Sri
    Lanka's White Vans: Dual Criminality of the Sri Lankan  State  and  the
    Rajapaksa Administration".  Moreover, she stated from the International
    Truth and Justice Project report entitled "A Still Unfinished War:  Sri
    Lanka's Survivors of Torture and Sexual  Violence  2009  -  2015"  that
    "being 'white vanned' has become shorthand in Sri Lanka  for  abduction
    by the security forces".

21.  Moreover, she indicated that the judge was entitled  to  consider  that
    the appellant fell into a category set out in GJ and others (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT (IAC) and also to the judgment in
    MM (Sri Lanka) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  36,  where  it  was  stated  that  an
    appellant could depart from the  airport  unnoticed  even  if  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities had an interest in him.   She  stated  that  it  was
    clear authority that delay should not necessarily be taken  against  an
    appellant when judging his credibility under the  Section  8  criteria.
    She stated that there was clear  evidence  that  those  who  had  given
    evidence to the Lessons Learnt  and  Reconciliation  Commission  (LLRC)
    could be in danger if returned.

Discussion

22.  I consider that there are material errors of law in  the  determination
    of the Immigration Judge.  The reality is that it is incumbent upon the
    judge to give anxious scrutiny to the evidence before her.   That  does
    not mean that the judge need only consider the allegations made by  the
    Secretary of State when refusing an application but  also  that  claims
    made by an appellant should be subject to such scrutiny.   That  simply
    did not happen here in this case.

23.  It is unfortunate that the judge did not set out the  appellant's  oral
    evidence and indeed she barely mentioned the submissions  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer.  What is of greater concern, however, is  that  she
    did not appear to engage in any way with  the  matters  raised  in  the
    letter of refusal.  She did not appear to have addressed such issues as
    the fact that the appellant's  brother  had  never,  it  appears,  been
    involved with the LTTE and that the evidence of his friend was at  odds
    with the evidence of those in the lodge where they had been living.

24.  Moreover, she does not appear to have  approached  the  documents  with
    any degree of rigour.  In particular, the typed letter  in  English  to
    the LLRC is not signed - the judge  makes  no  comments  thereon.   The
    reality is of course that there were no principal documents before her.
     These were issues which she should have factored in  when  considering
    the credibility of the appellant's claim.

25.  Moreover, she did not appear to have considered the delay in the  claim
    for asylum.  Although in paragraph 31 she asserts that she  had  regard
    to Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004 she does not say why she did not place any weight on the
    delay in claiming asylum or give reasons for stating that she  did  not
    consider that the delay damaged the appellant's credibility.

26.  Moreover, she did not  appear  to  engage  with  any  reasons  why  the
    appellant or his brother would have been abducted by "white  van  men".
    Neither the appellant nor his brother had any connection with the LTTE.
     The reality appears to be that she took the fact that  abductions  are
    being made or have in the past been made by men in white vans and  then
    the assertion of the appellant that he was taken by a man  in  a  white
    van as showing that what he was saying was credible.  There  is  a  non
    sequitur in that reasoning:  because one individual is  abducted  by  a
    man in a white van does not mean that a man  who  states  that  he  was
    abducted by a man in a white van is telling the truth.  The judge  does
    not engage with those factors.  This is  a  short  determination  which
    lacks the detailed scrutiny which is required for a  determination  and
    that is, I consider, a material error of law.

27.  I further consider that the approach of the judge to the  assertion  by
    the appellant that he was abducted because he had been in contact  with
    the LLRC is also an assertion  that  does  not  bear  scrutiny  on  the
    evidence before her given the  lack  of  evidence  from  the  appellant
    regarding his detention.  I note that the judge did place  evidence  on
    the letter from Trini Gordan Rayen dated 28 March 2017 but the  reality
    is that that letter was produced at a late stage  and  that  the  judge
    should have been concerned about that.  Moreover, the letter  does  not
    say in terms that what was stated in the  appellant's  father's  letter
    was true.  Indeed, reading the letter in its entirety,  what  Mr  Rayen
    states is that he assisted the appellant's father  during  the  inquest
    and the attempt to raise the death with  the  local  police  and  human
    rights  organisations  when  it  was  realised  that  the  police  were
    unwilling to be helpful and that he had helped the  appellant's  father
    to submit a complaint to the LLRC in May 2011 but not that he  had  any
    first-hand knowledge of what had happened and indeed he states that the
    death of  the  appellant's  brother  remained  as  an  unsolved  matter
    "although there was evidence to point to an extrajudicial killing".  He
    does to say that there was an  extrajudicial  killing.   Indeed,  there
    seems no reason why that should have been the case.

28.  When I consider the evidence given by the appellant  at  interview  and
    in his witness statement it is of note  that  at  paragraph  8  of  the
    witness statement the appellant had stated that:-

         "On  13  June  2005  Sydney's  body  was  found  in  the  river  of
         Thennakumbura.   We  initially  thought  this  must  have  been  an
         accident.  The boys Sydney boarded with told my father that  Sydney
         had previously been to that river with his friends.   They  thought
         perhaps he had gone there by himself to swim, and had drowned.   It
         was only later that we came to learn that Sydney had in  fact  been
         kidnapped by white van thugs."


    That was focused on by the Secretary of State in the letter of refusal,
    who stated that there was no reason why the appellant's  father  should
    have been believed that his son, who was not a member of  the  LTTE  or
    supported them, should have been  taken  by  white  van  men  when  the
    perfectly understandable and reasoned explanation for the  son's  death
    had been put forward by those in his  boarding  house.   This  was  yet
    another matter which the judge should have considered.

29.   Particularly  taking  into  account  the  lack  of  knowledge  by  the
    appellant of who "John" was, again, this is a matter on which the judge
    should have given anxious scrutiny but did not.

30.  For these reasons I find that there are material errors of law  in  the
    determination of the Immigration Judge and I set aside her decision.  I
    consider that the terms of the Senior President of Tribunal's  Practice
    direction are met and it is appropriate that this  matter  be  remitted
    for a hearing afresh in the First-tier on all issues.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed  to  the  extent  that  this
appeal is remitted to the First-tier for a hearing afresh on all issues.

Directions.
The appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh on all issues in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Signed   [pic]                          Date: 20 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy



