
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
pa/02882/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th December 2018                |        On 14th January 2019            |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     RW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Syed-Ali, Counsel, Temple Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  15th
    February 2018 to refuse his  application  for  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection in the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated on 1st October 2018.   The
    Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal with permission granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison dated 26th October 2018.

 2. The Grounds of Appeal contend that there was a procedural error in that
    the judge heard the appeal in the Appellant's absence despite that fact
    that there was an adjournment request.  The second ground is  that  the
    judge erred in failing to consider the appeal on Article 8 grounds even
    though that had been pleaded in the Grounds of Appeal.

 3. In paragraph 6 of the decision the judge noted that the  Appellant  did
    not attend the hearing and that on the day of  the  hearing  the  judge
    received a faxed transmission from the Appellant which  stated  that  a
    doctor's letter was attached in relation to his  anxiety  attack  which
    prevented him from attending court.  The judge  noted  at  paragraph  7
    that the medical report on which the Appellant relies is a statement of
    fitness for work under the Social Security Statutory  Sick  Pay  Scheme
    which recorded that his case was assessed on 28th August 2018 (the date
    of hearing) and that the Appellant was not  fit  for  work  because  of
    anxiety.  The judge noted that no further detail had been provided.  At
    paragraph 8 the judge noted that the  onus  was  on  the  Appellant  to
    demonstrate that he was  unable  to  attend  the  hearing  for  medical
    reasons; that the sick note was obtained on the date of the hearing and
    provided  no  detail  at  all  as  to  why  the   Appellant's   anxiety
    incapacitated him to such an extent that he was unable  to  attend  the
    hearing; and the judge  was  satisfied  that  the  application  for  an
    adjournment should be declined and that this would not prevent the just
    disposal of the appeal.  The judge went on to determine the  appeal  on
    the merits on the papers and in the absence of the Appellant.

 4. It is contended in the Grounds of Appeal that, as well as faxing a 'fit
    to work' certificate  to  the  Tribunal,  the  Appellant's  friend  had
    telephoned the clerk to the Tribunal and explained the circumstances of
    the Appellant's illness that he had severe depression  and  an  anxiety
    attack.  At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Syed-Ali  produced  a  witness
    statement from the Appellant's friend claiming that the  Appellant  was
    suffering from an anxiety and panic attack, that he contacted the court
    clerk and explained that the Appellant had been suffering from a  panic
    attack all night, had been in emotional turmoil over  the  hearing  and
    that he was not going to attend.  It is stated that the clerk told  the
    friend that she would place the matter before the judge.  There  is  no
    record in the court file of any telephone  call  in  relation  to  this
    matter.

 5. However there is a letter from the Appellant to the Tribunal dated 27th
    August 2018 saying that he had suffered from an "acute  anxiety  attack
    due to depression and a mental health condition".  He said that  he  is
    attending talking therapies in relation to his issue and is  under  the
    care of his GP for this condition.  It is stated that he would  forward
    a sick note as confirmation of this and  asked  if  there  could  be  a
    further date given for the appeal hearing.

 6. This was followed by the fax the following day  27th  August  from  the
    Appellant to the Tribunal attaching the doctor's  letter  which  is  as
    noted by the judge a statement of fitness for work for Social  Security
    or statutory sick pay stating that the Appellant was suffering from  an
    anxiety state and was not fit for work.

 7. It therefore appears that the judge decided to refuse  to  adjourn  the
    appeal only on the basis of the fax of 28th August and in ignorance  of
    the telephone call from the Appellant's friend or, more  significantly,
    the letter of 27th August which had clearly been sent the previous day.
     Had the judge had this document before would have had more  detail  as
    to why the Appellant's anxiety impacted on his ability  to  attend  the
    hearing and may well have come to a different view in relation  to  the
    adjournment request.

 8. In these circumstances in light of the fact that the judge did not have
    all of the evidence submitted to the Tribunal in  connection  with  the
    adjournment request I am satisfied that there was a  procedural  error.
    I take into account the decision  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 where the then President of the  Tribunal  stated  at
    paragraph 7;

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; appealing to apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FTT
         acted reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  out  of
         fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
         to a fair hearing?   Any  temptation  to  review  the  conduct  and
         decision of the FTT through the  lens  of  reasonableness  must  be
         firmly resisted, in order to avoid a misdirection  in  law.   In  a
         nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion."

 9. Given that the decision to  proceed  was  not  made  with  all  of  the
    relevant information and was not fair it is appropriate  to  set  aside
    the decision so that the Appellant may have an opportunity to  put  his
    case to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The effect of the procedural error is such that the Appellant  has  not
    had the opportunity to put her case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In
    light of the Presidential Practice Statements the nature or  extent  of
    the judicial fact finding which is necessary for the  decision  in  the
    appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective in rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date: 29th December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award because no fee was paid or is payable.



Signed                              Date: 29th December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

