
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA021842016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                     |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2017                            |On 3 July 2017             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    [B T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms V Adams (counsel) instructed by Fountain solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS


1.  I have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge CM Bell promulgated on 12 January 2017, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on protection grounds, but  allowed  it  on  Humanitarian
protection grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant  was  born  on  01/07/1995  and  is  a  Kurdish  Iraqi.  On
24/02/2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge CM Bell ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
asylum and ECHR claims, but allowed the appeal  on  Humanitarian  protection
grounds.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 8 February 2017  Judge  Andrew  gave
permission to appeal stating

       "1. The appellant seeks permission to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
       decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  CM  Bell)  who,  in  a
       determination  promulgated  on  12th  January  2017   dismissed   the
       appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to
       grant asylum.


       2. Although the appellant's representative stated he was not pursuing
       the refugee convention with any vigour (paragraph 19) this  does  not
       mean that he conceded the claim under the Refugee Convention was  not
       met. The Judge made no findings in this regard and this amounts to an
       arguable error of law."

The Hearing

6. For the appellant, Miss Adams moved the grounds of appeal.  She  took  me
to [19] of the decision where the Judge records

       "Mr Hussain confirmed in his submissions that he was not pursuing the
       refugee convention reason with any vigour."

She told me that what had been said by counsel at  the  First-tier  did  not
amount to abandoning a ground of appeal. Instead, what counsel had done  was
explained that greater emphasis would be put on some arguments than others.

(b) Ms Adams told me that the first sentence of [19] is  in  stark  contrast
to the first sentence of [23], where the Judge says

       "Mr Hussain did not seek to argue that  the  appellant  had  a  well-
       founded fear of persecution for a refugee convention reason."

She told me that comparison of [19] and [23] of the decision shows that  the
Judge made  a  material  error  of  law  because  the  Judge  misinterpreted
counsel's statement that some  arguments  were  stronger  than  others,  and
erroneously believed that no refugee convention reason was argued.

(c) The Judge's record of proceedings is typewritten. I read an  extract  to
parties' agents. The Judge clearly notes that counsel said

       'Not pursuing the convention reason with any vigour - focusing on  my
       strongest arguments.


       Not instructed to withdraw any element of the case ...'

(d) Ms Adams told me that the  Judge's  error  led  the  Judge  to  make  no
findings at all on the appellant's ethnicity. She  told  me  that  that  has
relevance because the  appellant's  brother's  application  for  asylum  was
initially refused, but his appeal was finally dealt with by  a  decision  of
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy, promulgated on  19  February  2016.  A
copy of that decision can now be found  between  pages  69  and  71  of  the
appellant's bundle.

(e) Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy found that the appellant's  brother
is entitled to protection as a refugee on the basis  of  his  ethnicity.  Ms
Adams told me that that finding of the Upper  Tribunal  indicates  that  the
First-tier's decision, promulgated on 12 January 2017, should be  set  aside
because it is tainted by material errors of law. She urged me to  substitute
my own decision  allowing  the  appeal  in  line  with  the  Upper  Tribunal
decision in the appellant's brother's case.

7. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz relied on the rule 24  response  dated  27
February 2017, but, having done  so,  conceded  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's
decision in respect of the appellants brother is a decision  which  followed
the same factual matrix as the appellant's claim. As he put it, one  brother
cannot be more Kurdish than the other brother. He candidly  stated  that  he
could not offer resistance to the grounds of appeal.

Analysis

8. The Judge's record  of  proceedings  quite  clearly  indicates  that  the
argument under the refugee convention was not  abandoned.  At  [19]  of  the
decision the Judge correctly records  Counsel's  submission  that  no  great
force was to be put behind the refugee  convention  argument.  It  is  clear
from what is recorded at [23] of  the  decision  that  the  Judge  has  been
wrongfooted  by  counsel's  decision  to  place  greater  emphasis  on   the
qualification directive that on the refugee convention.

9. It is clear from the record of proceedings that the Judge  misinterpreted
what was said by counsel, and,  believing  that  no  argument  was  advanced
under the refugee convention, did not make findings of fact in  relation  to
that ground of appeal.

10. In DC (Philippines) 2005 UKIAT 00011 the Tribunal said  that  a  failure
to make  findings  on  points  raised  in  the  notice  of  refusal  (in  an
immigration appeal) was an error of law.

11. The Judge did not have a copy of the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  the
appellant's brother's case, which  would  have  alerted  the  Judge  to  the
significance of the appellant's ethnicity. The  appellant's  original  claim
for asylum proceeds on the basis of his imputed political opinion and  race.
It is  now  clear  that  the  appellant's  brother's  claim  was  ultimately
successful on the ground of ethnicity alone. It was  probably  the  confused
way in which the case was presented which prevented the  Judge  from  making
findings of fact in relation to  the  refugee  convention.  The  absence  of
those findings of fact amount to a material error of law.  I  must  set  the
decision aside.

12. There is sufficient material before me to enable  me  to  substitute  my
own decision.

13. At paragraph 31  of  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the  respondent
accepts that the appellant is an Iraqi national  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.  In
the decision of the Upper Tribunal promulgated  on  19  February  2016,  the
appellant's brother's protection claim is allowed because there  is  a  real
risk of serious harm to the appellant's brother because  of  his  ethnicity.
The appellant and his brother are both Iraqi Kurds from Mosul.

14. Counsel for the appellant invites  me  to  substitute  my  own  decision
relying on the Upper Tribunal decision promulgated on 19 February 2016.  The
Senior Home Office Presenting Officer adopts  a  neutral  position.  I  find
that as the Upper Tribunal has already found that  the  appellant's  brother
is a refugee because of his ethnicity, then by analysis the  appellant  must
be a refugee as he and his brother share the same ethnicity.

15. As I have found the appellant is a refugee I cannot consider whether  he
qualifies for humanitarian protection.

16. Therefore, I  find  the  appellant  is  not  eligible  for  humanitarian
protection.

17. As I have found the appellant has established  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution, by analogy I find that his  claim  engages  article  3  of  the
Human Rights Convention because he  would  face  a  real  risk  of  torture,
inhuman or degrading treatment  if  he  were  returned  to  his  country  of
origin.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 12  January  2017
contains a material error of law. I therefore set aside

19. I am able to substitute my own decision.

20. The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

21. The appellant's appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.

22. The appellant's appeal is allowed on article 3 ECHR grounds.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 30 June2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

