
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02008/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16th November 2016                    |On 6th December 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iran born on 25th October 1993.   He
    entered the UK illegally on 18th June 2015 and applied for  asylum  the
    following day.  That application was refused for the reasons  given  in
    the Respondent's letter of 12th October 2015.  The Appellant  appealed,
    and his appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Graham
    (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 27th June 2016.   She  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights
    grounds for the reasons given in her Decision  dated  28th  June  2016.
    The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  8th  August
    2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because she found the  Appellant  to  be
    lacking in credibility and did not believe his  account  of  events  in
    Iran.   The  Judge  identified  a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the
    Appellant's evidence and took account of the fact that on  his  arrival
    the Appellant had not been truthful about his journey to the  UK.   The
    Judge also found the Appellant's credibility damaged  by  operation  of
    Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004.  The Appellant also relied upon his sur place  activities  in
    the UK with the  KDPI.   The  Judge  decided  that  the  Appellant  had
    embellished this part of his evidence, and that he was not at  risk  on
    return to Iran particularly as the messages on his Facebook  page  were
    not overtly political.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Woodhouse referred to the grounds of application and
    to his Skeleton Argument and argued that the Judge had materially erred
    in law in coming to these conclusions.  The Judge had  failed  to  deal
    sufficiently with the issue of the Facebook entries.  The Judge had not
    taken into account or even referred to the decision in  AB  and  Others
    (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015]  UKUT  0257  (IAC).
    The posts on the Appellant's Facebook page were very political.   These
    would be investigated by the Iranian  authorities  on  the  Appellant's
    return to Iran as a consequence of the "pinch  point"  created  by  the
    Appellant's illegal departure.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to her Rule 24 response and argued that
    there were no such errors of law.  The Judge had made findings of  fact
    open to her on the evidence before her and for which she had given full
    reasons.  At paragraph 37 of the Decision the Judge had  explained  why
    she attached no weight to the arrest warrant and court summons produced
    by the Appellant.  The  Appellant  had  no  political  profile  and  an
    illegal departure would not put him at risk on return as decided in SSH
    and HR (illegal exit, failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]  UKUT  00308
    following SB (risk on return -  illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    00053.

 6. I find no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  Judge  which
    therefore I do not set aside.  The Judge decided that the Appellant had
    not been engaged in any political activities in Iran  which  might  put
    him at risk on return.  As Mrs Aboni argued, this was a conclusion open
    to the  Judge  from  the  evidence  before  her  and  which  she  fully
    explained.  It cannot therefore be said that the Judge's assessment  of
    the Appellant's sur place activities was tainted in any way by a  wrong
    decision about the Appellant's activities in Iran.

 7. As regards the Appellant's sur place activities, I find that the  Judge
    was correct to conclude that there were no "pinch points"  which  might
    arouse suspicion on the Appellant's return.  The fact that he had  left
    Iran illegally, if that was the case, would not suffice as  established
    in jurisprudence.  Even if there was such suspicion, I agree  with  the
    Judge's assessment of the evidence  before  her  that  the  Appellant's
    Facebook pages  were  not  overtly  political.   The  additional  pages
    supplied to me at the hearing, with my consent, are not translated  and
    take the matter no further.

 8. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton               6th December 2016

