
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02019/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2019                   |On 19 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'HA'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr G Dolan, Counsel, instructed by Black Antelope
Law
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
    were given orally at the end of the hearing on 5 December 2019.

Introduction

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herlihy (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 28 August  2019,  by
    which she dismissed his appeal against the respondent's refusal of  his
    protection and human rights claims, in a  decision  dated  22  February
    2019.  The respondent had refused the appellant's application for leave
    to  remain  based  on  a  claim  of  asylum,  or  in  the  alternative,
    humanitarian protection, which he founded  on  his  membership  of  the
    Bangladesh National Party ('BNP'); and  his  claim  that  such  refusal
    would breach his rights under articles 2,  3  and  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').

 3. In essence, the appellant's claims  involved  the  following  issue:  a
    claim that the brother of his former wife, who was a  prominent  member
    of the rival Awami League in the district in which  the  appellant  had
    lived,  had  persecuted  the   appellant   in   Bangladesh,   including
    threatening him.  The core points taken against the  appellant  by  the
    respondent related to the vagueness of his knowledge about the BNP,  of
    which he claimed to be a member; an inconsistency between the dates  on
    his claimed  membership  card,  compared  with  his  claimed  dates  of
    membership; his varying accounts of alleged torture and  threats  which
    were  internally  inconsistent;  and  the  inconsistencies  in  threats
    received by his brother-in-law.  Whilst  the  respondent  considered  a
    medical report, which diagnosed the appellant as  suffering  PTSD,  its
    assistance in the assessment of the appellant's  credibility  was  very
    limited.  The appellant could seek state protection from his brother-in-
    law or  could  relocate  internally  in  Bangladesh.   The  appellant's
    claimed  medical  conditions,  specifically  Hepatitis   B,   migraine,
    heartburn and PTSD,  were  not  of  sufficient  seriousness  to  engage
    articles 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

The FtT's decision

 4. The FtT did not accept the appellant as credible, although she accepted
    that he may have been involved as a low-level member of the  BNP.   The
    FtT noted the appellant's failure  to  claim  asylum  at  the  earliest
    opportunity; the deficiencies  in  the  membership  card,  including  a
    misspelling of the  appellant's  name  and  the  inconsistency  of  the
    claimed membership dates; the vagueness in the appellant's  account  of
    his activities the BNP; and the limited weight which the FtT placed  on
    other  evidence  from  the  appellant's  supporters.   Whilst  the  FtT
    considered the medical evidence, she  did  not  attach  weight  to  the
    expert's conclusions on the cause of the appellant's PTSD, noting  that
    she had found the appellant not to be credible.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially  that  the
    FtT failed to consider whether the appellant was a vulnerable  witness,
    which might explain  inconsistencies  in  his  evidence;  and  the  FtT
    appeared to reach her conclusion  about  the  appellant's  credibility,
    before addressing that the expert medical evidence and then discounting
    it.  The appellant also asserted that  the  FtT  had  misconstrued  the
    appellant's claimed  membership  of  a  'particular  social  group'  in
    relation to his activities with the BNP.

 6. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  initially  refused  permission  to
    appeal to this Tribunal on 18 October 2019, but on renewal,  permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell on 30  October  2019.   He
    regarded it as arguable that the FtT fell into the error identified  in
    Mibanga v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367,  in  making  an  assessment  of
    credibility, and consequently discounting the medical  report;  and  in
    arguably failing to  treat  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness.
    Whilst he did not limit the grant of permission  on  its  scope,  Judge
    Blundell did not understand the reference in the ground to a particular
    social group membership, as the appeal was a case of actual or  imputed
    political opinion.



The hearing before me

Concession and conclusions

 7. The representative's submissions were brief, but  Mr  Dolan  reiterated
    the points in relation to the failure to consider a vulnerable  witness
    and the 'Mibanga' error.

 8. Mr Walker expressly conceded before this  Tribunal  that  the  FtT  had
    erred in law in two respects, so that the FtT's decision should be  set
    aside:  the first error of law was a failure by  the  FtT  to  consider
    that the appellant was a vulnerable witness within the context  of  the
    relevant presidential  guidance.   As  a  consequence,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to consider the impact that this might have on  the
    appellant's credibility.  The second error of law conceded by Mr Walker
    was the 'Mibanga' error: in making an  assessment  on  the  appellant's
    credibility and  then  going  on  to  consider  the  medical  evidence.
    Specifically, at [42] of the FtT's decision, she states:

         "I accept the diagnosis of the appellant's mental health  condition
         but I do not attach weight to the doctor's conclusions  as  to  the
         cause of the appellant's conditions as being traumatic  experiences
         suffered in Bangladesh at the hands of his brother-in-law as I have
         not found the appellant's claim credible."

 9. On a final point, Mr Dolan did not understand, nor did  I,  the  ground
    relating to asserted membership of a particular social group, which  he
    believed to be in error and did not pursue.

10. The representatives agreed that as the errors went to the  core  issue,
    namely the appellant's credibility, that none  of  the  findings  could
    stand, and that it was necessary for the remaking of the appeal to done
    in its entirety by the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete  rehearing
with no preserved findings of fact.

The remitted appeal  shall  not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
Herlihy or Osborne.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  16 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

