
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02799/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 October 2018                            | On 26 October 2018           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                 rizgar [m]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks, instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors,
Wolverhampton
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 23 August 2018, my decision finding there was  legal  error  in  the
    decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge Chapman was issued.

 2. At that time, with the agreement of the parties, I decided the decision
    should be remade in the Upper Tribunal because the issue centred on the
    proper application of country guideline decisions in respect of whether
    it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant  to  relocate  to  the
    KRG.

 3. In preparation for the resumed hearing, I gave the parties  liberty  to
    provide further evidence if it was  received  14  clear  calendar  days
    before the resumed hearing.

 4. The appellant has provided further evidence.  His witness statement  of
    21 September 2018 changes his protection claim in two ways.  First,  he
    claims his mother and brother who  were  living  in  Kirkuk  have  been
    displaced as a result of the Kurdish independence referendum that  took
    place in  September  2017,  which  is  after  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determined his appeal.  If the appellant has no one in Kirkuk  who  can
    help him obtain a CSID, then his claim regarding undue hardship may  be
    strengthened.

 5. Second, the appellant claims that instability in the  KRG  means  those
    whom he fears might locate him if he were to relocate to that  part  of
    Iraq.  The instability of the KRG and the risks facing the appellant in
    that region is a new factor and is not related solely to the  issue  of
    internal relocation.

 6. Mr Whitwell was concerned that  to  proceed  on  this  revised  factual
    matrix  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  be  contrary  to  the   Senior
    President's practice directions on when to remit an appeal  because  of
    the need to make substantive  factual  findings.   He  added  that  the
    Secretary of State was at a disadvantage  because  the  country  expert
    report was not submitted in accordance with directions and it would  be
    appropriate to have some time for a presenting  office  to  review  the
    case in light of the new evidence so as to properly prepare the case.

 7. Mr Brooks accepted his instructing solicitors had not complied with  my
    directions. He accepted they only wrote requesting  more  time  a  week
    after the deadline and  provided  no  reasonable  explanation  for  the
    failure.  He acknowledged what Mr  Whitwell  said  regarding  remitting
    this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Having listened to the application and arguments, I decided to  revisit
    my decision not to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.   Given
    the further evidence now available, it  is  no  longer  appropriate  to
    retain this case in the Upper Tribunal.  Although I do not condone  the
    failure of the appellant's solicitors in not complying with directions,
    the evidence presented has to be admitted given it is material  to  the
    future conduct of the appeal.  Looking at the case in the round, it  is
    necessary to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. However, I do so with the following directions.  The findings of  Judge
    Chapman at  paragraph  40  are  preserved.   For  that  reason,  it  is
    appropriate that the remitted appeal is  heard  by  me  sitting  in  my
    capacity as a First-tier Tribunal.  I indicated that  I  would  arrange
    for a listing on the first available date after 28  days  to  give  the
    respondent to consider the  expert  report  and  prepare  the  remitted
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal subject to the  directions
in paragraph 9 above.


Signed                              Date         8 October 2018

         Judge McCarthy, A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
