
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02001/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 29 January 2020                        |On the 26 February 2020       |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     A K
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Petterson Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a national of Iran. He appeals with permission against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtTJ"), promulgated on the 18th
    July 2019 dismissing his appeal against the decision to refuse his
    protection and human rights claim.


 2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the FtTJ but was granted
    on reconsideration by Upper Tribunal Judge Kopiciek on the 23 September
    2019, for the following reasons:

         " It is arguable that, I light of HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT
         00430 that the First-tier Tribunal  failed to undertake a proper
         assessment of the potential for discovery of the appellant's
         Facebook posts to create a real risk of persecution or article 3
         harm, regardless of the motives behind the face book posts."


The background:


 3. The appellant's history is set out in the decision letter of the 26th
    January 2019 and the decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs 2-7. The
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on the 14 December 2015 and
    made a claim for asylum on the following day.

 4. He provided a screening interview and later provided a statement of
    evidence (SEF statement) and was interviewed about the factual basis of
    his claim on the 2 November 2017.

 5. The basis of his claim can be summarised as follows. The appellant is a
    citizen of Iran and is of Kurdish ethnicity. He was an only child and
    his family had limited money. His family had a farm, but his father
    carried out work as a smuggler, bringing goods, including alcohol into
    Iran illegally. The appellant would assist his father on smuggling
    trips from the age of about 13. It was said that his father was also a
    supporter of the Kurdish opposition, and it would also bring in
    literature on behalf of the party known as Komala. Some months before
    the appellant left Iran, his father informed him that he must assist in
    delivering pro-Kurdish propaganda leaflets from this political party to
    houses in the area, which he stated he did several times.

 6. On 10 October 2015 the appellant had been working tending to the
    family's livestock, when his grandfather told the appellant that a
    friend of his father had said that the appellant's father been arrested
    in their home and been raided. The appellant's grandfather said that
    the authorities were now looking for him. Arrangements were then made
    for him to leave Iran. He travelled into Turkey and then onwards into
    Europe. He claimed to have had no contact with any friends or family in
    Iran since.

 7. In a decision letter dated the 26th January 2018, the respondent
    refused his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection. It was
    accepted the appellant was an Iranian national of Kurdish ethnicity but
    did not accept his claim that he had been of interest to the Iranian
    authorities (see paragraphs 31-47).


 8. As can be seen within those paragraphs, the Secretary of State set out
    a number of credibility issues relating to the core aspects of his
    claim to be of interest to the Iranian authorities as a result of his
    activities in that country either through smuggling or through any
    claimed political involvement.

 9. As to the appellant's claim that he would smuggle alcohol into Iran
    with his father and that he had done so since the age of 13, the
    respondent concluded that when asked for details about the smuggling,
    the goods being smuggled and the people involved, the appellant gave
    very vague and limited answers and was not able to provide any evidence
    of any of the issues that he claimed to have had or that the Iranian
    authorities were aware of his participation or were actively seeking
    him ( see paragraphs 31 - 37).

10. As to his political involvement and the claim that he smuggled
    documents into Iran for the Komala party, the respondent considered
    that the appellant had not given a credible account of this. Other than
    claiming his father was a member of Komala and that he would help the
    party by smuggling and distributing leaflets, he did not know what he
    did for the party or how long he was a member of the party
    (Q33,Q97,Q110).

11. The appellant had claimed that he did not know what the leaflets
    contained as they were in Farsi which he could not read that they were
    red and green and he did not ask his father what they contained as he
    didn't like it when he did so. It was further claimed his father would
    demand him to distribute the leaflets in the village and surrounding
    areas by dropping them in houses and putting them on walls which we do
    once or twice a week.

12. The respondent considered that it was not reasonably likely that a
    Kurdish party would dispute leaflets were predominately in Farsi the
    when the audience would be the Kurdish people. It was further not
    plausible that he would continue to distribute leaflets without knowing
    what was contained on the leaflets given that he knew the party was
    illegal in Iran and that the punishment was either life in prison or
    execution if caught doing this (see paragraph 41).

13. Furthermore, he was asked number of questions as regards the party's
    leaders, the aims of the party, headquarters of the party, any
    affiliations with other parties and any divisions of the party. He was
    not able to give answers that held any specific detail and the answers
    given when checked against objective evidence available were incorrect
    (see paragraph 42).

14. It was also noted that in the screening interview he stated that his
    father worked for the Kurdish Labour Party and when challenged as to
    why the account varied, he could not give a sufficient explanation as
    to why there was a difference in his account and he stated he did not
    say that party and it was properly written down wrongly (see question
    39).

15. He claimed the authorities knew about his involvement with Komala
    because his father was arrested and that he had helped his father with
    everything and possibly because they had informants watching. He
    further claimed that they were looking for him as his grandfather's
    friend told his grandfather they were looking for him.

16. He did not attend any demonstrations or meetings for the party. The
    documents supplied from Komala was not in the original and therefore
    little weight could be added to them.

17. The respondent concluded that he had not supplied any evidence of the
    authorities were interested in him and that he was only aware of their
    interest through word-of-mouth. Considering the inconsistencies in the
    account, his inability to explain inconsistencies and lack of any
    specific detail as regards the party, and his role, he had not
    demonstrated that he was of interest to the Iranian authorities.

18. Paragraphs 49 - 50 the respondent referred to Section 8 of the 2004 Act
    and that he travelled through safe countries and failed to take a
    frontage of a reasonable opportunity to make an asylum human rights
    claim.


19. The appellant sought to appeal that decision and his appeal was
    originally heard on the 28th August 2018. In a decision promulgated on
    the 7th September 2018 the FtTJ dismissed the appeal having concluded
    that the appellant had not given a credible or consistent account as to
    his activities in Iran.


20. Following the dismissal of his appeal, grounds of appeal were issued
    for permission to appeal and that application was granted by Judge
    Nightingale on the 2 October 2018.

21. At a hearing on the 1 March 2019,  deputy Upper Tribunal Holmes  found
    that the decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on a
    point of law, that the FtTJ had erred as to his approach to the
    corroborative material and thus remitted the appeal for a fresh hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

22. The appeal then came before the FtTJ (Judge Gumsley). The FtTJ recited
    the factual history of his claim as set out above but noted that in
    addition to the issues raised before the respondent, the appellant also
    raised the fact that he been involved in commenting on various pro-
    Kurdish and anti-Iranian regime pictures and articles on Facebook. He
    also claimed to be at risk of persecution or serious harm on return and
    that this would be as a result of his actual and/or imputed political
    opinion on the basis that he was a smuggler. In addition, he claimed
    that upon return he would be a particular interest to the authorities
    and risk, as a Kurd returning as a failed asylum seeker, who had taken
    part in sur place activity and who had exited the country illegally.

23. In a decision promulgated on the 18h July 2019, the FtTJ dismissed his
    appeal. The FtTJ was not satisfied that he was ever engaged in
    smuggling, but even if he was, he was never caught or identified as a
    smuggler (see [46]). The judge also did not accept that the appellant
    assisted Komala at the assistance of his father or otherwise and
    rejected his evidence of any political activity whilst in Iran.


24. The FtTJ considered the issue of his sur place activities at paragraphs
    [42]-49]. As to the appellant's sur place activities, he rejected any
    suggestion that these were carried out other than on the basis of an
    improperly motivated attempt to try to bolster or create is otherwise
    fabricated asylum claim. The timing of the start of his activity, the
    lack of enthusiasm or knowledge of the Kurdish political cause
    hitherto, the fact that a friend telling what to do on Facebook, and
    the advice he accepts being given by another "to publish", left the
    judge "with no doubt that the appellant's motives are entirely
    cynical".

25. The FtTJ then turned to the issue of risk on return. The FtTJ referred
    to his earlier findings and found that he would not be at risk arising
    from any smuggling or any political activities which he carried out in
    Iran. He was not satisfied that engaged in or it come to the attention
    of the authorities for those activities at all.


26. As to the sur place activities, the judge recorded at [51] that he had
    to consider even if they had been "cynically motivated" whether there
    is a real risk they will be known to the authorities. The FtTJ reached
    the conclusion for the reasons he gave that the appellant would not be
    at risk of harm, taking into account his Kurdish ethnicity and his
    stated activities. The judge therefore dismissed his protection claim.


The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:


27. The appellant appeared unrepresented. At a previous hearing he had
    informed the Tribunal that he did have legal representation and
    therefore the hearing was adjourned to enable them to attend. At this
    hearing the appellant again stated that he had representation but that
    they had not attended court. However, when further enquiries were made
    by the Tribunal clerk, an email was sent stating that the
    representatives identified by the appellant were not representing him.
    Having taken into account the overriding objective and that the
    appellant had been given the opportunity to obtain representation but
    had not done so, I concluded that the appeal could be determined fairly
    without any further adjournment. There was a court interpreter present
    and I am satisfied that both the interpreter and the appellant
    understood each other during the hearing and that neither identified
    any difficulties in understanding the other.

28. The grounds advanced by the appellant are those originally provided,
    and the appellant informed the court that he relied upon those grounds.
    He referred to further documents which upon enquiry he confirmed
    related to his attendance at demonstrations that had taken place since
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal decision.


29. In the written grounds, provided by the appellant in person it was
    submitted that the judge made an error of law by failing to properly
    assess the claim by reference to the country guidance decision HB
    (Kurds) and the decision in Danian v SSHD [2009] and that the FtTJ
    erred when questioning the date of his Facebook posts.

30. Ms Petterson submitted that there was no challenge in the grounds to
    the findings of fact made by the FtTJ that he had not been involved in
    any political activity whilst in Iran, or that he not been involved in
    smuggling or that he had not come to the attention of the authorities.
    Consequently, on return nothing would be known which would be adverse
    to him.

31. When looking at the Facebook evidence, the FtTJ made unchallenged
    findings that they were put on recently, four years after he arrived in
    the UK but importantly that the appellant had not demonstrated that
    they were available in the public domain. At [55] the FtTJ was entitled
    to take into account that the appellant had not posted anything himself
    and the judge was not even satisfied the posts were even still
    available to the public. The appellant would be able to delete them. It
    would not be a breach of the principles of HJ (Iran) to expect
    appellant delete social media posts before return when they do not
    represent genuinely held beliefs.  She therefore submitted that the
    FtTJ did not make any error of law when considering the Facebook posts
    which were not even translated.


32. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
    give.

Relevant Country Guidance:

33. The Upper Tribunal in  HB  (Kurds)  Iran  CG  [2018]  UKUT  430  (IAC).
    provided as follows as summarised in the headnote:

"(1) SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT
308 (IAC) remains valid country guidance in terms of the country guidance
offered in the headnote. For the avoidance of doubt, that decision is not
authority for any proposition in relation to the risk on return for refused
Kurdish asylum-seekers on account of their Kurdish ethnicity alone.

(2) Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence does not
support a contention that such discrimination is, in general, at such a
level as to amount to persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

(3) Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have become increasingly suspicious
of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity. Those of Kurdish
ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater suspicion than hitherto and
are reasonably likely to be subjected to heightened scrutiny on return to
Iran.

(4) However, the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity with or
without a valid passport, and even if combined with illegal exit, does not
create a risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

(5) Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor which, when combined
with other factors, may create a real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
treatment. Being a risk factor, it means that Kurdish ethnicity is a factor
of particular significance when assessing risk. Those "other factors" will
include the matters identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below.

(6) A period of residence in the KRI by a Kurdish returnee is reasonable
likely to result in additional questioning by the authorities on return.
However, this is a factor that will be highly fact-specific and the degree
of interest that such residence will excite will depend, non-exhaustively,
on matters such as the length of residence in the KRI, what the person
concerned was doing there and why they left.

(7) Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at risk of
arrest, prolonged detention and physical abuse by the Iranian authorities.
Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or who speak out about Kurdish
rights also face a real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

(8) Activities that can be perceived to be political by the Iranian
authorities include social welfare and charitable activities on behalf of
Kurds. Indeed, involvement with any organised activity on behalf of or in
support of Kurds can be perceived as political and thus involve a risk of
adverse attention by the Iranian authorities with the consequent risk of
persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

(9) Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that is perceived to
be political, such as, by way of example only, mere possession of leaflets
espousing or supporting Kurdish rights, if discovered, involves the same
risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. Each case, however, depends
on its own facts and an assessment will need to be made as to the nature of
the material possessed and how it would be likely to be viewed by the
Iranian authorities in the context of the foregoing guidance.

(10) The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as a 'hair-
trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to be involved in
Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish rights. By 'hair-
trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion is low and the reaction
of the authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme."

Decision on the error of law:

34. The FtTJ made the following findings of fact in relation to the events
    in Iran which are not challenged in the grounds:

       1. He was not satisfied that the appellant had told the truth about
          his date of birth and did not accept that he was a minor when he
          made his asylum claim and found his correct date of birth is 1996
          or 1997 but not 1999. The FtTJ found that the appellant had made
          admissions as to using false dates of birth in his screening
          interview and even more concerned, and a factor to which he
          afforded significant weight, was that he was still trying to be
          untruthful about this issue and perpetuate his attempt to deceive
          (see paragraphs [24]-[27] and conclusion at [45]).
       2. The appellant's core claim appeared to lack credibility and that
          the appellant had failed to tell the truth about large portions
          of his evidence. In his evidence the appellant said that he had
          been helping his father with Komala work for 10 to 12 months
          before his father was arrested. In his asylum interview he said 3
          to 4 months. When asked, he specifically denied ever saying 3 to
          4 months claiming he had always said 10 to 12 months. The judge
          regarded that as an inconsistency in his account. Furthermore, in
          his screening interview, the appellant said his father worked for
          the KL P although later the appellant did speak about his support
          for Komala like his father. When asked about this apparent
          discrepancy in evidence, the appellant said that it always said
          Komala, again denying that he had ever said what had been
          recorded. This was a further inconsistency.
       3. As to the lack of knowledge or wrong answers given in relation to
          Komala, as set out in the respondent's decision letter, in his
          witness statement the appellant said that he was not really
          involved in the party and was not even a "direct supporter", and
          that his father did not tell him much other than the basics and
          he could only get information from leaflets which he was unable
          to read. The judge considered that his lack of knowledge and
          activity should be considered in the context of what was
          contained in the letters from Komala which the appellant heavily
          relied upon. The judge accepted that the letters did come from
          someone in Komala as claimed and considered the external country
          evidence. However, there were aspects of the evidence that caused
          concern. Firstly, in the way that they were sought. The appellant
          stated that he had contacted Komala by telephone and spoke to a
          man called A. he didn't know where A was but thought that he
          might be in Iraq. He said he got the details on Facebook, through
          the Komala page. The judge found that this did not sit well with
          the appellant's claim to be illiterate and have limited
          understanding of Facebook itself. There was no "audit trail of
          him having contacted Mr A. He said he'd been able to upload a
          picture of his UK ID card and send it to Komala and told A that
          he was in the UK and detailed what happened to him. However,
          there was no record of the upload provided or Facebook or other
          message having been sent. The appellant said he been told to
          delete it. The judge found that his ability to do all of that
          given his accepted lack of IT knowledge and issues of literacy
          was of concern. Komala had originally stated the appellant stated
          birth was in 1996. The FtTJ had already set out why the
          appellant's explanation did not stand up to scrutiny. Given that
          Komala did state the wrong date of birth and the lack of detail
          as to what given by them, the judge was concerned as to how they
          managed to investigate and find details about the appellant prior
          to correcting the date of birth. The judge was also uncertain as
          to how Komala knew the date of birth was in fact wrong and no
          audit trail of communications in that respect it be been
          provided. As to the contents of the letters, there seem to have
          been two different interpretations of the same document. One
          letter stated that he joined the organisation in January 2015.
          That was inconsistent with the appellant's account that he was
          not a member, or even a "direct supporter". Another
          interpretation stated that he had contacted Komala's secret cells
          in January 2015. Again, this is inconsistent with the appellant's
          case because he said he had nothing to do with Komala directly
          and that he obeyed his father's instructions. Neither translation
          refers to him only working with his father or comments on his
          father's involvement at all. One translation suggested that he
          was involved in "many" secret political activities like
          delivering and is debiting publications. The appellant said that
          delivery is all that he did. What other secret activities were
          not detailed but the judge was not satisfied that they were
          consistent with the appellant's account. There was also no
          indication as to how the p claims had been checked by Komala and
          by and with whom. The judge concluded that he could only attach
          the most limited weight to that evidence.
       4. The judge also did not accept that the appellant's grandfather
          who kept livestock and lived next to the appellant and his family
          would be able to recruit an agent and pay the agent to assist the
          appellant. The appellant said his grandfather was not rich but
          was not poor, had no idea as to how matters had been arranged,
          what was agreed and the costs and he made no call home to confirm
          that he been properly delivered by the agent.
       5. The FtTJ was not satisfied that he was ever engaged in smuggling,
          but even if he was, he was never caught or identified as a
          smuggler (see [46]).
       6. The judge did not accept that the appellant assisted Komala at
          the assistance of his father or otherwise and rejected his
          evidence.


35. I now turn to the thrust of the  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant which relate to the sur place claim.

36. As summarised in the earlier part of  this  decision,  the  Judge  made
    several adverse credibility findings in relation to his claim  to  have
    been involved in political activity and having been of interest to  the
    Iranian authorities before he left that  country.  The  FtTJ  therefore
    rejected his claim to have been involved in any political  activity  in
    Iran and that therefore he was not at risk on return to Iran  for  that
    reason. It follows from those unchallenged findings of  fact  that  the
    appellant was of no interest to the Iranian authorities  when  he  left
    Iran.

37. No specific submissions are made in the grounds  as  to  how  the  FtTJ
    erred in his assessment of the  sur  place  issue  beyond  the  general
    complaint that the appellant maintained that his sur  place  activities
    placed him in danger on return and as a failed asylum seeker. Reference
    is made to the decision of Danian and that "risks generated by  actions
    in bad faith do not exclude a person from refugee status". The grant of
    permission is more illuminating in which  it  identifies  that  it  was
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  undertake  a  proper
    assessment of the potential for discovery of the  appellant's  Facebook
    posts citing HB(Iran).

38. The assessment made by the FtTJ concerning the nature of the
    appellant's sur place activities can be summarised from his decision at
    paragraphs [42]-49]. The FtTJ considered the evidence to the security
    services in Iran from the CPIN Iran; background information including
    protection and internal relocation, which referred to the Ministry of
    intelligence and Ettela'at.


39. The appellant said that he had been posting and/or liking pro-Kurdish,
    anti-Iranian material on Facebook. He had been in the UK since 2015 but
    it only started doing this in April 2019. The judge recorded the
    appellant's evidence that he said a friend of his had set it up and
    shown what to do and that his friend had "told him to publish". He said
    he was not familiar with Facebook at all, but the pages produced
    suggests the appellant has 283 friends.

40. Whilst in his statement the appellant suggested his pages were public,
    the appellant said in evidence that he did not know if that was the
    case. The judge concluded that "it seemed to me that he didn't really
    understand the concept of publicly available postings and activity."
    The presenting officer produced some evidence from "Facebook for
    dummies" which suggests that pages open to the public have a "Globe" on
    them. The judge, whilst being cautious about this as an authoritative
    reference book, found that there was no indication that the globe
    appeared on any of the pages provided. Thus, he concluded that there
    was no indication from the evidence provided that the appellant pages
    were publicly available at all, how long they were available and
    whether they are still available and if so, to whom. The judge found
    "it was apparent the appellant had no real knowledge of what he was
    doing in this regard. In addition, he questioned as to how the
    appellant had been able to properly engage with Facebook given his
    claimed lack of literacy. He said he looked at photos of friend
    requests to see if they had photos or flags, or the executions of
    people, before accepting them. The FtTJ stated "This seemed to me to be
    an inherently unlikely method of vetting friends" (see [43]).


41. The judge concluded at [49].
    "as to the appellant's sur place activities, I reject any suggestion
    that these were carried out other than on the basis of an improperly
    motivated attempt to try to bolster or create is otherwise fabricated
    asylum claim. The timing of the start of his activity, the lack of
    enthusiasm or knowledge of the Kurdish political cause hitherto, the
    fact that a friend telling what to do on Facebook, and the advice he
    accepts being given by another "to publish", leave me with no doubt
    that the appellant's motives are entirely cynical. I am satisfied that
    his Facebook pages do not in any way reflect a genuine sense of the
    need to politically protest or inform."

42. The FtTJ then turned to the issue of risk on return. The FtTJ referred
    to his earlier findings and found that he would not be at risk arising
    from any smuggling or any political activities which he carried out in
    Iran. He was not satisfied that engaged in or it come to the attention
    of the authorities for those activities at all.

43. The grounds assert that the judge fell into error by failure to have
    regard to the decision in Danian. Having carefully considered the
    decision of the FtTJ, I am not satisfied that the FtTJ failed to apply
    the ratio of Danian.

44. As to the sur place activities, the judge recorded at [51] that he had
    to consider even if they had been "cynically motivated" whether there
    is a real risk they will be known to the authorities.


45. The judge expressly referred himself to the decision of YB (Eritrea) v
    Secretary of State for Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 360 and that
    when dealing with any risk in relation to sur place activities, ill
    motivated sur place activity is not an automatic bar to the claim. The
    judge stated "the question for me to consider remains as to whether I
    am satisfied that there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that the
    appellant will suffer mistreatment (amounted to persecution by reason
    of perceived political opinion) as a result of those sur place
    activities"(at [52]).

46.  As set out in Danian [1999] EWCA Civ 3000, even if his credibility
    might be low, it was still necessary to scrutinise and assess the new
    claim (sur place claim). Consequently, it has not been demonstrated
    that the FtTJ failed to direct himself in accordance with the decision
    in Danian which is consistent with that set out above.


47. The grounds seek to challenge that risk assessment. In his analysis,
    the FtTJ accepted that Iran has a sophisticated intelligence system and
    made reference to the country material recited at [42] where the
    library of Congress noted that the function of the security services
    included "collecting, analysing, producing and categorising internal
    and external intelligence and uncovering conspiracy, subversion,
    espionage, sabotage and sedition against the Islamic Republic of Iran."




48. He made reference to the decision in BA (demonstrators in Britain-risk
    on return) Iran CG [2011]UKUT 36 and the CPIN Iran : journalist and
    Internet-based media (October 2016) para 2.2.2 which set out reports of
    the Iranian authorities harassing, detaining, abusing and torturing,
    flogging or otherwise severely punishing "those involved in Internet-
    based media, such as bloggers and the users of social media, whether
    reporting is, or is perceived to be, critical of the government or
    offensive to public authority." And that "the press, Internet caf�'s,
    cyberspace and private communications including social networking sites
    and messaging apps."


49. Having referred himself to those two matters, he set out at [54] that
    whilst he was satisfied that the Iranian government did have an
    interest in Facebook and other social media sites, it considered that
    the material on the Internet was so vast that it was unrealistic to
    assume that the Iranian authorities could or would trawl through all of
    it, Iran being a country of 81 million people), even with keywords or
    specific search terms. He found that this was supported by the same
    CPIN note at paragraph 2.2 for that "since the reigning government is
    not able to monitor the activities of every individual, decision-makers
    must consider the level of involvement of the person, in addition to
    any political activity that the person may have previously been
    involved with in Iran."


50. In addition the judge cited the decision of BA which stated that "given
    the large number of those who demonstrate here and the publicity which
    the demonstrators receive, for example on Facebook, combined with the
    inability of the Iranian government to monitor all returnees who been
    involved in demonstrations here, regard must be hard to the level
    involvement of the individual here as well as any political activity
    which the individual might have been involved in Iran before seeking
    asylum in Britain."


51. The FtTJ then applied that to the particular circumstances of this
    appellant.


52. His assessment was as follows:
      i) He was not satisfied that the sur place activities were anything
         other than minimal.
     ii) there were no postings by the appellant himself.
    iii) most significantly the judge was not satisfied on the evidence that
         the appellant activity was even public and reminded himself that
         the onus is on the appellant to establish his claim (see EZ v SSHD
         [2017] CSOH 30). That decision related to a fresh claim where the
         court found that the respondent did not erred in his refusal to
         accept further submissions where there was reliance on for Facebook
         posts. It was not known how widely circulating those posted been or
         whether the posts were accessible to the public as opposed to
         Facebook friends.
     iv) Here, the judge was not satisfied that there was a real risk that
         is pages would be of interest to or even seen by the authorities.
      v) He recorded that it was suggested that one of his friends might be
         being watched or that the Iranian authorities might obtain details
         of the appellant through other means or through his Facebook
         friends. The judge rejected that and stated that there was no
         evidence that any of his "friends" have any significant profile.
     vi) There was no evidence that the appellant had been of any interest
         to the Iranian authorities whilst it been in the United Kingdom.
    vii) He concluded at [56) that he was not satisfied that the appellant
         would be at any real risk of persecution arising from the
         "extremely limited sur place activity in which had been involved."


53. The FtTJ then turned to whether the appellant had left Iran illegally.
    On the facts, he was not satisfied that the appellant had illegally
    left Iran. However, he considered the position if he had been wrong
    about that aspect of his account and made reference to the case law of
     SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016 ] UKUT
    0038 and HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 0430. He summarised the country
    guidance caselaw that merely being a failed asylum seeker even having
    left illegally would not in itself generally place a person risk on
    return to Iran. However, that is, with the caveat that the individual
    circumstances of the case (including possible increased interest in a
    person by reason of them being a Kurd) must naturally be considered.


54. At [57] having applied that decision he stated as follows "I accept
    that returnees are screened on arrival. I am mindful of the guidance in
    HB and accept that the Iranians do operate a "hair trigger" policy to
    suspicions they may have and do not afford someone about whom they are
    not sure the benefit of the doubt. The appellant submits that as he is
    left Iran illegally there is a risk he will be questioned, particularly
    as he is of Kurdish ethnicity and a failed asylum seeker. It is
    submitted that if questioned, as he is not required to lie, he would
    have to say that he claimed asylum on the basis that he had assisted
    Komala. This would result in a very real risk of him thereafter being
    treated in a way that would amount persecution or serious harm. "

55. The conclusion reached by the judge at [58] is as follows:


         "I am not satisfied that his illegal exit, and failed asylum seeker
         status even as a Kurd would in itself be sufficient to satisfy me
         that the appellant would be risk upon return such as to justify
         international protection being afforded to him.
         Whilst I do accept that being a Kurd particularly when taken
         cumulatively with being a failed asylum seeker might present a
         heightened risk of being asked questions, and I take this into
         account, as for explaining the basis for his asylum claim, if you
         told the truth he would have to say it was rejected as wholly
         untrue, as I have found it to be.
         I have had regard to MA v SSHD [2017] CSOH 134 where the FtTJ had
         concluded that the appellant had in fact been a genuine support of
         the Kurdish cause, but had not been a member of (in his case) the
         KDP, that he had involved himself in sur place activity in the UK
         to the extent of attendance at one meeting and contact with the
         KDPI but that was highly unlikely to cause him to be of interest to
         the authorities. The Court of session concluded that it had been
         recently opened to the FTT in the light of the country guidance to
         find that even for disclosure by MA of his activities (when
         questioned at the airport by the authorities) would not create an
         interest in him as his activities were of such a low level. In this
         case the level of the activities of the appellant is significantly
         lower than in MA. In any event I found that there is no real risk
         the authorities would be aware of such activities in the case of
         the appellant."


56. Whilst he grounds assert that the FtTJ failed to have regard to the
    decision in HB (Iran), the above summary makes it plain that the FtTJ
    did so and expressly took into account what would happen on arrival and
    the "hair trigger approach".


57. Activities undertaken in bad faith can found a sur place claim but
    careful attention must be given to whether those activities are likely
    to come to the attention of the authorities on return - see the
    reasoning in YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360.  This was a
    question of fact for the judge to assess on the evidence before him.

58. On his assessment of the evidence, which is not challenged in any
    material respect, the FtTJ found that there were no postings by the
    appellant himself and that he had not even set up the page. Most
    significantly the judge was not satisfied on the evidence that the
    appellant activity was even public and reminded himself that the onus
    is on the appellant to establish his claim (see EZ v SSHD [2017] CSOH
    30). It was not known how widely circulating those posted been or
    whether the posts were accessible to the public as opposed to Facebook
    friends. On the particular facts, the judge was not satisfied that
    there was a real risk that his pages would even be seen by the
    authorities.

59. He recorded that it was suggested that one of his friends might be
    being watched or that the Iranian authorities might obtain details of
    the appellant through other means or through his Facebook friends. The
    judge rejected that and stated that there was no evidence that any of
    his "friends" have any significant profile.

60. Whilst paragraph 116 of HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT makes reference
    to the process of investigation and that in that case of HB his face
    book pages would become known, part of the assessment of risk would
    necessarily include the commitment shown in the UK, and whether he
    would be likely to continue that political activity on return. On the
    factual assessment, the FtTJ reached the conclusion that the activity
    was an "improperly motivated attempt to try to bolster or create is
    otherwise fabricated asylum claim. The timing of the start of his
    activity, the lack of enthusiasm or knowledge of the Kurdish political
    cause hitherto, the fact that a friend telling what to do on Facebook,
    and the advice he accepts being given by another "to publish", leave me
    with no doubt that the appellant's motives are entirely cynical. I am
    satisfied that his Facebook pages do not in any way reflect a genuine
    sense of the need to politically protest or inform."


61. It was therefore open to the FtTJ to reject the claim that if
    questioned that he is not required to lie (the HJ(Iran  principle)
    because as the FtTJ found he did not hold any genuinely held political
    views that he would wish to continue to express. If asked directly,
    upon return to Iran the appellant would truthfully be able to confirm
    that he had not been engaged in any political activity outside of Iran.
    It must follow, as Ms Petterson submitted, that as the appellant did
    not even set up the posts or the Facebook account, he, or his friend
    responsible for setting up the account could delete the account. This
    is a "common sense consideration" (see AM (Iran) and one that would
    apply on the factual findings of the FtTJ. Consequently, it was open to
    the FtTJ to reach the overall conclusion as to risk that the appellant
    would not be at risk on return to Iran, even taking into account in his
    ethnicity as a Kurd and his status as a failed asylum seeker  ( see SSH
    and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker Iran CG [2016 ] UKUT 0038
    and HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 0430).

62. The appellant has stated that since the decision of the FtTJ he has
    become involved in attending demonstrations and other political
    activity. That material cannot demonstrate an error law in the decision
    of the FtTJ but it is open to the appellant to make fresh claim if
    there are further grounds and evidence now available upon which he
    seeks to rely.



Notice of Decision
63. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law and is therefore the decision  of  the  FtTJ
    shall stand.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


                                Date     14/02/2020

                                    Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds




