
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02014/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 July 2019                      |On 05 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                  mEET KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Boyes in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan, against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum.

 2. The application under appeal was  refused  on  14  February  2019.  The
    Appellant exercised her right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. The
    appeal came before Judge Boyes on 1 April 2019  and  was  dismissed  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds but  allowed  by  virtue  of
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  The  Appellant  applied  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The application was granted
    by Designated Judge Woodcraft on 8 May 2019 in the following terms

         "... The judge dismissed the asylum claim but  allowed  the  appeal
         under Article 8 on  the  grounds  of  insurmountable  obstacles  to
         reintegration. Those obstacles, as set out by the judge at [31]  to
         [40],  arguably  cross  the  Article  3  threshold  and  amount  to
         persecutory treatment, as argued at paragraph 13 of the grounds..."



Background

 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Afghanistan of the Sikh faith born on 1 January  1993.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom in  2013  with  her  husband  and  eldest
    child. The couple's second child was born in the  United  Kingdom.  The
    Appellant's husband claimed asylum on arrival  and  the  Appellant  was
    dependent on his claim. Their application  was  refused,  their  appeal
    against refusal  dismissed  and  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was refused and the family became appeal rights  exhausted  on
    10 June 2014. In 2018 a further  claim  for  asylum  was  made  by  the
    Appellant with her husband and two children dependent on the claim. The
    basis of her claim was that, as a Sikh, her life and that of her family
    would be in danger in Afghanistan.

 4. The Respondent refused the application based firstly  on  the  decision
    made in the family's previous appeal and secondly the basis that  there
    was a sufficiency of state protection for Sikhs in Afghanistan

 5. In dismissing the protection appeal the Judge found that there  was  no
    significant difference between the facts put forward and those that had
    been rejected by  the  previous  Judge.  However,  he  also  found,  at
    paragraphs 31 to 40 of his decision that the  obstacles  faced  by  the
    Appellant and her family to integration into  Afghanistan  life  should
    they be returned were surmountable. On this basis he allowed the appeal
    by virtue of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.



Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Howells very helpfully conceded that  there
    is  merit  in  the  grounds.  He  said  that  the   factual   findings,
    particularly  at  paragraphs  30  and  35,   were   relevant   to   the
    consideration of a protection claim. Applying  TG  and  others  (Afghan
    Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC) and  referring
    to the head note subparagraph(ii) lists four areas  for  consideration.
    Amongst these are finances, accommodation and  education.  The  factual
    findings made by the Judge demonstrate that the Appellants  would  face
    very serious issues in all of these areas. Mr  Howells  said  that  the
    Respondent accepted that the Judge made a material  error  of  law  and
    asked me to set aside the decision and based upon the factual  findings
    made by the First-tier Tribunal judge to remake the  decision  allowing
    the appeal. Mr Dieu concurred.




 7. I agreed that the decision would be set aside and  remade  accordingly.
    My reasons are given below.




Decision

 8. This is a straightforward decision to make because it is made with  the
    agreement of both parties but because it will result in  the  grant  of
    protection status it is nevertheless important that brief  reasons  are
    given.

 9. As detailed above  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  this  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds whilst dismissing the protection appeal.  The  reason
    that the appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds was because the  Judge
    found that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    reintegration into Afghanistan. This was because the Appellant had been
    away from Afghanistan for a  lengthy  period,  she  has  no  family  or
    friends there and there are no means by which she or  her  husband,  as
    Sikhs, could gain an employment which would give sufficient  income  to
    sustain themselves and their family. They have two young  children  who
    have only a slim chance of being able to achieve any education and  who
    will be living at or only  slightly  above  the  breadline.   The  full
    factual findings are to  be  found  at  paragraphs  31  to  40  of  the
    decision.

10. The error of law is that having made these findings the Judge failed to
    address them to the case law. The decision in TG and  others  holds  at
    paragraph 119 (iii) that consideration of whether an individual  member
    of the Sikh community in Afghanistan is at real risk of persecution  is
    fact sensitive and that in assessing the facts careful attention should
    be paid to the following:

          a.  women  are  particularly  vulnerable  in   the   absence   of
             appropriate protection from a male member of the family;


          b. likely financial circumstances and  ability  to  access  basic
             accommodation bearing in mind


                - Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member  of  the
                  Sikh and Hindu communities


                - such individuals may face difficulties (including threats,
                  extortion, seizure  of  land  and  acts  of  violence)  in
                  retaining property  and  /  or  pursuing  their  remaining
                  traditional pursuit, that of a shopkeeper / trader


                - the traditional source of support  for  such  individuals,
                  the  Gurdwara  is  much  less  able  to  provide  adequate
                  support;


          c.  the  level  of   religious   devotion   and   the   practical
             accessibility to a suitable  place  of  religious  worship  in
             light of declining numbers and the  evidence  that  some  have
             been subjected to harm and threats to  harm  whilst  accessing
             the Gurdwara;


          d. access to appropriate  education  for  children  in  light  of
             discrimination  against  Sikh  and  Hindu  children  and   the
             shortage of adequate education facilities for them.


11. The error of  law  is  material  because  given  the  factual  findings
    referred to above there is every indication that the Appellant and  her
    family, as Sikhs, will face persecution on a return to Afghanistan.  On
    that basis and based on those factual findings I remake the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal and I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.



Summary of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material  error  of
    law and for that reason the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds is set aside.

13. I remake the decision and I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

14. The Appellant is a  refugee  and  therefore  she  is  not  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.



Signed                                  Date: 26 July 2019
[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
