
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02997/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th October 2018                          |On 12th November 2018         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                    T V P
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty of Counsel instructed by B.H.T.
Immigration Legal
     Services
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 1st September  1999.   It
    was his claim that he had been trafficked into the United Kingdom.   In
    an interview conducted on 6th April 2016 he set out his experiences.

2.   In the decision  of  15th  February  2018  his  account  was  generally
    accepted as credible by the respondent and it was accepted that  indeed
    he had been the victim of trafficking into the United Kingdom.  It was,
    however, the position of the  respondent  in  that  decision  that  the
    appellant could safely return to Vietnam and for that reason his  claim
    for asylum or other protection was refused.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence on 5th April 2018.  By a
    determination promulgated on 30th April 2018 the claim was dismissed.

4.   Subsequently an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  has  resulted  in  that
    decision being set aside for an error of law.  It is now before us  for
    a full hearing of the claim.

5.   Credibility is not in issue in this particular  case,  but  rather  the
    outcome of the appeal turns upon risk of return  and/or  human  rights.
    It  has  come  before  us  essentially  focused  upon  the  issues   of
    sufficiency  of  protection,  internal  relocation  and  human   rights
    generally.

6.   The appellant was not called to give evidence, but rather  adopted  his
    witness  statement.   We  are  grateful  to  the  parties  for  updated
    evidential  material,  which  together  with  submissions  informs  our
    decision.

7.   By way of background the appellant lived in Mong Cal  with  his  mother
    and sister.  When he was 6 or 7 years old they left him in the care  of
    his grandmother.  She died when he was 10.  He continued to live in the
    home with the assistance of neighbours. He worked as a dishwasher.   He
    moved away briefly to take up work decorating houses but  returned  and
    spent a further year working in a kitchen and as a caretaker.

8.   When he was approximately aged 12 he was introduced  to  a  man  called
    Hung who employed him at a restaurant.  He was a significant figure  in
    the neighbourhood.  The man attempted to sexually assault the appellant
    and beat him so badly that he spent two months in hospital.  Afterwards
    he was forced to return to the control of Hung. He was threatened  with
    violence should he attempt to escape.  He was made to work but received
    no money.

9.   In April 2014 Hung arranged for the appellant to be taken to China  and
    to Russia, France and finally to the United Kingdom.

10.  He found himself under the control of three  Vietnamese  men  who  were
    verbally and physically abusive to him.  He was made to cook and  clean
    for them and not allowed his liberty.  He was told that he was  working
    to pay the debt owed for transporting him to the United Kingdom.

11.  Eventually he managed to escape from the men and from the property  and
    wandered the streets until he found a Vietnamese nail  shop.   He  went
    between nail bars in the Vietnamese community, working in some  stores,
    cleaning and serving drinks.  He was encountered by  the  police  at  a
    particular nail bar on 8th October 2015  when  it  was  raided  by  the
    police.

12.  Since that time the appellant  has  been  in  the  care  of  the  local
    authority living with  a  foster  carer,  AC.   She  and  her  daughter
    attended the hearing and indeed gave evidence in the course thereof.

13.  A particular and significant feature of this case is the  vulnerability
    of the appellant,  both  emotionally  and  mentally  arising  from  his
    experiences as summarised briefly above.

14.  In that connection we have regard to the psychological report  prepared
    by Alice Rogers dated 24th March 2018 arising  from  the  interview  of
    12th March 2018.   The appellant is in her opinion a  vulnerable  young
    man meeting the criteria  for  mild-moderate  PTSD.   Such  had  arisen
    because of  the  serious  sexual  and  physical  attacks  that  he  had
    experienced in the past and his general experience at the hands of  the
    traffickers.  Such has led to significant attachment difficulties.   He
    suffered  a  serious  depressive  episode  some  two  years  ago   with
    associated high levels  of  risk  and  suicidality.   He  has  shown  a
    considerable improvement since then because of the  stability  afforded
    to him by his foster carer.  He is no longer clinically  depressed  but
    has extensive psychological symptoms of depression, with high levels of
    shame, guilt and lack of self-worth.  He is at risk of further episodes
    of depression given his PTSD and the severity of his  former  symptoms.
    His strong relationship with his  foster  carer  has  assisted  in  the
    healing process.

15.  The report was based upon a three hour interview with the appellant.

16.  The appellant attends college  and  sometimes  can  retain  information
    well, on others less well.  He has a family of Vietnamese friends  with
    whom he visits, but otherwise he tends not to go out but  stay  closely
    within the safe environment of his foster carer  and  her  family.   He
    expresses himself as being afraid to return to Vietnam, particularly in
    case he is found and sold and trafficked once again.

17.  In terms of emotional relationships the appellant  presents  very  much
    as a younger child.  According to AC,  his  foster  carer,  he  is  not
    interested in his peer group and hardly goes out.  He finds  difficulty
    in making relationships but is very close to her and  her  family.   He
    appears to be very dependent upon her and  the  family  situation.   On
    occasions he continues to blame himself and think  that  he  is  a  bad
    person and sometimes keeps himself to himself.

18.  The  conclusion  of  the  report  is  indeed  that  the  appellant  has
    experienced significant and traumatic loss at an early  age  which  has
    been  highly  detrimental   to   his   subsequent   development.    His
    vulnerabilities are  associated  with  social  stigma  and  shame.   He
    functions like a younger child in many ways.  According to  the  report
    he has heightened levels of anxiety symptoms and depressive conditions,
    a feeling of low worth.  He found it difficult to make  friends  or  to
    manage social relationships due to his early experience.   It  was  the
    view of Miss Rogers that the loss of the  relationships  which  he  has
    developed in his first foster family would be profound.

19.  We heard evidence also from AC and her daughter ARC in relation to  the
    appellant's  current  state  of  health.    She   confirms   what   the
    psychologist in her report had to say.

20.  In terms of the return itself considerable  reliance  has  been  placed
    upon the report of Christine Beddoe,  a  specialist  adviser  on  human
    trafficking and child exploitation dated 3rd April 2018.

21.  In the report  she  sets  out  her  experience  in  relation  to  human
    trafficking and modern slavery, and more  particularly  her  experience
    working in Vietnam and her keeping up-to-date with  current  issues  in
    Vietnam, particularly by discussing the matter with  colleagues  or  by
    reading research papers.

22.  For the appellant to gain any recognition in Vietnam  as  a  victim  of
    trafficking,   involves  in  practice  a  very   lengthy,   complicated
    administrative process.  There is no bilateral  agreement  between  the
    United Kingdom and Vietnam so  it  will  fall  upon  the  appellant  to
    convince the authorities as to  his  experience  of  being  trafficked.
    Such in turn requires the appellant to produce cogent documentation  as
    to his household family situation when  in  Vietnam  and  all  relevant
    documents as to status and identification.  The Vietnamese  authorities
    have their own laws and policies for  victim  identification  purposes.
    The appellant will be categorised as "self-returning" under the  policy
    and thereafter there will be a complex administrative  procedure  which
    will require him to apply to the authorities on his return for them  to
    investigate with the local authorities as well as  the  authorities  in
    the country where the trafficking and exploitation  took  place.   Such
    identification is often ineffective.  There is a  leisurely  collecting
    of victims' preliminary information  which  leads  to  difficulties  in
    formally identifying a victim's status.  Such  affects  the  access  to
    victim protection, assistance and support.

23.   In practice the appellant's  introverted  mental  state  and  lack  of
    engagement with outsiders would render his dealing with authorities and
    with  the  police  extremely  difficult  for  him.  There  would  be  a
    significant delay in the process in any event,  whether  successful  or
    not, during which he  would  be  without  any  status  or  grounds  for
    protection.
24.  A further obstacle in  that  path  is  that  although  the  authorities
    recognise female trafficking, particularly for the purposes  of  sexual
    exploitation there is less recognition for the  exploitation  of  young
    males  for  the  purposes  of  working.   Though  there  was  sheltered
    accommodation for females, it was the opinion of Christine Beddoe  that
    there were no such facilities available  for  male  or  child  victims,
    notwithstanding  the  indication  to  the  contrary  in  the  US  State
    Department Trafficking in Persons Report 2017.

25.  In that connection Mr Tufan drew our attention to  the  Country  Policy
    and Information Note of Vietnam: Victims of trafficking Version 3.0  of
    September 2018, paragraph 2.5.5, which spoke of the Ministry of Labour,
    Invalids and Social  Affairs  providing  protection  and  reintegration
    support operating some 400  social  protection  centres  through  local
    authorities which provide  services  to  a  wide  range  of  vulnerable
    groups, including trafficking victims.  Ms Beddoe indicated  that  that
    was to fundamentally misunderstand  the  policy  that  lay  behind  the
    setting up of those centres.  They were designed for nine categories of
    person, namely the elderly, very elderly, HIV, orphaned children  under
    16, those who are very severely disabled physically and those  who  are
    suffering  from  severe  and  serious  psychological  and   psychiatric
    illness.  Such categories did not apply to the appellant and  he  would
    have no access to them as a young male.

26.  We  note  indeed  in  paragraph  2.5.5  that  there  were  no  shelters
    designated exclusively for male and child  victims,  although  existing
    shelters provided assistance to all victims as needed.  The view of the
    expert was, however, that essentially  it  was  to  protect  women  and
    females rather than men.  It was  also  stated  that  there  were  non-
    Government organisations in Vietnam who could  assist  the  victims  of
    trafficking.  Little detail of those organisations have been provided.

27.  In summary it was the view of the expert that the appellant would  face
    extreme difficulties in persuading the authorities to accept him  as  a
    trafficked person, and indeed even if that succeeded, there was  little
    by way of practical support that would be given, or could be  given  to
    him in the circumstances.

28.  Indeed there was a suggestion that is contained in the  Country  Policy
    and Information Note of the  Home  Office,  particularly  at  paragraph
    4.1.11 quoting from the USSD TiP Report 2018, that the Government  were
    decreasing efforts to protect victims.  In 2017 authorities  identified
    670 victims, a decrease from 1,128 in 2016.  However, there  were  very
    few statistics which identified those figures by type of trafficking.

29.  We note also in the same report under profiles  of  trafficked  victims
    and traffickers in paragraph 5.1.1 women and girls are considered  more
    susceptible to trafficking than men due to unequal gender relations and
    socio-economic positions.  They both are at risk from  different  forms
    of exploitation.

30.  Even were it the case that the appellant was regarded as  a  young  man
    returning to his country in order to find settlement and  work,  it  is
    the view of Christine Beddoe that the circumstances of this  particular
    case pose great difficulties.  It is fundamental  to  the  registration
    system in Vietnam that each household is given a household registration
    booklet ("So Ho Khau").  Such records  the  details  of  all  household
    members and their relationship  with  the  household  head.   It  is  a
    document intimately tied to the place of residence.   It  controls  the
    rights of the citizens to buy a house or land, to get  married,  to  be
    employed, to train, to borrow from a bank and to  register  births,  to
    drive or in any other way have  access  to  community  services.   Such
    documents are held in a  non-digital  form  at  present,  although  the
    intention is to try and convert them to digital in 2020.  The documents
    are held in the local area  registry  and  would  have  to  be  sourced
    directly from such a venue.  Such would entail the appellant  going  to
    his home area where he was first exploited or seeking some other  means
    or some assistance through third parties to access that document. Given
    the length of time that he has been away from Vietnam, such  may  prove
    to be very difficult.  She emphasises that it is  a  very  bureaucratic
    process to access any documents  through  official  channels  and  that
    corruption of officials is extremely high.  That in itself would be  an
    extremely difficult process for the applicant.   Even  if  he  were  to
    succeed it would take a considerable amount of time,  during  which  he
    would have no status and no rights.

31.  His ability to relocate to another area, particularly to  another  city
    as is suggested he may by the respondent, requires possession  of  that
    document.  Those who move to another area who have the So Ho Khau  must
    still apply for a temporary residence status using that  document.   It
    would be then up to the town officials to decide  in  their  discretion
    whether to grant a permanent status or not.  The authories' concern has
    been to restrict the flow of people from the countryside into the towns
    and hence this process is designed to make changes of venue  difficult.
    Even were the applicant to obtain a  temporary  residence  status  that
    would not afford him equal access to state-based affordable  healthcare
    support and other services than residents with  permanent  registration
    are offered.

32.  It was the view  of  Christine  Beddoe,  as  reflecting  the  views  of
    others, that migrants' access to health and other  social  services  is
    another  critical  problem.   Local  authorities  and   employers   and
    destination places are not so much interested  in  the  improvement  of
    migrant access to safe housing, health and social services.  Their main
    interest is centred on safeguarding their  community.   She  said  that
    most of the poor migrants are  crowded  into  boarding  houses  without
    basic infrastructure and facilities, lack health  insurance  and  other
    legal protection.

33.  Christine Beddoe also suggests, particularly at  paragraph  81  of  her
    report, that being an internal migrant places the individual at greater
    risk of intimidation  and  bribery  from  corrupt  police  officers  or
    officials.  Lack of support may lead to the danger of loans  and  money
    lenders.  Equally  the  lack  of  access  to  health  conditions  would
    constitute a  significant  disadvantage  to  the  applicant  given  the
    fragility of his mental wellbeing and condition.

34.  It is her submission in the report that the applicant would  revert  to
    having to do low paid and often exploitive items of work, as indeed  he
    had done in the past, and that those  would  expose  him  to  the  very
    difficulties which he experienced in the past, namely exploitation  and
    forced labour.

35.  It is her consideration that in practical  terms  the  ability  of  the
    appellant to obtain the requisite  documentation  would  be  very  slim
    indeed and he would be forced to live in the shadowy black economy with
    no protection.  In fact, he would be  living  in  the  same  vulnerable
    state that he was when he first left home.

36.  His fragile mental health and juvenile outlook would not assist him  in
    dealing with authority, employers, or those said to misuse  him  or  do
    him harm.  He is not streetwise nor can he  in  reality  stand  up  for
    himself and so will become, she  suggests,  almost  inevitably  another
    victim of trafficking once again linked with corruption and  the  abuse
    of power, particularly for those perceived to be weak would only add to
    the difficulties in this case.  It is further her  view  that  internal
    relocation is not a viable option for the appellant in any event.

37.  She contends that it would be difficult enough for a fit young  man  in
    good physical health to cope in such  an  environment,  let  alone  the
    appellant with his mental condition and abusive background.

38.  In terms of documentation relied upon by the  respondent,  much  weight
    is placed by the Home Office, not unsurprisingly, on  its  own  Country
    Policy and Information Note of  September  2018,  such  that  paragraph
    2.4.5 highlights the factors which may make the person at risk. Factors
    that  make  a  person  face  an  increased  risk  of  being  abused  or
    retrafficked include:-

     - having an outstanding debt to the traffickers;


     - the absence of a supportive family willing to take him back into the
       family unit;

     - having no other support network to assist;

     - no or little educational or vocational skills;

     - mental  health  conditions  which  may  well  have  been  caused  by
       extensive abuse when originally trafficked;

     - material and financial deprivation - he would be living  in  poverty
       or conditions of destitution;

     - factors which may lower the risk of  being  abused  or  retrafficked
       include the availability of a supportive family.

39.  The report stresses that the risk of  trafficking  must  be  considered
    according to the facts of each individual  case  and  their  individual
    vulnerability to retrafficking.  It was also noted in the  report  that
    Vietnam  does  have  anti-trafficking  legislation  and   attempts   to
    prosecute those involved in  trafficking.   Whilst  legislation  exists
    there is a lack of co-ordination across provincial agencies and a  poor
    understanding  of  the  relevant  legislation   resulting   in   uneven
    enforcement of the law.  The decision makers must however give  careful
    consideration  to  the  relevance  and   reasonableness   of   internal
    relocation on a case-by-case basis.

40.  At paragraph 4.1.3, as reported in September 2016 by IRIN  News,  human
    trafficking is on the rise in Vietnam.  At paragraph 4.1.7  trafficking
    in Vietnam continued to increase because it was difficult  to  control,
    according to a report from Vietnam News in an article  published  on  4
    November 2017.   It  is  recorded  at  paragraph  4.1.10  that  on  its
    website, Anti Slavery.org stated that  the  trafficking  of  vulnerable
    young people from Vietnam to the UK is on the rise, with  the  majority
    trafficked into cannabis production, nail bars and forced prostitution.



41.  In  terms  of  shelter  and  initial  support  such  is  considered  at
    paragraph 7.1.2, quoting the USSD  TiP  Report  of  2018,  which  makes
    reference to the 400 social protection centres  already  considered  by
    Christine Beddoe.   It  is  noted,  however,  that  these  centres  are
    unevenly  staffed,  under-resourced  and  lacked  appropriate   trained
    personnel to assist victims.  The women's unions  in  partnership  with
    NGOs continue to operate three shelters in urban cities, including  one
    dedicated to trafficking victims.  The unions assisted fourteen victims
    in 2017 and helped to  repatriate  35  Vietnamese  women  and  children
    subjected  to  trafficking  overseas.  According  to  an  international
    organisation  report,  reintegration  assistance  has  been  to  eleven
    victims.  There is insufficient record keeping to determine  the  total
    number  of  identified  victims  benefitting  from  Government  or  NGO
    protection services. The TiP Report did not  report  how  many  victims
    receive  Government  cash  subsidies  for  food,  clothing  and   other
    essential needs.

42.  In terms of reintegration  of  victims  of  trafficking,  it  noted  at
    paragraph 8.1.1 that victims of trafficking who escape  and  return  to
    Vietnam have no legal protection.  Many rural women find their land has
    been confiscated during their absence.  The absence of  a  So  Ho  Khau
    creates illegal  citizens  deprived  of  the  right  to  education  and
    healthcare. The USSD TiP Report 2018 stated that in 2017 the Government
    reported assisting approximately 500 victims, a decrease  from  600  in
    2016.  To a large extent the subsequent details  in  the  report  focus
    upon the difficulties faced by women.

43.  In terms of risk of retrafficking, set out at paragraph  8.4  the  Asia
    Foundation, it was noted that even when victims  manage  to  return  to
    Vietnam they face  tremendous  difficulty  in  reintegrating  in  their
    communities,  stigmatised  by  society   and   traumatised   by   their
    experience.  They are reluctant to seek help for fear of further  abuse
    by traffickers, debt bondage, and as  such  seem  perhaps  to  be  more
    focused upon the stigma of sexual trafficking rather  than  trafficking
    associated with labour.  However, we note at 8.4.3  that  The  Guardian
    reported in February 2018 that the  Director  of  Advocacy  at  Pacific
    Links, a Vietnamese anti-trafficking charity indicated that because  of
    lack of resources there was no specialised long-term  support  services
    for male victims of trafficking returned to Vietnam. This in  turn  may
    reproduce the conditions for retrafficking, because  the  factors  that
    led victims to be trafficked in the first place  still  exist  and  are
    even enhanced by what they have gone through.

44.  As Christine Beddoe indicated, freedom of movement is a  constitutional
    right. However movement    without  the  necessary  documentation  will
    confer few community or family rights.

45.  Finally, and in fairness to the position of the respondent, we note  at
    6.1.6, that there is a suggestion that IOM established  its  Assessment
    Centre models in border provinces to  provide  a  safe  and  supportive
    environment for trafficked persons to be assessed for reintegration  by
    professional staff.  It was matter which was put to Christine Beddoe by
    Mr Tufan.  She indicated that to her knowledge there was no such  clear
    trafficking support. IOM provided the means to bring  people  into  the
    country but not to facilitate the assessment.  She  concluded  that  it
    was a cumbersome, lengthy bureaucratic procedure for the most part.

46.  Indeed she, in her evidence, stressed the recent research conducted  by
    the University of Bedfordshire in which anti-trafficking  organisations
    were  complaining  at  the  difficulty  in  the  claimants'   accessing
    documentation and how the requirement of  Ho  Khau  made  such  matters
    extremely difficult and provided little safeguards, if  any,  to  those
    who were seeking protection from the authorities.  She emphasised  also
    that there was a prevailing currency  of  corruption  among  officials.
    Many worked to the benefit of  those  able  to  pay  bribes  to  obtain
    documentation but not to be  unhelpful  to  those  who  had  little  to
    contribute in that regard.

47.  Having considered the report of Christine Beddoe and having  noted  her
    response to the questioning by  Mr  Tufan  and  the  way  in  which  he
    responded to the more recent  Home  Office  and  USS  State  Department
    Reports we place considerable weight upon her evidence  and  find  that
    she is  both  accurate  in  her  recollection  and  up-to-date  in  her
    knowledge of the relevant material.

48.  In terms of asylum it is necessary for the appellant to  show  that  he
    falls within one of the categories of individuals under the  Convention
    and would face a real risk of persecution by  reason  of  such  matters
    upon return.  In the alternative, consideration arises  as  to  whether
    or not the appellant meets the test of humanitarian protection  as  set
    out in paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules  in  that  he  does  not
    qualify as a refugee as defined in  Regulation  2  of  the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006 or that substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the
    person concerned, if returned to the country of return,  would  face  a
    real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable,  or  owing  to  such
    risk, unwilling to avail themselves of the protection of  that  country
    .In such circumstances consideration of Article 3 ECHR must be given.

49.  For the purposes of paragraph 339C serious harm consists of torture  or
    inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of a person in the country
    of return.

50.  We are asked to consider that the appellant falls within the  scope  of
    the refugee convention by reason of being  a  member  of  a  particular
    group, namely a trafficked person.

51.  A particular social group is defined  in  the  case  of  K  and  Fornah
    (Secretary of State for the Home Department v  K  [2006]  UKHL  46)  as
    being:-

              "a particular social group is a group of persons who  share  a
         common characteristic other than their risk of being persecuted, or
         who are perceived as a group by society.  The  characteristic  will
         often be one which is innate, unchangeable, or which  is  otherwise
         fundamental to identity, conscience or the exercise of one's  human
         rights.".

52.  The court went on in their paragraph 100 of the judgment as follows:-

              "The size of the group has sometimes been used as a basis  for
         refusing to recognise 'women'  generally  as  a  particular  social
         group. This argument has no basis in fact or reason, as  the  other
         grounds are not bound by  this  question  of  size.   There  should
         equally be no requirement  that  the  particular  social  group  be
         cohesive or that members of it voluntarily associate, or that every
         member of the group is at risk of persecution.  It is well-accepted
         that it should be possible to identify the group  independently  of
         the persecution, however, discrimination or persecution  may  be  a
         relevant factor in determining the visibility of  the  group  in  a
         particular context."

53.  The judgment went on to consider the UNHCR Guidelines and noted also
    "Their characteristics also identify them as a group in society,
    subjecting them to different treatment and standards in some
    countries".

54.   A person who has been trafficked can be  said  to  have  an  immutable
    characteristic,  namely,  having  been   trafficked.    However,   some
    difficulty, it seems to us, arises if there  is  indeed  a  requirement
    that a particular social group must be recognised, seen  or  identified
    as such as a distinct group within society.  It seems to  us  that  the
    evidence that that is so is lacking in this particular case.  Indeed it
    is difficult to determine what particular status or special  protection
    is offered to someone found by due process  to  have  been  trafficked.
    The use of  the  shelters  is  a  temporary  aspect,  particularly  for
    females, and seemingly less so for  males.   It  seems  to  remain  the
    obligation  upon  the  individual  to   obtain   for   themselves   the
    documentation of residence and/or identity.  Having obtained  the  same
    there is little indication that there is  any  benefit  conferred  upon
    them in terms of housing, health or unity stability by reason of having
    achieved the definition of being trafficked.

55.  Ms Easty submits that the appellant as a young  male  could  fall  into
    the narrower category of trafficked person, particularly given the lack
    of any shelter or housing available as a consequence.  It does not seem
    to us, however,  to  make  a  material  difference  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case.  There is no indication, for example,  that
    the Vietnamese authorities actively discriminate in their assessment of
    someone who is trafficked by reason of gender.  Rather,  the  focus  of
    consideration, perhaps understandably, has been on the sexual safety of
    women rather than of the exploitation arising from labour.  The lack of
    shelter provided would seem to us to be a  matter  of  perception  that
    young men are less needy of such matters than are women, rather than of
    a positive decision to discriminate against them. There  is  little  to
    indicate that those who have been trafficked who return to society will
    be regarded in any different way by members of the  society  with  whom
    they associate, or indeed with the  Government  or  civic  authorities.
    Indeed, it is to be hoped with the assistance of the  authorities  that
    they would be allowed to resume with some safety their lives as general
    citizens of Vietnam.

56.  Thus although being trafficked may be a characteristic, it is  not  one
    that is readily perceivable by the community at large.  Though  certain
    sexual activities, such as prostitution, may have a stigma attached  to
    them, it is difficult to consider that same situation to arise in terms
    of  employment.   The  purpose  for  return  is  hopefully   that   the
    experiences of being trafficked are not repeated, for the normality  of
    everyday life is the aim and purpose of reintegration.

57.  It seems to us therefore that in the particular circumstances  of  this
    case that it is  the  provisions  of  paragraph  339C  that  have  more
    application linked particularly with the considerations  of  Article  3
    ECHR.

58.  It is clear that in  the  past  the  appellant  has  suffered  torture,
    inhuman and degrading treatment at the hands of those who  have  abused
    him, both physically and in terms of his labour.  He has been violently
    assaulted, both sexually and physically and has been put in fear of his
    safety.  His very identity has been put in question by  the  nature  of
    the slavery to which he was addressed.  The focus of our  consideration
    must therefore be, applying the  appropriate  burden  and  standard  of
    proof, as to whether there is a real risk that such an experience  will
    be repeated if he returns to Vietnam.  We find that it would.

59.  Were he to return to his home area we find that he is a  person  having
    an outstanding debt to the traffickers; there  is  an  absence  of  any
    supportive family willing to take the appellant back; there will be  no
    other support network to assist him with  little  or  no  education  or
    vocational skills.

60.  We find that any access to official documentation to assist his  status
    would be lengthy and protracted, if indeed successful.   His  situation
    would of necessity  cause him to need to contact  police  or  officials
    and publish thereby his returning presence to the area  from  which  he
    was originally trafficked.  We note what he says  about  Hung  and  the
    potential influence that Hung had.  In his lack of education and skills
    we find that the appellant would be  back  doing  the  casual  jobs  in
    restaurants and cleaning that he engaged in when he was  first  on  the
    streets which drew him to the attention of the traffickers.

61.   Of  particular  relevance  in  this  case  is  his  mental  fragility,
    particularly his lack of engagement with the wider community.  There is
    little doubt that he would find it difficult to  integrate  within  the
    community and would readily be perceived as an outsider  and  therefore
    somebody who would be an obvious target to be retrafficked.  Indeed his
    need to be supported emotionally is just the sort of need that  can  be
    exploited by potential traffickers who seek initially to  befriend  him
    and then use him for their own purposes.

62.  We note the cumbersome process which he would need to follow  in  order
    to have his trafficked status recognised.  It is a  cumbersome  process
    and one that involves  considerable  engagement  with  authority.   The
    appellant's mental condition as we have gleaned, both from  his  foster
    carer and from the psychological report is to indicate  that  he  would
    not manage that process very well or give any good account  of  himself
    in the process.  Given the length of time that he has been absent  from
    his area, it seems to us to be speculative as to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant will achieve any recognition of his trafficked status.   Even
    if he does it does not seem apparent to us that there is any particular
    protection or assistance that would be available to him.  We  note  the
    absence of hostels, the absence of any other indication of support that
    would be available to him.

63.  During the process of the investigation there  will  be  no  particular
    benefits or protections available to him and he would therefore  remain
    vulnerable in such a circumstance.  He would, in the absence of  having
    the   proper   documentation,   be   unable   to   access   healthcare,
    accommodation, work or support and that can only exacerbate what is his
    fragile mental state to his detriment.

64.  Although it is not to be doubted that the authorities  in  Vietnam  are
    actively seeking to counter trafficking, it is to be noted  that  there
    have been few, if any,  prosecutions  and  that  the  number  of  those
    recognised as being trafficked has decreased.  There is nothing to lead
    us to the conclusion that there would be any sufficiency of  protection
    to the appellant were he to return to his home area.  We bear  in  mind
    also the corruption that is endemic which clearly  supports  those  who
    have influence but not those who have no standing  or  influence.   For
    these reasons we conclude that there is indeed a very  real  risk  that
    the appellant will be retrafficked were he to return to his own area.

65.  In considering the aspect of internal relocation we bear  in  mind  the
    decision in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5. It has to be  established  that  such
    relocation is not unduly harsh and that the appellant would be able  to
    conduct his life with access to work, accommodation and to  survive  in
    an economic  manner  as  a  citizen.   We  do  not  find  that  in  his
    circumstances that that is a realistic consideration of the  situation.
    Were the appellant to obtain his certificate of registration  he  would
    be entitled initially to temporary  residence  with  the  disadvantages
    that that would bring.  We consider it more likely than  not  that  the
    appellant would be unable to produce the  requisite  documentation  and
    remain very much on the margins of society, as indeed he  did  when  he
    first left home.  Once again the mental state of the  appellant  is  of
    utmost relevance to his ability to interact in a community sense.   For
    reasons that  we  have  given  we  consider  that  the  nature  of  his
    psychiatric and psychological make-up renders him to be seen very  much
    as a vulnerable individual to be exploited.   We  have  no  doubt  that
    whether he returns to his home area or elsewhere, he remains very  much
    at risk of being retrafficked  and  thereby  suffer  torture,  harm  or
    humiliation as before.   We  do  not  find  that  the  efforts  of  the
    authorities,  would  be  effective  to  guarantee  him  any  safety  or
    protection.

66.  In terms of the wider aspect of  human  rights  we  bear  in  mind  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, particularly 276ADE of  Appendix
    FM.  We consider whether there are very significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration were he to be returned.  It  follows  from  the  comments
    that we have set out above that we come  to  the  conclusion  upon  the
    requisite standard that he would.    We bear in mind his  psychological
    fragility and all the matters that have been advanced on his behalf  in
    that respect so that he would  find  it  very  difficult  to  establish
    himself on any official basis, or indeed to be in a position  to  stand
    up for himself in finding work  in  what  would  be  a  very  difficult
    circumstance.  Although he  is  now  19  it  is  the  evidence  of  the
    psychologist and indeed of his foster carer is that he  is  emotionally
    much younger than that. Such would severely hamper him in any steps  to
    establish any economic  viability  for  himself  in  the  situation  of
    return.   We  note  the  cumbersome  procedure  for  even  establishing
    recognition of his difficulties with  the  authorities,  or  indeed  of
    obtaining any documentation to assist him as to his  status.   We  have
    little doubt therefore that there would be very  significant  obstacles
    to his integration.

67.  In terms of his Article 8 ECHR as a whole it is to be  recognised  that
    it is important for him to have the stability of a caring family  home.
    There is no doubt at all that his condition has improved thanks to  the
    care and attention of his foster family.  We understand that  his  care
    can be officially supported until  he  is  21  and  thereafter  as  Mrs
    Collins has indicated he can continue to live with her and  her  family
    if need be.  She regards him as a member of her family.

68.  Given his experiences we find that there  is  an  emotional  dependence
    that he has upon his foster family which is more than normal and  meets
    therefore the test in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  We  have  no  doubt
    that it is important for his development and mental health for  him  to
    remain in education and be supported, both by  his  foster  family  and
    also receive counselling and treatment  for  his  PTSD.    He  is  much
    younger than his age emotionally and mentally.  It is  right  therefore
    to bear that matter also significantly in mind.

69.   We find the appellant meets the Immigration Rules  as  to  276ADE  and
    that there are compelling circumstances which require that he continues
    to live and be supported in the United Kingdom with his foster parents.
     Such matters inform us as to the balance  to  be  struck  between  the
    specific interest to control immigration  and  the  proportionality  of
    removal in the circumstances.  We can see no  benefit  at  all  to  the
    appellant in being returned.  It would be rather  a  detriment  to  his
    condition.  All the evidence that we have points  conclusively  to  the
    importance and terms of his own personal identity and safety to be  one
    of remaining in the United Kingdom.  We find indeed that to return  the
    appellant to Vietnam will expose the appellant to such risk of harm  at
    the hands of third parties and that would potentially engage Article  3
    of the ECHR, and if not to that level, then certainly to engage Article
    8 of the ECHR.

70.  Thus, in conclusion we  find  firstly  that  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 339C and Article 3 ECHR as he  would  face  a
    real risk of suffering serious harm were he to be returned to  Vietnam.
    Further, we find that the provisions of 276ADE are  applicable  to  him
    and that the situation and circumstances of his removal are such as  to
    engage adversely his human rights, such that Article  3  and/or  8  are
    engaged.

Notice of Decision

71.  The appeal is allowed as to humanitarian  protection,  the  Immigration
    Rules and human rights, in particular Article 3 and 8 of ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 1 November 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD




