
[pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02142/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 June 2017                               |On 03 July 2017               |
|Decision given orally at  the hearing         |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                    [r w]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty of Counsel instructed by Luqmani
Thompson &
     Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of China born on [ ] 1979 who  appeals  with
    permission against a decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Coutts promulgated on 21 April 2017 in which the  judge  dismissed  her
    claim for asylum and for leave to remain on human rights grounds.   The
    judge accepted that the appellant is  gay  and  is  in  an  openly  gay
    relationship with  another  Chinese  national.   It  appears  that  her
    partner does not have leave to remain in  Britain,  and  so  the  issue
    would be whether or not they would be able to return to China together.
     The judge accepted that the appellant had had a  violent  husband  who
    has returned to China and is living in the appellant's  home  area  and
    has set her family against her.  The judge in paragraphs 38 and  39  of
    the determination focuses on  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  and
    briefly states that the appellant would be able to  return  to  another
    part of China, and therefore that internal relocation would be open  to
    her.

2.   There was before the judge, and it was  clearly  relied  on  as  it  is
    mentioned in the skeleton argument that was before the  judge,  a  very
    detailed  report  by  a  Miss  Jackie  Sheehan  which  deals  at   some
    considerable length with the position of LGBT people in  China  and  in
    particular to the appellant's own circumstances as   a  lesbian.   That
    report deals also  at  some  considerable  length  with  the  issue  of
    internal relocation and in particular the Hukou system.   It  indicates
    that although the appellant might be able to live elsewhere for a while
    in China, she would at some stage have to return to her home area.   It
    is not entirely clear how long she would have to do that, nor indeed is
    it necessarily clear what is meant by the home area, but be that as  it
    may it is a lengthy and detailed report.   The  effect  of  the  report
    might possibly influence an interpretation of the country  guidance  to
    which the judge refers to in the determination.  The reality however is
    that the judge did not engage in any way with the report.  There  might
    be an oblique reference to  him  being  aware  of  its  existence,  but
    certainly he has not engaged with the facts or assertions made therein.
     It is accepted by Mr Deller that that is a  clear  error  of  law  and
    therefore that the determination should be set aside.

3.   I do set aside the determination on the basis that  there  is  a  clear
    error in law therein.  Having set it aside however, I consider that the
    facts which I set out at  the  beginning  of  this  oral  decision  are
    preserved, that is that the appellant is in a relationship with another
    Chinese national and that she fears a violent and abusive  husband  who
    has returned to China and lives in her home area.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the Judge in  the  First-tier  is  set  aside  and  the
appeal is remitted to the First-tier for a  decision  afresh  save  for  the
facts to which I refer in paragraph 3 are preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed        [pic]                     Date 3 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
