
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02692/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 7th December 2018               |on 11th January 2019               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     TD
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by Just Right
Scotland
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Fox dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of Vietnam.  He arrived in the UK as an
      unaccompanied minor.  He made a claim for international protection
      based on political and religious grounds.  The Competent Authority in
      the UK found that the appellant was trafficked within France prior to
      entering the UK.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made adverse credibility findings
      against the appellant.  Permission to appeal was granted on three
      grounds in particular.  It was arguable that the judge erred (a) by
      failing to make a finding as to whether the appellant would be at risk
      returning to Vietnam as a victim of trafficking; (b) by failing when
      considering Article 8 to take into account English language
      certificates obtained and lodged by the appellant; and (c) by failing
      to have regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010:
      Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance.

   4. In his submission for the appellant Mr Bryce referred to a poor
      underpinning for the judge's adverse credibility findings.  There was
      no regard to the Presidential Guidance on children and vulnerable
      adults.  The judge did not properly take into account the finding that
      the appellant had been trafficked.  The whole fact-finding exercise
      needed to be carried out again.

   5. For the respondent Mrs O'Brien indicated that she was unable to defend
      the decision because of the strength of the arguments put forward on
      behalf of the appellant.  She would not object to the appeal being
      remitted.

   6. While a number of defects in the decision have been identified, the
      approach of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to the issue of
      trafficking provides a particular illustration of the weakness of the
      findings made.  At paragraph 32 of the decision the judge notes that
      the respondent accepted that the appellant was a victim of
      trafficking.  The judge also notes that the report on trafficking was
      not before him.  At paragraph 34 the judge states that as the
      trafficking report is not before him it is difficult for him to accept
      that the appellant would be at risk on return from traffickers in
      Vietnam.  The judge records at paragraph 36 that the appellant himself
      "does not identify any fear of individual or groups of traffickers."
      In the next paragraph, paragraph 37, the judge finds the appellant has
      "not demonstrated that he has any real and genuine fear of return to
      Vietnam."

   7. While acknowledging the respondent's acceptance that the appellant was
      a victim of trafficking, the judge proceeds to question the
      implications of this finding, seemingly on the slender basis that the
      report on the trafficking of the appellant was not before him.  From
      this position the judge then concludes that the appellant would not be
      at risk from traffickers on return to Vietnam.  What is lacking in
      this approach is any reasoned analysis of the risk that might arise to
      the appellant from trafficking.  Instead of carrying out an analysis
      the judge presents a few doubts and queries of his own, which do not
      form an adequate basis for the findings he then makes.

   8. The parties were agreed that the adverse credibility findings made by
      the judge should not stand.  In view of the extent of the fact-finding
      exercise now required, remittal is appropriate in terms of paragraph
      7.2(b) of the Practice Statement.  The decision is set aside and the
      appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings
      preserved, to be reheard before a differently constituted tribunal.

Conclusions
   9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  10. The decision is set aside.

  11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings
      preserved, to be reheard before a differently constituted Tribunal.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  A
direction has now been sought on behalf of the appellant.  Having regard to
the age and circumstances of the appellant, including the finding that he
is a victim of trafficking, and in order to preserve the positions of the
parties until the appeal is finally decided, I consider an anonymity
direction should be made in the following terms.  Until a court or tribunal
directs otherwise no report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family.  This
direction applies to the appellant and the respondent.  Failure to comply
with the direction may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


M E Deans
                            24th December 2018
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

