
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02612/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 07 January 2019                           |On 01 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because the case involves protection issues. Unless and until a tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms G. Loughran, instructed by BHT Immigration Legal
Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I will refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant entered the UK on 14 October 2008  as  an  unaccompanied
    asylum seeking minor. His protection  claim  was  refused  but  he  was
    granted  Discretionary  Leave  to  Remain  until  10  August  2010.   A
    subsequent appeal was dismissed on 15 May  2009.  He  made  an  in-time
    application for further leave  to  remain,  which  was  refused  on  27
    October 2010. On 07 July  2011  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  his
    appeal on limited human rights grounds. The Secretary of  State  agreed
    to reconsider the case and to make a fresh  decision.  On  08  November
    2011 the human rights claim was refused.  The  appellant  appealed  the
    decision. The appeal was allowed on 08 March 2012,  again,  on  limited
    grounds. It is said that the respondent was to consider the  route  and
    method of return to Iraq. The respondent issued another decision letter
    on 29 April 2013. A further appeal was dismissed on  11  November  2013
    and permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused. On 18  July
    2014 the appellant made a fresh protection and human rights claim.  The
    respondent refused to treat the further submissions as a fresh claim in
    a decision dated 30 June 2015.

3.    At the end of July 2015 the appellant made a voluntary  departure.  He
    says that he travelled, irregularly,  to  his  aunt's  home  in  Kirkuk
    district via France, Italy, Turkey and the Iraqi Kurdish Region  (IKR).
    He says that he stayed with his aunt for five days. She told  him  that
    it was dangerous to remain. She gave him jewellery to fund  his  return
    journey to Europe. He travelled illegally through Europe and arrived in
    Ireland, where he claimed asylum. The appellant was returned to the  UK
    on 22 February 2016 under the terms of the  Dublin  Regulation.  On  02
    February 2017 he made further submissions to the Secretary of State.

4.    On 07 July 2017 the appellant was convicted of making threats to  kill
    to his GP and was sentenced  to  22  months'  imprisonment.  He  had  a
    previous conviction for threatening, insulting words or behaviour  with
    intent from 30 December 2014 for which he was sentenced to a  community
    order with a 10 week  exclusion  requirement.  As  a  result  of  these
    convictions the respondent issued a  notice  of  intention  to  make  a
    deportation order on 25 July 2017. The deportation order was signed  on
    19 October 2017.  The  appellant  appealed  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision dated 19 October 2017 to refuse a protection and human  rights
    claim in the context of deportation proceedings.

5.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever ("the judge") allowed the appeal in  a
    decision  promulgated  on  17  October  2018.  The  judge   noted   the
    appellant's immigration history [2-3] and  summarised  the  documentary
    and oral evidence and submissions [4-13].  He  identified  the  correct
    legal framework relating to automatic deportation under the UK  Borders
    Act 2007 and the relevant grounds of  appeal  [16].  In  assessing  the
    appellant's protection and  human  rights  claim  the  judge  used  the
    previous First-tier Tribunal decisions as a starting point according to
    the guidance in Devaseelan (second appeals - ECHR  -  extra-territorial
    effect) Sri Lanka [2002]  UKAIT  00702  [19].  The  judge  went  on  to
    consider  further  evidence  produced  since  the  previous  First-tier
    Tribunal decisions  including  the  appellant's  account  of  voluntary
    departure to Iraq, a psychiatric report and evidence  relating  to  the
    situation in Iraq at the date of the hearing [20].

6.    The judge found that the fact that the appellant was able  to  contact
    his aunt in Kirkuk belied his earlier claim that he was unable to trace
    her and underscored "the correctness of the earlier decisions" relating
    to the protection claim [22]. He went on to  consider  the  psychiatric
    report prepared by Dr Briffa, a consultant psychiatrist, on  17  August
    2018. The judge noted that she had seen the appellant on one  occasion,
    and after having  taken  a  history,  diagnosed  "enduring  personality
    change  after  catastrophic  experience".  The  history  taken  by  the
    psychiatrist was based on the appellant's account of long term-abuse by
    his uncle and fear of recruitment by ISIS or the government.  He  noted
    that other judges  rejected  the  account  on  previous  occasions.  He
    expressed surprise, if the appellant's  psychiatric  condition  was  as
    serious as claimed, that a psychiatric assessment was not  provided  on
    previous occasions [24].  The  judge  observed  that  the  psychiatrist
    appeared to be aware of the fact that the appellant  returned  to  Iraq
    but made no mention of this fact as part of her assessment  of  suicide
    risk. He noted that she assessed the appellant to be at  high  risk  of
    suicide if deported to Iraq but contrasted  this  assessment  with  the
    prison medical records, which recorded no thoughts of self-harm and  an
    attempt to hang himself "a few years ago". The judge  also  noted  that
    there was evidence to show that he  discontinued  counselling  services
    offered to him as long ago as 2011 [25]. The judge concluded that there
    was little in the psychiatric report that might  alter  the  consistent
    set of credibility findings made in previous decisions  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The doctor's opinion that he was at high risk of suicide
    contrasted with observations made by other people over a period of time
    [26].

7.    The judge then turned to  the  third  aspect  of  the  fresh  evidence
    relating to the current situation in Iraq. It  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant's home area is  Diyala,  an  area  identified  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544,  where  there
    would be an Article 15(c) risk. The judge considered the  Secretary  of
    State's CPIN  report  dated  September  2017  and  concluded  that  the
    evidence indicated that there continued to be a risk in the appellant's
    home area [28].

8.     The  First-tier  Tribunal  went  on  to  consider  whether   internal
    relocation would be a reasonable option  with  reference  to  the  more
    recent country  guidance  decision  in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212. He made the following findings relating
    to the appellant's ability to obtain a CSID document:

         "29.     ... I note the Appellant has not said that he  has  had  a
             CSID in the past although he was aware of his details being in
             the civil registry in Diyala. He claimed not to know the  page
             or reference number. I find no evidence to indicate  that  the
             Appellant had previously had a CSID or other form of document,
             and I also bear in mind the age when he left Iraq, namely  15.
             I note that the civil registry is within  Diyala  which  is  a
             place that the CPIN notes remains an exception to  relocations
             as does the case of AA [2015]. The only relative that  emerges
             with consistency in the account is the aunt, a female relative
             and not therefore necessarily of assistance in going with  the
             Appellant to a civil registry ... I have looked at Amin [2017]
             EWHC 2417 which was drawn to my attention, where it  was  said
             that country guidance cases must  give  way  to  reality.  The
             judge found the Home Office  were  entitled  to  have  changed
             their position on Kirkuk. However so far as I can see the CPIN
             still refers to the Baghdad Belts bordering Diyala as being an
             exception. AA [2015] also refers to Diyala. Therefore whilst I
             entirely agree with the decision in Amin, it is  case-specific
             and does not deal with the circumstances before me.

         30.       I  do  not  find  evidence  that  the   Appellant   could
             immediately or in a reasonable time scale  obtain  a  CSID.  I
             have looked at AA [2015] section C.  I  take  account  of  the
             money available to  the  Appellant  on  return.  I  also  take
             account that his aunt in Kirkuk  clearly  has  funds  and  has
             assisted him in the past. I also note  earlier  findings  that
             the Appellant had cousins in Iraq and his uncle. The  CSID  is
             needed to acquire housing,  [employment],  education,  medical
             treatment and assess financial support from the government.  I
             have also taken account of the fact that  the  Appellant  does
             have some mental health issues, is a Sunni Kurd who  does  not
             speak Arabic. There  has  never  been  any  finding  that  the
             Appellant has relatives or friends in Baghdad and  indeed  has
             been outside of Iraq now for nine or so years.

         31.      I find when applying the appropriate standard of proof and
             following guidance within country guidance cases and the CPINs
             that the Appellant could be returned to Baghdad. I have  noted
             at paragraph 11 that if it is feasible to return a  person  to
             Iraq then if there are no family or other members likely to be
             able to provide support then such an individual is  likely  to
             face a risk of destitution amounting to serious harm if by the
             time funds from the UK have gone he  still  does  not  have  a
             CSID. Whilst he may be housed by his aunt in Kirkuk  there  is
             no evidence I can rely upon as  to  how  the  Appellant  would
             travel without ID to Kirkuk. I appreciate he says that he  did
             it three years ago but I  must  follow  the  law  and  country
             guidance cases on such issues. I do not find when  looking  at
             AAH [2018] that circumstances  indicate  the  Appellant  could
             relocate from Baghdad to the IKR. He has never lived there and
             has no relatives or connections to that part of the country."

9.    The Secretary of State appealed the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

    (i)    The judge could not rationally conclude that the appellant would
         face ill-treatment amounting to a breach of Article 3 on the  facts
         of the case. The judge failed to take into account the  possibility
         that the appellant may have had some form of ID in  order  to  pass
         through checkpoints when he travelled to Kirkuk in 2015. The  judge
         failed to reconcile the appellant's evidence recorded at [11]  that
         he left his CSID at his uncle's house in Iraq and  his  finding  at
         [29] that he did not have  a  CSID  in  the  past.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  to  explain  why  the
         appellant's aunt could not assist him to obtain  a  new  CSID.  The
         judge failed to explore the possibility that other  male  relatives
         might be able  to  assist  the  appellant  to  obtain  a  CSID.  In
         assessing whether it would be reasonable to expect the appellant to
         relocate to Baghdad  the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether  the
         appellant might have a basic understanding of Arabic given that  he
         was able to travel illegally to Kirkuk through various checkpoints.



    (ii)   The judge erred in his  assessment  of  Article  15(c)  risk  by
         failing to address the Secretary of State's submission, made in the
         decision letter, that the conditions in both Diyala and  Kirkuk  no
         longer meet the Article 15(c) threshold.

Decision and reasons

10.   Mr Melvin argued that the judge  could  not  rationally  come  to  the
    conclusions that he did on the evidence before him and that  he  failed
    to take into account relevant considerations relating to family members
    who might be able to assist the appellant to  obtain  a  new  CSID.  Ms
    Loughran accepted that the judge made a mistake at [29] of the decision
    in failing to acknowledge what he recorded at [11], that the  appellant
    left a previous CSID at his uncle's house. However, she argued that  it
    made no material difference to the outcome given the appellant was only
    15 years old when he left his uncle's house as long ago as 2008.

11.   Although the appellant returned on a voluntary  basis  to  his  aunt's
    house near  Kirkuk,  he  travelled  overland  from  the  north  and  by
    irregular means. For the purpose of assessing a claim under the Refugee
    Convention, the Tribunal must  consider  the  relevant  avenue  that  a
    Signatory State would take to return  a  person  to  their  country  of
    origin. In this case, it is not disputed that the only avenue of return
    would be by air to Baghdad.

12.   It was open to the judge to conclude that the  new  evidence  was  not
    sufficiently strong to take  a  different  view  to  the  two  previous
    Tribunals in relation to the credibility of the appellant's account  of
    past events.

13.   In assessing whether there was a potential risk of  ill-treatment  for
    the purpose of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive in his home
    area of Diyala,  the  relevant  country  guidance  was  AA.  The  judge
    considered the country guidance and the evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent to assert that there had been a change in  circumstances  in
    the appellant's home area [28-29]. Section 3 of the Home Office Country
    Policy and Information Note (CPIN) on "Iraq: security and  humanitarian
    situation" dated March 2017 set out the  respondent's  view  about  the
    security situation in those regions. The respondent's view appeared  to
    be based on an empirical assessment of the number of security incidents
    recorded in  the  worst  affected  regions  since  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in AA (see section 11).

14.   The judge did not  conduct  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  background
    evidence relating to the potential security  situation  in  Diyala.  At
    [29] he considered one of the two CPIN reports before him (although  he
    does not say which one). After having looked at both reports,  the  one
    the judge refers to appears  to  be  the  CPIN  "Iraq:  Return/Internal
    relocation" dated September 2017 in  which  the  respondent  states  at
    [2.2.4] that internal relocation was possible to all areas of Iraq save
    for some exceptions. Among the areas still considered to pose a risk of
    ill-treatment under Article 15(c)  were  "the  parts  of  the  'Baghdad
    Belts'  (the  residential,  agricultural  and  industrial  areas   that
    encircle the city of Baghdad) that border Anbar, Diyala and  Salah  al-
    Din." This is not a reference to Diyala province itself, but the  areas
    of the Baghdad Belts bordering with Diyala. To this  extent  the  judge
    may have misunderstood the evidence contained in the CPIN report.

15.   I have considered whether this undermines the  judge's  assessment  of
    Article 15(c) to a  degree  where  the  decision  must  be  set  aside.
    However, I find that the misunderstanding of  the  evidence  would  not
    have made any material difference to the outcome  of  the  decision  on
    Article 15(c) given the appellant would  be  returned  to  Baghdad  and
    would have to travel through those  areas  of  the  Baghdad  Belts  the
    respondent still considered posed a risk in order  to  reach  his  home
    area. Although the CPIN report from March 2017  noted  a  drop  in  the
    number of recorded security incidents in Diyala the Upper  Tribunal  in
    AAH considered evidence in February 2018  which  indicated  that  there
    were mounting attacks on Shi'a militias, particularly in Diyala,  where
    there was believed to be a "considerable ISIL presence". The  situation
    was predicted to prevail for some time [14].

16.   Even if there might have been some misunderstanding of  the  evidence,
    the judge's overall conclusion that the  appellant  would  be  at  risk
    under Article 15(c) outside Baghdad was sustainable. There was at least
    a serious possibility that the appellant would have to travel through a
    territory that still posed a risk under Article 15(c) in order to reach
    his home area. The evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  indicated
    that there had been some change of control in Diyala, but in  light  of
    the evidence  showing  that  ISIL  continued  to  have  a  considerable
    presence there, it could not be said that there had been a  significant
    and non-temporary change in the circumstances such  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to depart from the country guidance in AA as it related  to
    the situation in Diyala.

17.   The judge went on to  consider  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to relocate to Baghdad. Although he did  not  make
    specific reference to the country guidance decision in BA  (Returns  to
    Baghdad) [2017] UKUT 18 it is apparent from  his  findings  at  [30-31]
    that  he  considered  relevant  factors.  He  considered  whether   the
    appellant could obtain a new CSID, whether he had  any  connections  in
    Baghdad, the fact that he was a Sunni Kurd, the fact that he  had  some
    mental health issues (albeit they were not sufficiently  compelling  to
    come to a different conclusion about the credibility of his account  of
    past events) and the length of time that he had lived outside of Iraq.

18.   The respondent is correct to point out that  there  is  an  unresolved
    inconsistency between the evidence recorded at [11] and the finding  at
    [29] that he has not had a CSID. On closer inspection the  highest  the
    appellant's evidence went was to say  that  he  saw  some  form  of  ID
    document at his uncle's house  when  he  was  a  child.  Even  if  this
    evidence was taken at its highest  the  appellant  last  lived  at  his
    uncle's house in 2008 and left when he was only 15 years old.  It  does
    not appear to be  disputed  that  he  does  not  have  a  CSID  in  his
    possession and would have to obtain a new one.

19.   In assessing whether the appellant had relatives who might be able  to
    assist him to obtain a new CSID the judge noted earlier  findings  that
    the appellant had "cousins in Iraq and an uncle"  [30].  Unfortunately,
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Blum does not appear to be in
    the papers for me to assess what findings he made about this issue. The
    decision made by a panel of the First-tier Tribunal  in  November  2013
    indicates that Judge Blum accepted  that  the  appellant's  father  and
    siblings were killed and that his mother abandoned him. Judge Lever was
    correct to find that the only relatives who were last known  to  be  in
    Iraq was the appellant's uncle and his  elderly  aunt  who  lives  near
    Kirkuk. The only  reference  to  cousins  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision from 2013 is to his aunt's two daughters [15]. The appellant's
    original claim to be at risk from his uncle was rejected, but there was
    no evidence to indicate that the appellant has had any contact with his
    uncle after he left his uncle's  house  in  2008.  When  the  appellant
    returned to Iraq in 2015 the only relative that he appeared to have any
    contact with was his elderly  aunt  who  lives  near  Kirkuk.  On  this
    evidence, it was within a range of reasonable responses to the evidence
    for Judge Lever to conclude that the "only relative that  emerges  with
    consistency in the account is the  aunt,  a  female  relative  and  not
    therefore necessarily of assistance in going with the  Appellant  to  a
    civil registry." [29]. I find that it was open to the judge to conclude
    that the appellant's aunt would not be in a position  to  help  him  to
    obtain a new CSID, which would have to be obtained from the registry in
    his home are of Diyala. His findings were open to him on  the  evidence
    and were generally consistent with the country guidance in AAH.

20.   Although the First-tier Tribunal decision would  have  benefited  from
    more structured findings with clearer reference to the  relevant  legal
    framework, I conclude that the findings that were  made  were  adequate
    and sustainable and do not disclose any errors of law that  would  have
    made any material difference to the outcome of the appeal. It was  open
    to the judge to conclude that there would be a  risk  of  ill-treatment
    under Article 15(c) in or travelling to his home area. It was also open
    to the judge to take into account a combination of  factors,  including
    the lack  of  any  prospect  of  renewing  his  CSID,  lack  of  family
    connections in Baghdad, his religion,  his  ethnicity  and  his  mental
    health in concluding that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate to Baghdad. The decision in AAH makes clear  that
    without a CSID or a valid passport it is unlikely  that  the  appellant
    could relocate to the IKR.

21.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the
    making of an error of law that would have made any material  difference
    to the outcome of the appeal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
      law

The decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 28 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

