
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02923/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10th November 2016                |On 22nd November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     A W
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Saleem of Malik and Malik, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds  that
         it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal judge  had  failed  to
         take account of material evidence including background material and
         evidence relating specifically to the appellant and found there  to
         be discrepancies when there were none. It was  also  arguable  that
         the judge had failed to consider whether the respondent was under a
         duty to verify documents that had been produced by the appellant.

      2. The applicant claimed, and it was accepted by the respondent,  that
         he had completed military school in Kabul in 1978,  studied  Pashtu
         at  Kabul  University,  graduating  in  1982.  He  then   commenced
         employment as senior lecturer in Pashtu at the Military  University
         in Kabul where he was employed as a lecturer for 10 years from 1982
         until 1992. Between 1992 and 2003 he was unemployed  but  continued
         to live in Kabul with his family. He recommenced work as a lecturer
         at the National Military Academy in 2003, subsequently  renamed  to
         National  Military  Academy  and  then  renamed  as  Marshal  Fahim
         National Defence University and remained in that post until 2013.

      3. The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim that in 2013 he
         changed his job due to health problems and became  the  Manager  of
         Establishment and Supervision of Girl's Schools in Afghanistan. Nor
         did the respondent accept that the appellant had become a target of
         the Taliban and was thus at risk.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson heard  evidence  from  the
         appellant and concluded that the only element  of  the  appellant's
         account that he accepted  as  credible  was  that  which  was  also
         accepted by the respondent. In finding the appellant's account  not
         credible, the judge referred  to  what  he  described  as  material
         discrepancies and major credibility issues:

           . that he had said he left his job when he left the  country  on
             3rd March 2015 whereas an email from a person who  "purported"
             to be a Senior advisor to the Minister of Education  said  the
             appellant was working with the Ministry of Education from  4th
             November until February 2015;

           . in his witness statement he referred to "we" meaning  him  and
             his son heard the Taliban threats whereas in his interview  he
             referred to his son hearing the Taliban threats;

           . that it was not credible that the Taliban  would  give  him  a
             month to leave his job (by letter) given the earlier threat to
             kill him;

           . that having left his job he would still be at risk because  he
             would have been  more  valuable  to  the  Taliban  if  he  had
             continued in his job;

           . that he claimed both that the Taliban wanted to kill  him  and
             that they wanted to  take  him  away;  such  assertions  being
             inconsistent with each other;

           . Although he has an identity card which is consistent with  his
             claim to be employed by the  Ministry  of  Education,  in  the
             light of the other discrepancies it was unreliable.

      5. The First-tier Tribunal judge  had,  in  the  bundle  of  documents
         before him, evidence of the role and employment of the  person  who
         confirmed  the  appellant's  employment  with   the   Ministry   of
         Education, such evidence being taken from the  Ministry's  website.
         The judge failed to consider the contact  list  provided,  the  job
         description  provided  and  the  independent   corroboration   this
         provided of the seniority of the writer of the letter.

      6. The judge also had evidence before him of the injuries sustained by
         the  appellant's  son,  which  corroborated  the  claimed   attack;
         documentary evidence from the police; documentary evidence  of  his
         employment. Yet although the  judge  refers  repeatedly  to  having
         taken all the documents into account  he  either  overlooked  these
         documents or had already determined that they would not  alter  the
         conclusion he was intending to draw.

      7. The judge identified a  discrepancy  which  did  not  exist  namely
         whether it was only his son who heard the threat  or  whether  they
         both heard the threat. To place such weight upon what is at best  a
         minor discrepancy if it exists at all, to take into account a  word
         said by the appellant that was not said is  perverse.  Furthermore,
         the judge failed to take any account of the hospital records or the
         account as a whole in reaching an adverse conclusion. Overall  this
         renders the identification of this as a discrepancy, perverse.

      8. Overall the judge has failed to take full account of the background
         material on the Taliban  and,  most  importantly,  failed  to  give
         proper and due attention to  the  documentary  evidence  which  was
         produced and was corroborative  of  the  appellant's  account.  The
         attempt  to  magnify  small  possible  discrepancies  renders   the
         decision of the judge perverse and irrational.

      9. I set aside the decision to be remade.

     10. Both parties were agreeable to my remaking the decision on the same
         day. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Saleem submitted an email  from
         Mr Siddiqui which confirmed that human resources had confirmed that
         he was paid until the end of February but  per  attendance  he  had
         last attended on 2nd March 2015. Mr Walker did not require time  to
         take instructions and did not seek an adjournment. He was satisfied
         that the email details were the same as appear on the  website  and
         on the other  documentary  evidence  produced  confirming  that  Mr
         Siddiqui was  Senior  Advisor  to  the  Minister  of  Education  in
         Parliamentary Affairs, as claimed by the appellant.

     11. Mr Walker confirmed that he had no questions he wished  to  put  to
         the appellant. He relied upon the respondent's reasons for  refusal
         letter and submitted the appeal should be dismissed.

     12. The evidence in support of the appellant's contention that  he  had
         been employed by the Ministry of Education in the post  of  Manager
         of Establishment and supervision of Schools for Girls includes:

           . Correspondence from the Senior  Advisor  to  the  Minister  of
             Education;

           . Contract of employment;

           . Letter from the Minister of Education

           . Letter confirming his duties;

           . An appreciation letter from the Ministry of Education

           . ID card.

     13. In so far as the incident in the market where the appellant claimed
         that the Taliban had threatened him and his  son,  I  am  satisfied
         that there are no significant discrepancies in the  accounts  given
         by the appellant. The appellant, although he had resigned from  his
         earlier post because of back pain from standing for long periods of
         the day, was  not  incapacitated  to  the  extent  assumed  by  the
         respondent in the reasons for refusal letter. The reaction  of  the
         appellant to run and cross what was a small river was credible when
         considered in the context of the market and  the  hospital  records
         produced of the injuries to his son and  the  police  record.  That
         there were small insignificant differences in the recording  of  an
         account does not  adversely  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
         account of that incident.

     14. The appellant has been employed in high profile  work  since  1982,
         other than his period of unemployment. He has been based in  Kabul.
         His job prior to leaving the country was to establish  schools  for
         girls and he travelled through four  provinces  to  undertake  this
         work. He has been commended  for  his  work  and  the  police  have
         confirmed they are unable to provide him with protection.  Although
         he had ceased to  undertake  the  work  around  girl's  schools  he
         clearly remains high profile. That he was told to resign and did so
         is not a matter that would result in him no longer being  at  risk.
         The work he was doing ceased  and  therefore  to  that  extent  the
         Taliban have achieved what they wished for but he remains a  person
         who had been undertaking work which was  contrary  to  the  Taliban
         ethos. The background material makes plain that it is not merely  a
         question of punishing individuals but fear is to  be  instilled  in
         those who might consider it appropriate to  conduct  themselves  in
         particular ways in the future. As a person who had previously  held
         high profile employment (not only in terms of the establishment  of
         girl's education but also  previously  in  terms  of  the  military
         academy) it is plain that he would remain at risk from the  Taliban
         because of his past profile.

     15. I am satisfied that the evidence in support of a finding  that  the
         appellant is at risk of being persecuted in his home area - Kabul -
         is overwhelming. In terms of internal  relocation,  his  employment
         took him to four provinces; he would be known there. If he were  to
         relocate to a province other than one of those  four  he  would  be
         identified  as  a  newcomer  and  his  origins  would  be   quickly
         established. There is very little doubt but that the Taliban  would
         be  able  to  find  him.  He  is  not  and  was  not  a  low  level
         insignificant person but someone who played a significant  role  in
         government policies which are anathema to the Taliban.  The  police
         are unable to offer the level of protection that would be  required
         to render him with anything approaching sufficiency of  protection.
         This would be even more the case outside Kabul.

     16. Based on the totality of the evidence before  me,  I  am  satisfied
         that the appellant is unable to access  sufficiency  of  protection
         anywhere in Afghanistan. He is at risk of being  persecuted  and  I
         allow his appeal.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing  it  on  international
    protection grounds.


[pic]
     Date 21st November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

