
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02946/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 December 2019                   |On 6 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     E B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, counsel instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M B
    Hussain, promulgated on 19 June 2019. Permission to appeal was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 22 October 2019.




Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is reiterated below.

Background

 3. The appellant, a national of Albania, arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely on 21 June 2016, aged  16.  He  applied  for  asylum  the
    following day. The basis of that  claim  was  that  the  appellant  was
    forced, by the use of violence, to work by his brother and  mother  for
    approximately two years after his father died  in  May  2014.  He  left
    Albania with the assistance of his paternal uncle's son.  In  addition,
    the appellant claimed to fear ISIS, after being held against  his  will
    in Italy and overhearing a discussion regarding sending him to Syria.

 4. In a letter dated 14 March 2019, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's  protection  claim.   The  respondent  noted  that  in  the
    appellant's National Referral Mechanism decision made on 18 July  2016,
    it was concluded that he was a victim of human trafficking or  slavery,
    servitude, or forced/compulsory labour. That the appellant was  a  male
    victim of trafficking was not considered to  be  a  Refugee  Convention
    reason. The appellant's age and nationality were accepted  as  well  as
    that he was beaten and forced to work by his mother  and  brother.  The
    respondent further accepted that the appellant  was  held  against  his
    will in order to be recruited for ISIS. Nonetheless, the  Secretary  of
    State considered that the appellant's genuinely  held  fears  were  not
    objectively well founded because there was a sufficiency of  protection
    in Albania and internal relocation was a reasonable option.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, an application was  made
    to adjourn the appeal in order to obtain a country expert  report.  The
    judge refused the application as well as to give his reasons for  doing
    so. The judge received, at his request, information from the presenting
    officer as to "the basis on which the (appellant's claim) he  had  been
    trafficked was accepted by the respondent." Counsel for  the  appellant
    unsuccessfully sought another adjournment in order to take instructions
    on this material. Counsel  then  declined  to  accept  service  of  the
    documents and withdrew from the proceedings, albeit  remaining  in  the
    hearing room.  No witness statement for the  appellant  or  bundle  was
    served prior to or at the hearing.

 6. The appellant was briefly questioned by  the  presenting  officer,  who
    made detailed submissions.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  owing  to  the
    judge's conclusion that  there  was  no  basis  for  finding  that  the
    appellant would be at risk from his family now and  that  his  paternal
    uncle and cousins could offer him some protection. The judge  dismissed
    the human rights appeal for the same reasons.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal  were  drafted  by  different  counsel  and  were
    accompanied by a witness statement from Mr G Symes, who was counsel  at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing prior to withdrawing representation.

 8. The six grounds were as follows:

       - Firstly, the judge failed to grant an adjournment on the basis that
         there was sufficient information  in  the  public  domain  but  had
         failed to refer to any such information in dismissing the appeal;

       - Secondly, the judge conversed with the presenting officer about the
         appellant's case in the absence of his counsel;

       - Thirdly,  the  judge  misconceived  the  nature  of  the  risk  the
         appellant faced on return and failed to have regard to the accepted
         facts

       - Fourthly, the judge failed to apply paragraph 339K of the Rules

       - Fifthly, there was a failure to make proper findings on sufficiency
         of protection and internal relocation

       - Lastly, there was a failure to address whether the appellant  could
         meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

 9. The application for permission to appeal was  made  out  of  time.  The
    judge granting permission extended time for appealing and admitted  the
    application. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought, with
    comment being made that the issue of the conversation between the judge
    and the presenting officer "must be explored further as there may  well
    have been procedural unfairness, which may have impacted on the overall
    findings."

10. The respondent's  Rule  24  response,  received  on  6  November  2019,
    indicated  that  the  appeal  was  opposed.  It  was  stated  that  the
    presenting officer's hearing minute did not give an indication that the
    judge discussed the case with her.

The hearing

11. Mr Bramble  submitted  the  minute  from  the  presenting  officer  who
    appeared before the judge which did not  overtly  address  any  of  the
    issues raised by this appeal.

12. Ms Iqbal urged me to accept the content of the witness statement of  Mr
    G Symes, counsel at the hearing in relation to the first ground,

13. the adjournment issue and made the following points. Firstly, the judge
    was wrong not to adjourn and secondly, he was wrong to refuse  to  give
    reasons at the hearing which was breach of  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note and Ngaiwe.  An expert had been instructed in relation to the risk
    to the appellant from ISIS. This case had been listed quickly  and  the
    solicitors had sought to adjourn the  matter  at  the  earliest  stage.
    Owing to a miscommunication there had been a delay with  obtaining  the
    expert report after the hearing, however the report was due any day.

14. As for the bias point, ground  two,  Ms  Iqbal  simply  relied  on  the
    grounds. She argued that there had been a failure  to  properly  assess
    the issues raised in grounds three to five and  a  failure  to  address
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) at all. On the  latter  point,  Ms  Iqbal  drew
    attention to the appellant's initial witness  statement  and  a  letter
    from social services which mentioned the appellant's mental health.

15. Mr Bramble was concerned regarding proceeding in relation to the second
    ground with no  opportunity  for  the  judge  to  give  his  view.  The
    statement of counsel said very little on the  content  of  the  alleged
    conversation between the judge and the presenting officer. As  for  the
    remaining grounds, he argued that the appellant's representatives  were
    not ready to proceed before the First-tier Tribunal  evidenced  by  the
    absence of an appellant's bundle or witness statement. The  latter  was
    required in order to address the issue of internal relocation  as  well
    the likelihood of whether the appellant would be  forced  into  further
    labour given that his mother and brother knew he was leaving Albania.

16. Mr Bramble pointed to the judge's conclusion at [47] that the appellant
    was not at risk of re-trafficking if  his  family  let  him  leave  and
    consequently  there  was  no  need  for  an  exploration  of   internal
    relocation. As for paragraph 276ADE, there  was  no  witness  statement
    from the appellant to explain the impact upon  him  of  his  return  to
    Albania. The previous material was dated and did not address this.

17. In response, Ms Iqbal stated that she was not aware if her  instructing
    solicitors had made a complaint regarding the judge's  conduct  as  she
    had been unable to contact them.  She  emphasised  that  the  appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a minor whose case had been  accepted.
    The judge had treated the appellant's claim with disbelief.

18. At the end of the hearing, I indicated that the judge made  a  material
    error of law in failing to  adjourn  the  hearing  and  set  aside  the
    decision.

Decision on error of law

19. The appellant lodged a timeous appeal against the decision of 14  March
    2019. In response to the case  management  hearing  enquiry  form,  his
    solicitors stated that they were intending  to  submit  expert  country
    evidence and that they had funding to do so. Following that, a  written
    application was made to adjourn the hearing of 29 April 2019, which was
    refused by a Tribunal caseworker and then a judge. The same reason  was
    given by each, namely that  there  was  ample  background  material  in
    relation to Albania.

20. The specific issues to be addressed by the expert included whether ISIS
    had a presence in  Albania  and  whether  the  appellant  could  access
    national protection from his family who had previously  forced  him  to
    work through violence. In refusing to adjourn  the  appeal,  the  judge
    gave two reasons at [30] of the decision  and  reasons.  Firstly,  that
    there was sufficient information in the public domain and secondly that
    any country expert was unlikely to be of  assistance.  Nowhere  in  the
    decision and reasons does the judge mention background  material  which
    addresses the presence of ISIS in Albania and nor did Mr  Bramble  draw
    my attention to any. On the contrary, at [44] the judge  merely  relied
    on the Secretary of State's assertions in the decision letter that ISIS
    did not have a presence in Albania as follows:

         "The Secretary of State has dealt  with  the  appellant's  fear  of
         being forced to join Isis because there is not the presence of that
         organisation in his home country and he would  not  be  removed  to
         France so that he may come into contact with them. That seems to me
         to effectively dispose of the appellant's claim in this regard."

21. The respondent's assertions as  to  ISIS  were  not  supported  by  any
    evidence but were accepted at face value by the judge. Given  that  the
    appellant's description of being held against his will with a  view  to
    being recruited for ISIS was not in dispute, it would undoubtedly  have
    been of assistance to have the view of a country expert as  to  whether
    there was any ISIS presence and whether the  appellant  was  reasonably
    likely to be at risk in Albania.

22. I have had regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  regarding  the  power  the
    First-tier Tribunal has to adjourn or postpone a hearing under its case
    management powers. Regard  should  have  been  had  to  the  overriding
    objective set out in Rule 2 requiring the Tribunal to deal  with  cases
    fairly and justly.

23. I have also considered the decision in Nwaigwe (Adjournment:  Fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). The crucial question being whether the refusal
    of an adjournment deprived the affected party of  a  right  to  a  fair
    hearing and not  whether  it  was  reasonable  of  the  judge  to  have
    proceeded with the hearing.

24. I have, in addition, taken into consideration the Presidential Guidance
    note no. 1 of 2014 and note that factors weighing against adjourning an
    appeal include where a party seeks "more time  to  prepare  the  appeal
    when adequate time has already been given."  While it is the case  that
    the expert report was not ready and nor had any appellant's bundle been
    produced, the Guidance states that a failure to comply with  directions
    will not be sufficient of itself to refuse an adjournment.

25. Paragraph 9 of the Guidance refers to a list of factors which may weigh
    against the granting of an adjournment, none of which  applied  in  the
    appellant's case. Firstly, the application to adjourn was made nearly a
    week  prior  to  the   hearing   and   in   circumstances   where   the
    representatives had previously stated that they would be  obtaining  an
    expert opinion; it was not speculative, in that counsel understood that
    the expert held a differing opinion to  the  respondent  regarding  the
    presence of ISIS in Albania; the delay was  likely  to  result  in  the
    provision of an expert report; it was obvious that  the  expert  report
    was material to the outcome of the case and it could not be  said  that
    adequate time had already been given owing to the fact that less than a
    month had elapsed between the appellant lodging his  notice  of  appeal
    and the hearing of that appeal.

26. A further issue is that the judge refused  to  inform  counsel  at  the
    hearing of his reasons for refusing the adjournment  application.  This
    is admitted by the judge at [30] of his decision. This approach  failed
    to take into consideration Presidential Guidance No.1  of  2014,  which
    counsel brought to  the  judge's  attention,  according  to  Mr  Symes'
    statement. Paragraph 14 of the Guidance states the following:

         "If a judge receives an adjournment application at  a  hearing  and
         refuses it, the judge should  give  reasons  to  the  parties.  The
         reasons should be noted in  the  Record  of  Proceedings  with  the
         expectation that the adjournment application and decision  will  be
         included in the decision  and  statement  of  reasons  subsequently
         issued. "

27. The aforementioned issue is, therefore, a further breach of the duty of
    fairness.

28. It was further concerning that the judge expressed  his  disquiet  that
    the appellant had been accepted as a  victim  of  modern  slavery.  The
    minute of the presenting officer notes that the "IJ  did  not  seem  to
    understand" the issue even after  it  was  explained  to  him  by  both
    representatives and that the judge insisted on seeing the grant  minute
    sheet, which the presenting officer described as sensitive  information
    which the Home Office do not disclose. This issue did not form part  of
    the grounds and I will say no more about it. Similarly,  as  the  judge
    did not have the opportunity to comment on the allegation  of  bias,  I
    make  no  findings  in  relation  to  the  whether  he  discussed   the
    appellant's case with the presenting officer  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant's representative at a time when the latter was still acting.

29. Having regard to the case law and the  2014  Rules,  I  find  that  the
    decision to proceed with the appeal was unfair in the circumstances.  I
    accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

30. I am mindful of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  regarding
    remitting an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh  decision
    however, I am satisfied that the  effect  of  the  error  has  been  to
    deprive the appellant of an opportunity to have his case  properly  put
    and considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  is  accordingly  an
    appropriate case for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    decision to be made.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 04 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

