

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02331/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 October 2016                        |On 20 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                   NUR [I]

                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan             (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M  Diwnycz         (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
the permission of a judge of the Upper Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (Judge Watt hereinafter "the Judge") to  dismiss  his
appeal against the respondent's decision of  28 October 2015  refusing  to
grant him international protection.

2.    By way of brief background, the appellant  claims  to  be  a  Rohingya
Muslim from  Myanmar.   He  says  that  he  was  born  in  that  country  on
1 January 1980 but that he had to leave, in  1992,  when  still  a  child,
because of ill-treatment his family  were  receiving,  as  Muslims,  at  the
hands of  the  Myanmar  authorities.   He  says  that  the  family  fled  to
Bangladesh where he lived in a refugee  camp  for  approximately  four  year
prior to leaving that camp.  He asserts that he then remained in  Bangladesh
unlawfully but that he married a Bangladeshi female by way  of  a  religious
marriage, in 1999. Indeed,  the  couple  have  four  children.   He  claims,
however, that in March 2015 he encountered the Bangladeshi police and that,
fearing that the authorities having detected him would seek  to  return  him
to Myanmar where he would be persecuted, fled to the UK.

3.    The respondent did not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  a  Rohingya
Muslim from Myanmar but thought that, even if he was, he would  be  able  to
secure Bangladeshi citizenship on the basis of his marriage if  he  were  to
be returned there.

4.    The appellant's appeal was  considered  by  way  of  oral  hearing  on
15 June 2016.  The Judge did not find him to be credible.  In  explaining
why the Judge said this:

      "     22.  When he was asked about  why  he  did  not  regularise  his
      status in Bangladesh he could  give  no  answer.   He  said  that  his
      marriage was a proper religious marriage but had not been  registered.
      It is clear from the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada  document
      in the Home Office bundle (H1) that the Kazi (Islamic Judge) has the
      authority  to  register  marriages  in  Bangladesh.   There  must   be
      therefore a process by which the religious marriage undertaken by  the
      appellant  can  then  be  formerly  registered  in  Bangladesh.    The
      appellant was resident in Bangladesh for 20 years.  I simply did  not
      believe his evidence that he had never tried or made  enquiries  about
      how to  formally  register  his  marriage.   It  is  also  clear  from
      document 1 of the Home Office bundle (information from the Immigration
      and Refugee Board of Canada) that a foreign national, whether male  or
      female, can obtain Bangladeshi citizenship by marrying  a  Bangladeshi
      citizen,  in  addition  to  fulfilling   certain   other   citizenship
      requirements.  I agree with Ms Pos, the Home Office Presenting Officer
      in this case, that it must have occurred  to  the  appellant  that  he
      would  be  able  to  regularise  his  status  within   Bangladesh   by
      approaching the Bangladeshi authorities and making it  clear  that  he
      had been married to a Bangladeshi citizen for a long number  of  years
      and had four children.  I simply did not accept the evidence from  the
      appellant that he had never considered or  made  any  enquiries  about
      this.

             23.   It  is  the  appellant's  evidence  that,  on  having   a
      relatively minor road traffic accident on 2 March 2015, he was  then
      able to pay an Agent and pay for a plane ticket on 23 March 2015  to
      travel to France and thereafter to the UK.  He states that he  was  so
      concerned after the accident that he might  be  returned  to  Myanmar.
      However, it is only a matter of three weeks between the  accident  and
      the plane flight.  The appellant accepts that he paid a  large  amount
      of money to the Agent for the plane flight and his services.   I  find
      it difficult to see how the appellant would be able  to  put  so  much
      money together over such a relatively short period.  He has a wife and
      four dependant children in Bangladesh.

            24.  It appears to me that any reasonable  individual  in  these
      circumstances would know that they had been in Bangladesh for decades,
      was married to a Bangladeshi  wife  and  would  try  to  approach  the
      Bangladeshi authorities to regularise his  immigration  status  before
      taking a huge risk in travelling illegally to Europe simply to  escape
      from a problem he might have with the police as a result of a  traffic
      accident.

            25.  Accordingly, I am not satisfied  with  the  credibility  of
      the appellant in this case.  The only document he has produced to back
      up his version of events that he is a refugee from Myanmar is  a  copy
      of an old registration card on which his name  appears  but  the  camp
      stated to  be  'Gundun'  does  not  appear  on  available  information
      regarding the refugee  camps  established  in  Bangladesh  to  shelter
      Rohingya refugees.

            26.  I therefore  do  not  consider  that  there  is  sufficient
      evidence looking at this as a whole to establish that the appellant is
      a Rohingya Muslim from Myanmar."

5.    The Judge then went on to say  that,  even  if  the  appellant  is  a
Rohingya Muslim from Myanmar it could not be said that he would  "definitely
be returned to Myanmar from Bangladesh".

6.    The appellant, through his representatives, applied for permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  grounds  contended,  in  effect,  that
the Judge had not adequately considered difficulties Rohingya Muslims  from
Myanmar might have in seeking to register marriages and  obtain  citizenship
and had not properly  considered  evidence  regarding  the  existence  of  a
refugee camp in Bangladesh known as "Ghundum  or  Gundum".   Permission  was
originally  refused  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier Tribunal  but   was
subsequently granted by a judge of the Upper Tribunal who said this:

      "     1.   It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal made a mistake
      of fact that has led  to  unfairness  regarding  the  existence  of  a
      refugee camp and the appellant's ability to register his marriage.

            2.   Both of these are  material  to  a  pivotal  issue  in  the
      appeal:  whether or not  the  appellant  is  a  Rohingya  Muslim  from
      Myanmar."

7.    Permission having  been  granted,  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal so that consideration could be  given  to  the  question  of
whether the Judge had erred in law and, if so, what should flow from  that.
It was indicated, in directions issued to the parties, that in the event  of
the Upper Tribunal deciding to set the Judge's decision aside, there would
be a presumption that the remaking of the decision would take place  at  the
same hearing.

8.    I heard oral submissions from the parties concerning the error of  law
issue.  Having considered those submissions I indicated to the parties  that
I did consider that an error of law had been  made  such  that  the Judge's
decision would have to be set aside.  As to that, I would accept  Mr Khan's
submission, not expressly opposed by Mr Diwnycz, to  the  effect  that  the
refugee  camp  registration  card  (see  paragraph   25   of   the   Judge's
determination set  out  above)  was,  potentially,  an  important  piece  of
evidence.  As  was  noted  when  permission  was  granted,  the  matter  was
material to a  pivotal  issue  in  the  appeal  being  whether  or  not  the
appellant is, as he claims, a Rohingya Muslim from Myanmar.   I  do  have  a
difficulty with the grounds of appeal to the  Upper Tribunal  because  they
appear to rely upon material concerning the claimed existence of  a  refugee
camp called Ghundum of  Gundum  (there  is  an  obviously  similarity  those
versions and Gundun) which had not been placed before the Judge. Of course,
the Judge cannot  be  criticised  for  failing  to  consider  material  not
provided at the appropriate time.  Nevertheless, in looking at  the  reasons
for refusal letter, it is apparent that the respondent, whilst referring  to
the card and the camp, had not sought to take a point to the effect  that  a
camp called Gundum or something  similar  had  not  existed  in  Bangladesh.
Accordingly, in my judgment, there was unfairness  in  the Judge  taking  a
point about that without giving the parties an opportunity  to  address  it.
The material now provided does at least appear to indicate that had such  an
opportunity been given it  would  have  been  possible  to  demonstrate  the
previous existence of such a camp in Bangladesh.

9.    I did  wonder  whether,  in  fact,  the Judge's  adverse  credibility
finding could be said to have been made on the basis of other material  with
the refugee camp point being inserted simply as an  add-on  or  afterthought
such that the above error could not have  been  material.   However,  whilst
that may on one reading appear to be so it does seem to me  that,  in  fact,
the Judge's erroneous view as to the  lack  of  evidence  of  the  previous
existence of such a  camp  did  play  a  part  in  the  adverse  credibility
assessment.  I also considered whether it might be said that  none  of  this
mattered  anyway  because  of  the Judge's  alternative  finding  that  the
appellant had failed to show that he would be returned  by  the  Bangladeshi
authorities to Myanmar even if what he  had  said  about  being  present  in
Bangladesh illegally was true.  However, leaving  aside  whether  the Judge
was right in saying that the appellant would have  to  show  that  he  would
definitely be returned to Myanmar, it appears that his view  as  to  all  of
this was coloured to some extent by his adverse credibility  finding,  which
was in part dependent upon the Gundum  point,  and  the Judge's  consequent
belief that the appellant would not have taken steps, as he claimed  he  had
not, to regularise his status in Bangladesh after his marriage.   So,  I  do
conclude that the error identified in the Judge's decision was  a  material
one in that it might have impacted upon the outcome.

10.   My having decided to set aside  the Judge's  decision,  there  was  a
discussion as to how to proceed.  I pointed out  to  the  parties  what  had
been stated in the directions.  However, Mr Khan indicated that he was  not
in a position to proceed, the case seemingly not  having  been  prepared  by
his instructing solicitors for any necessary remaking, and there  not  being
a Bengali speaking interpreter present so that no additional  oral  evidence
could be given.  I concluded, therefore, that matters could not  immediately
proceed to remaking and that there would  be  unfairness  if  that  were  to
happen.  It is important to note, however, that the usual directions  issued
by the Upper Tribunal now do place upon representatives a duty  to  prepare
sufficiently well to enable the Upper Tribunal to proceed  to  remaking  at
the same hearing.  That is, to some extent perhaps,  a  departure  from  the
way things might have been done in the recent past but representatives  need
to be aware of that change and need to prepare accordingly.

11.   In this case, given the above situation, and having  heard  the  views
of the parties, I have decided to remit to the First-tier so  that  remaking
can be undertaken by that body.  That  is  because  the  parties  considered
that to be the most appropriate course of action, because the error  I  have
identified means that there will in all probability have to be  an  entirely
fresh credibility assessment, because I am not in the circumstances able  to
preserve anything of significance from the previous  determination,  because
new factual findings will be required and because  the  First-tier Tribunal
is an expert fact-finding body.  I have  set  out,  below,  some  directions
which will hopefully assist with  respect  to  the  remaking  process.   The
parties may care to consider whether, as part of preparation  for  the  next
hearing, documentary evidence should be  obtained  and  provided  concerning
the existence of the Gundum refugee camp in Bangladesh  and  concerning  the
rules in Bangladesh regarding the registration of religious  marriages,  the
obtaining of Bangladeshi citizenship  and  whether  there  are  or  are  not
impediments to Rohingya Muslims from Myanmar obtaining citizenship.

Directions for the  First-tier  Tribunal  concerning  the  remaking  of  the
decision

      A     Nothing will be preserved from  the  previous  decision  of  the
           First-tier Tribunal.  There  will,  therefore,  be  a  complete
           rehearing  of  the  appeal.   The  rehearing  shall  take  place
           (subject to any subsequent variation to these directions) at the
           Bradford Hearing Centre and there shall be  a  three  hour  time
           estimate.  The  appellant  shall  be  provided  with  a  Bengali
           speaking interpreter who,  preferably,  is  able  to  speak  the
           Sylheti dialect of that language.   The  hearing  shall  not  be
           before Judge Watt.

       B      The  appellant's  representatives  are  directed  to  file   a
           consolidated bundle of all documents which will be  relied  upon
           at  the  new  hearing  (even  if  previously  filed)   including
           background country material and witness statements of any person
           who shall be giving oral evidence.  The bundle shall be  indexed
           and paginated and shall contain a schedule of essential reading.
            The witness statements shall be drawn in sufficient  detail  to
           stand as evidence  in  chief.   The  bundle  shall  be  sent  in
           sufficient time for it to be received by the First-tier Tribunal
           (with a copy simultaneously sent to the other  party)  at  least
           five working days prior to the date which shall be fixed for the
           hearing.

      C     If the  respondent  proposes  to  rely  on  further  documentary
           evidence, other than that filed for the previous hearing  before
           the First-tier Tribunal, that too shall be in the  form  of  an
           indexed and paginated bundle and  should  be  filed  within  the
           above time-scale with a  copy  simultaneously  provided  to  the
           appellant's representatives.

      D     The parties should not assume that any documentation  not  filed
           in accordance with these directions will be considered.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  The decision is set aside.  The case is remitted so that the  decision
can be remade by a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.  None had been made previously and none  was
sought before me.


Signed                            Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway    20 October 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is payable there can be no fee award.


Signed                       Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway    20 October 2016

