
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02782/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 September 2017                  |On 3 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                              Ali Reza Rezayee
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr R Bednarek, instructed by IAS
For the respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lever promulgated 17.17, dismissing his  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated  4.3.16,  to  refuse  his
    protection claim.

 2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pedro  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    25.4.17, but when the application was renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted permission on 1.6.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 25.9.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found no error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to  require  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.

 5. In granting permission, Judge Coker found it "just about arguable" that
    the judge failed to give adequate reasons for the very  limited  weight
    accorded to the Ali Dorodian v  SSHD  (01/TH/01537)  witness,  Reverend
    Hinchcliffe. There is some confusion  in  the  permission  and  in  the
    decision as to the name of the witness, referred to as Reverend Hewitt,
    when it should be Reverend Hincliffe.

 6. Having carefully considered Mr Bednarek's submissions, relying  on  his
    skeleton argument, and the decision of Deputy High Court Judge  Gilbart
    in SA (Iran) [2012] EWHC 2575 (Admin), I am satisfied that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal gave the evidence all due weight and that no error of law
    is disclosed. I find the ground in fact misconceived.

 7. The evidence is dealt with at [29] of the First-tier Tribunal decision,
    where the judge accepts that the witness believes that the appellant is
    a genuine convert. However, as she accepted, a true conversion can only
    be known to the individual. It is not uncommon in the experience of the
    Tribunal for such witnesses to be fully persuaded that a  person  is  a
    convert. Judge Gilbart, whose prior experience  in  such  cases  cannot
    have been significant, suggested that it  was  a  dangerous  thing  for
    anyone to peer into a soul to  assess  whether  a  professed  faith  is
    genuinely held. However, if it has any weight that view must also apply
    equally to those who affirm that another is a genuine convert. It is  a
    view that ignores the principle established  by  Ali  Dorodian  v  SSHD
    (01/TH/01537). Judge Gilbart suggested  that  he  was  "at  a  loss  to
    understand how that is to be tested by anything other than  considering
    whether (a person)  is  an  active  participant  in  the  new  church."
    However, the experience of the Tribunal, reflected  in  many  decisions
    upheld on appeal in the higher courts, is that many who claim asylum on
    the basis of Christian conversion from Islam specifically engage as  an
    active participant in a dishonest  and  calculated  effort  to  falsely
    portray themselves as genuine converts.

 8. The difficulty with the grounds of appeal is  that  it  is  clear  that
    Judge Lever did not discount or give limited  weight  to  the  Reverend
    Hinchcliffe, but fully accepted the witness genuinely believed  in  the
    appellant's conversion. However, as stated at [29]  the  judge  had  to
    consider that evidence as "part of the complete evidential  picture  in
    the round." In other words, the evidence had to be  considered  in  the
    context of the whole, as is required of a Tribunal judge. It was in the
    light of the other evidence and findings referred to  in  the  decision
    that the judge, weighing the evidence as he  must,  was  not  satisfied
    even to the lower standard of proof that the appellant  was  a  genuine
    convert. In other words, the adverse  credibility  findings  outweighed
    his claim to be a Christian convert. That is a conclusion open  to  the
    judge on the evidence and for which adequate and cogent  reasoning  has
    been provided. No error of law is disclosed.

 9. In related submissions, Mr Bednarek  relied  on  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's  girlfriend   purporting   to   confirm   the   appellant's
    conversion. However, not only  is  she  not  an  Ali  Dorodian  v  SSHD
    (01/TH/01537) witness, but she is hardly a reliable impartial  witness.
    It is not incumbent on a judge to  address  each  and  every  piece  of
    evidence. In the light of the other findings,  I  do  not  accept  that
    addressing this evidence would or could have made any difference to the
    outcome of the appeal.

10. Mr Bednarek attempted to submit that the appellant  would  be  at  risk
    because his baptism and attendance at church, if known or disclosed  to
    the Iranian authorities, would be viewed as  apostasy  and  render  him
    liable to criminal prosecution, and that this was not considered by the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge. However,  this  was  not  addressed  in  the
    submitted grounds of appeal at all. No application  had  been  made  to
    raise further grounds and in the circumstances of  this  case  such  an
    application had little prospect of success, given that it  was  not  an
    issue raised with the First-tier Tribunal. In the  circumstances,  this
    is not a ground of appeal available to the appellant.

11. In summary, I find the grounds of application for permission to  appeal
    disclose no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Conclusion & Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.


     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


