


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/02860/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 21 November 2016                    |On 19 December 2016       |
|Prepared on 12 December 2016           |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    A. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn. Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally  and  claimed
           asylum on 23 July  2015.  That  application  was  refused  on  6
           November 2015,  and  a  decision  to  remove  him  was  made  in
           consequence.
        2. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal against  the  refusal  of
           his claim to protection was heard and dismissed by  decision  of
           First Tier Tribunal Judge Duff promulgated on 12 September 2016.
        3. The Appellant's application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal was granted on 20  October  2016  by  Judge
           Page on the basis that it was arguable that "notwithstanding the
           changes that had occurred in Somalia the objective evidence  was
           such that the  Judge  had  misdirected  himself  and  failed  to
           consider the evidence in the round".
        4. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Error of Law?
        5. The grounds, as drafted by Ms Cleghorn, offer  three  complaints
           about the approach taken by the Judge to the evidence. First  it
           is argued that it was unsafe for the  Judge  to  rely  upon  the
           conclusions in MOJ & Others (return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
           [2014] UKUT 442. Second it is argued that the Judge was wrong to
           fail to take as his starting point the  fact  that  one  of  the
           Appellant's brothers had been recognised as a refugee  following
           his 2010 appeal to the Tribunal. Third it  is  argued  that  the
           Judge wrongly  imposed  upon  the  Appellant  a  requirement  to
           provide corroboration of his account,  in  wrongly  adopting  an
           argument advanced by the Respondent at  the  hearing,  that  the
           Appellant ought to be able to provide documentary evidence of  a
           death that was said to have occurred in Mogadishu hospital,  but
           which he knew to be disputed.
        6. The Appellant's case was that  he  had  used  a  genuine  Somali
           passport to leave Mogadishu, and to travel to Qatar by  air.  He
           claimed that he had then destroyed  that  passport  and  used  a
           false Dutch passport to enter Italy by air, and then  to  travel
           to the  Netherlands.  He  asserted  that  his  family  had  been
           targeted by AlShabab when living in Somalia, in  both  Mogadishu
           and Medina, with the result that  his  father  and  two  of  his
           brothers had been murdered. As a result his case was that it was
           not safe for him to return to live anywhere in that country.
        7. Before me, Ms  Cleghorn  initially  sought  to  argue  that  the
           Appellant was not an "ordinary citizen" within the meaning given
           to that term in MOJ. Upon reflection she accepted that she could
           not sensibly advance that proposition; the Appellant  had  never
           claimed to have been associated with the  security  forces,  or,
           any aspect of the administration of Somalia, or, any NGO.
        8. Ms Cleghorn therefore fell back upon the argument that since the
           Appellant's father had been murdered by  AlShabab,  it  followed
           that the Appellant was necessarily  in  a  special  category  of
           persons who were of interest to that group,  and  at  harm  from
           that group. There is however no proper evidential basis for such
           a bald proposition, and as advanced it  is  simply  inconsistent
           with the guidance to be found in MOJ  as  to  the  situation  in
           Mogadishu as it was assessed by the Upper Tribunal to be on  the
           evidence placed before it in early 2014.  Ms  Cleghorn  accepted
           that she was unable to advance before Judge Duff the proposition
           that there was reliable evidence to show that there had  been  a
           significant adverse change in the situation  since  early  2014.
           The Judge was obliged in those  circumstances  to  consider  the
           Appellant's account in the context of that country guidance.
        9. The Judge noted  that  the  Appellant's  account  of  AlShabab's
           activity in Mogadishu and ability to target  and  murder  family
           members  was  inconsistent  with  the  findings  made   in   MOJ
           concerning the expulsion of that group from Mogadishu,  and  the
           lack of  any  real  prospect  of  their  re-establishment  of  a
           presence in that city. He was right to do so.
       10. In  my  judgement  the  approach  taken  by  the  Judge  was  in
           accordance with the authority of Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  702.
           The fact that the Appellant's elder brother was able to  succeed
           in his asylum appeal before the Tribunal in  February  2010  was
           never a  trump  card  in  2016.  That  appeal  turned  upon  the
           concessions that were made by the Respondent in that case, which
           were not made in this appeal. The situation in Mogadishu in 2009
           was consistent with the description offered by  the  Appellant's
           brother at his hearing in 2010. It  was  entirely  different  to
           that which existed in September 2016,  and  to  that  which  had
           existed for some little time prior  to  February  2014.  As  the
           Judge  identified,  it  was  the   inconsistency   between   the
           Appellant's  account  and  the  assessment   of   the   evidence
           undertaken by the Upper Tribunal in MOJ that indicated  strongly
           that he was not telling the truth about his own experiences  and
           those of his family, since 2009.
       11. Finally, I  note  that  the  Appellant  has  never  offered  any
           evidence to substantiate, or to found, Ms  Cleghorn's  assertion
           that there is  no  system  for  recording  deaths  in  Mogadishu
           generally,  or  specifically,  those  occurring   in   Mogadishu
           hospital. It is now accepted before me that this was an argument
           advanced on behalf of the Respondent at the hearing below.  Thus
           it was argued on behalf of the Respondent that the Appellant had
           failed to offer any evidence to corroborate his claim  that  his
           younger brother had died, or his claims as to the  circumstances
           in which he had died. Both arguments were properly open  to  the
           Respondent, and Ms Cleghorn accepts that she did not respond  to
           them at the hearing. In my judgement it is wholly  inappropriate
           in such circumstances to advance the assertion  that  the  Judge
           made any material error of law when he commented that  the  lack
           of any such corroborative evidence was in accord with  the  lack
           of credibility inherent in the Appellant's account.
       12. In the circumstances the Judge did not make any  material  error
           of law in his decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds, and
           I confirm his decision.





   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  12
      September 2016 did not involve the making of an error of  law  in  the
      decision to decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision
      to be set aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 12 December 2016



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 12 December 2016



