
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02932/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th October 2018                 |On 31st January 2019                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss. G Patel, Counsel instructed by Oakmount Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
    Judge Garratt promulgated on 26th June 2018.  The FtT Judge dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 1st
    February 2018 refusing his claim for international protection.


 2. There was no application for anonymity before First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT") Garratt.  An anonymity order had however previously been made
    by FtT Judge Burnett.  Although no application is made before me, the
    appeal concerns a claim for asylum and international protection and in
    my judgement it is appropriate for an anonymity order to be made under
    Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  SK is
    granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to proceedings being brought for
    contempt of court.


 3. It is common ground that the appellant is a national of Iraq.  His
    immigration history is set out at paragraphs [1] to [3] of the decision
    of the FtT Judge.  For present purposes it is sufficient to note that
    the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 7th August 2015 and
    claimed asylum. The claim was refused and an appeal against that
    decision was dismissed by FtT Judge Burnett for the reasons set out in
    a decision promulgated on 24th November 2016.  The appellant then made
    further submissions to the respondent, who, for the reasons set out in
    a decision dated 1st February 2018, again refused the claim for
    protection. It was that decision that was the subject of the appeal
    before the FtT Judge.


 4. Before turning to the decision of FtT Judge Garratt, it is useful to
    note the findings previously made by FtT Judge Burnett.  At paragraph
    [35] of his decision, FtT Judge Burnett notes that the respondent
    accepted that the appellant was from Kirkuk, a contested area, and that
    he is an ethnic Kurd.  FtT Judge Burnett found, at [36], that the
    appellant is at risk of persecution in Kirkuk on the basis of his
    religious beliefs and on the basis that he does not support the ISIS
    movement.  The FtT Judge referred to the country guidance set out in AA
    (Article 15 (c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) and noted that that
    decision was the subject of an appeal before the Court of Appeal.  At
    paragraph [45] of his decision, FtT Judge Burnett stated:


         "45. The appellant in this case: he speaks Arabic among other
         languages; he is Male; he is a Kurd. He has no family support. The
         appellant has made no attempt to obtain a document from the Iraqi
         Embassy in London. This might be considered a "Bradshaw point" like
         in a stateless claim. (In short-A person who makes no efforts to
         obtain a National document cannot show that they are stateless.)"


 5. FtT Judge Burnett went on, at paragraphs [47] to [49], to conclude as
    follows:


         "47. ... The appellant would encounter great difficulties in
         relocating to Baghdad?but in my judgment the level of risk and
         circumstances are not sufficient to cross the threshold required.


         48.  In the circumstances of this case, I consider that it is
         reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to Baghdad. Any risk
         to the appellant is intertwined with the ability to get a CSID. The
         appellant will not be returned without any documents. With such
         documents it will not be unreasonable for him to relocate. I note
         he speaks Arabic and he has some skills which he could engage in
         order to survive. I consider it would not be unduly harsh for him
         to relocate, if it is feasible for him to return. He returned in
         2011 and survived in Iraq for a number of years.


         49.  Considering the same factors as set out above, ability to
         obtain employment, language abilities and family support, I
         consider it would be reasonable to expect him to relocate to the
         IKR.  I therefore dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds."


The decision of FtT Judge Garratt


 6. FtT Judge Garratt outlines the appellant's claim as set out in the
    further submissions to the respondent, at paragraph [4] of his
    decision. The Judge notes that:


         "... It was argued that there had been a significant change in the
         general situation in Iraq and the appellant's personal
         circumstances had altered significantly. In particular, the
         appellant had no identity documents and had spent a considerable
         time in the United Kingdom and so would be at real risk owing to
         the high levels of violence throughout the country. Further, the
         appellant had no-one in Iraq who could assist him with his return
         or to accommodate him. He also could not speak Arabic sufficiently
         to communicate and live a life in an area of Arabic speaking
         people.  He would also face discrimination as a Sunni Muslim and a
         Kurd."


 7. The Judge sets out the evidence that he received at paragraphs [11] to
    [22] of his decision, and the parties submissions at paragraphs [23] to
    [27] of the decision.


 8. The FtT Judge's findings are set out at paragraphs [34] to [42] of the
    decision.  As there had been a previous decision of the FtT, FtT Judge
    Garratt referred to, and followed the Devaseelan guidelines.  FtT Judge
    Garratt noted at paragraph [34] of his decision, that the findings of
    FtT Judge Burnett as to whether the appellant has any family remaining
    in Iraq, are not entirely clear.  He referred to the apparent
    inconsistency between paragraphs [45] and [49] of the decision of FtT
    Judge Burnett. At paragraph [35] of his decision, FtT Judge Garratt
    States that he was dissatisfied with the evidence of the appellant
    about the claimed disappearance of his relatives in Iraq. He states:


         "35. In my conclusion the appellant has not shown that he has no
         relatives in Iraq, or for that matter, other contacts, in that
         country. In the latter respect I bear in mind that the appellant
         has also said that he tried to make enquiries of the whereabouts of
         his relatives through others returning to Iraq. It follows that
         those individuals would be known to him and could act as a point of
         contact."


 9. FtT Judge Garratt noted the evidence of the appellant regarding the
    four years that he had spent in Iraq between 2011 and 2015. The
    appellant's evidence, as recorded at paragraph [18] of the decision,
    was that when he left Norway to return to Iraq he still had his Iraqi
    passport, a work permit, identity card, and an Iraqi driving license.
    The appellant's evidence, as recorded at paragraph [19] of the
    decision, was that he had remained in possession of his identity
    documents when he left Iraq in 2015, but they were taken away from him
    by an agent in Turkey.  The appellant had claimed that he had been in
    contact with the Iraqi Consulate in Manchester, in writing, and the
    Consulate had called him by telephone. He claimed that he had informed
    the Consulate that he had no Iraqi identity cards, and he was told that
    without any identity papers, they could not help him.


10. At paragraphs [36] and [37] of his decision, FtT Judge Garratt, noted
    that the appellant has provided no evidence to satisfy the Judge, even
    to the lower standard, that he has made any enquiries of the Iraqi
    Embassy or its Consulate in Manchester, putting forward details of his
    possession of identity documents when he returned to Iraq, and
    subsequently left the country again.  At paragraphs [38] to [40], FtT
    Judge Garratt concluded as follows:


         "38. The appellant claims that, if returned to Iraq, the general
         situation in either Baghdad or his home region of Kirkuk would,
         having regard to his personal circumstances, be such as to put him
         at risk of serious harm. I am unable to agree. The appellant is a
         resourceful individual who has already returned to live in Iraq
         after claiming asylum in Norway. He is young and employable.
         Although, if returned to Iraq, he will be identifiable as a Sunni
         Muslim and Kurd, I conclude that it will be possible for him to
         obtain a CSID reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq (even if he
         does not already have identity documents to facilitate his return).
         In reaching this conclusion, I take into account the finding of the
         first Judge that it would be reasonable to expect the appellant to
         relocate to Baghdad having regard to his personal circumstances.
         Despite the appellant's evidence before me, I can see no change to
         his situation from the time of the first decision to the present.


         39.  If the appellant is returned to Baghdad it will also, I
         conclude, be possible for him to find his way to his home region of
         Kirkuk. In that respect I bear in mind that it has not been shown
         that the appellant will be without assistance from relatives in the
         country or others who can help him. Whilst the appellant's
         representatives have produced information which suggests that the
         situation in southern Kirkuk and particularly the Daquq town
         remains unstable, the appellant's personal circumstances lead me to
         conclude that he could safely live in other parts of Kirkuk. He
         would be assisted, on return, by the respondent's resettlement
         package which will give him the funds to move location, seek
         employment and obtain any other necessary documentation.


         40.  Further, it is my conclusion that the appellant, as a Kurd,
         would be able to take advantage of short-term entry into the IKR
         where he would be able to obtain employment and extend his stay.
         In reaching that conclusion I have also had regard to the
         conclusions in AA (Iraq) about the entry requirements for the IKR."


Error of Law


11. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal, although there is some
    overlap between the first two grounds.  First, the FtT Judge erred in
    his approach to the determination and findings previously made by FtT
    Judge Burnett.  FtT Judge Garratt considered that the "... findings of
    the first judge in this case, are not entirely clear in relation to the
    appellant's family remaining in Iraq", but in reaching that conclusion,
    the Judge failed to have regard to paragraphs [40], [43] and [45] of
    the decision of FtT Judge Burnett, in which he had clearly found that
    the appellant does not have family remaining in Iraq.  Applying the
    Devaseelan guidance, as the Judge claims to do, there was no good
    reason to depart from that finding.  Second, FtT Judge Garratt erred in
    his assessment of the credibility of the appellant's account regarding
    relatives in Iraq.  Quite apart from the fact that there was no good
    reason to depart from the previous finding made by FtT Judge Burnett,
    the appellant had maintained that he believes that his sister and
    brother-in-law were killed and the failed searches for them, in fact
    demonstrate that he has no family to return to. It was irrational for
    FtT Judge Garratt to conclude that the appellant could approach random
    contacts, whose whereabouts details and own resources were not at all
    considered by the Tribunal.  It was common ground that the appellant's
    home the area is in a contested area, and that the area was attacked by
    ISIS. In reaching his decision, FtT Judge Garratt failed to consider
    the likelihood of the family having been killed or displaced in light
    of that background.  The Judge also erred if his assessment of the
    appellant's evidence as to the approaches made to the Manchester
    Consulate. Finally, it follows from the erroneous findings, that the
    Judge failed to properly address the risk upon return.


12. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Haria on 27th July 2018.
    The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of FtT
    Judge Garratt involved the making of a material error of law, and if
    so, to remake the decision.


13. On behalf of the appellant, Miss Patel submits that FtT Judge Burnett
    had made clear findings regarding the appellant's lack of family in
    Iraq. She submits that at paragraph [49] of his decision, FtT Judge
    Burnett simply referred to relevant factors having previously found, at
    [40], that the appellant does not have family that remain in Iraq, that
    could be approached to assist with obtaining an ID document.  She
    submits that it was not properly open to FtT Judge Garratt to go behind
    that finding of fact. In any event she submits, FtT Judge Garratt did
    not properly engage with the country guidance, and at paragraph [38] of
    his decision, FtT Judge Garratt failed to consider how the appellant
    would obtain the necessary ID documents. She submits that applying the
    country guidance in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - Internal relocation) Iraq CG
    UKUT 00212 (IAC), it is clear that the appellant could not obtain the
    necessary CSID document because he has no male family members that
    could assist him. She submits that removal would be to Baghdad, and the
    appellant would be unable to safely travel from Baghdad to the IKR
    without a CSID document.


14. In reply, Mr Bates submits that the previous findings of FtT Judge
    Burnett are, as FtT Judge Garratt noted, unclear insofar as the
    appellant's family is concerned. FtT Judge Garratt had proper regard to
    the lack of clarity regarding that issue and it was open to FtT Judge
    Garratt to resolve that matter in the way that he did. He submits that
    the key issue in the appeal was whether the appellant can internally
    relocate to the IKR and whether he could obtain the necessary CSID
    document.


15. I reject the claim that it was not open to FtT Judge Garratt to
    reconsider the issue about the claimed disappearance of the appellant's
    relatives in Iraq. I have carefully read the decision of FtT Judge
    Burnett.


16. FtT Judge Burnett noted at paragraph [35] of his decision, that the
    appellant claimed that his family had been killed. At paragraph [40] of
    his decision, it is correct to note that in addressing the question as
    to whether the appellant has any form of ID documents, FtT Judge
    Burnett states "... He does not have family that remain in Iraq who
    could possibly be approached to assist with this.".  In that paragraph,
    FtT Judge Burnett appears to be addressing the submission made by the
    respondent, that the appellant's return to Iraq is feasible. FtT Judge
    Burnett does not state whether he accepts or rejects the appellant's
    evidence that his family had been killed.  If the evidence had been
    accepted, FtT Judge Burnett does not explain why that evidence was
    accepted. He does not for example, say that he had found the appellant
    to be entirely credible.


17. At paragraph [43] of his decision, FtT Judge Burnett states "... I note
    though that the appellant does not have family in Iraq. He stated that
    his family have been killed...".  Again, having noted the evidence of
    the appellant, the Judge does not state whether he accepts or rejects
    the appellant's evidence that his family had been killed.  At paragraph
    [45] of his decision, FtT Judge Burnett appears to set out what he
    considers the profile of the appellant to be.  He states "... He has no
    family support ...", but that is then at odds with what is said at
    paragraph [49].  Paragraphs [48] and [49] of the decision of FtT Judge
    Burnett must be read together. In addressing whether it is reasonable
    to expect the appellant to relocate, the Judge noted that any risk to
    the appellant is intertwined with the ability to get a CSID.  In
    considering the relevant factors, at paragraph [49], FtT judge Burnett
    refers to the appellant having "family support".


18. In my judgement, FtT Judge Garratt was right to note that the findings
    of the first Judge are not entirely clear in relation to the
    appellant's family. It was open to FtT Judge Garratt to reach his own
    conclusions as to whether the appellant has family remaining in Iraq.


19. There is however some force to the appellant's claim, as Mr Bates
    appeared to accept before me, that FtT Judge Garratt did not properly
    engage with the country guidance, and at paragraph [38] of his
    decision, FtT Judge Garratt failed to consider how the appellant would
    obtain the necessary ID documents to establish whether internal
    relocation to the IKR might be possible


20.  The Judge referred to the country guidance set out in AA (Article
    15(c)) [2015] UKUT 5441 (IAC) as amended by the Court of Appeal in AA
    (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944. The Court of Appeal supplemented the
    guidance provided by the Upper Tribunal.  The Court of Appeal confirmed
    that whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi nation to obtain a new
    CSID, whether the individual is able to do so, within a reasonable time
    frame, will depend on the individual circumstances.  The Court of
    Appeal identified relevant factors.


21. For an Iraqi national returnee of Kurdish origin, the key issue is
    whether the appellant had a CSID card. It remains possible to obtain a
    new CSID but whether or not the appellant will be able to do so in a
    particular case, within a reasonable timeframe, will depend on the
    individual circumstances. Those circumstances include whether he has an
    existing form of documentation such as a passport, current or expired,
    or other form of ID. There is also to be considered the presence or
    location of the civil registry office, whether the office is
    operational and whether it is within an area of ISIS control. Another
    issue is whether the appellant has male family members who would be
    able and willing to attend a civil registry with the appellant with a
    view to obtaining a CSID card. If he does, he could be safely returned
    to Baghdad and travel from there to the IKR relatively easily, and
    certainly without a real risk of suffering persecution, serious harm or
    article 3 ill-treatment but without one, it would be more difficult.


22. At paragraphs [38] to [39] of his decision, FtT Judge Garratt conflates
    a number of issues and fails in my judgement, to give adequate reasons
    for his conclusion that the appellant could remain in Baghdad or find
    his way to the IKR.  In fact, at paragraph [39], FtT Judge Garratt
    refers to the appellant making "... his way to his home region of
    Kirkuk ...".  That is to ignore the previous findings of FtT Judge
    Burnett and the country guidance in AA (Iraq) that the internal armed
    conflict in certain parts of Iraq comprising the governorates inter
    alia Kirkuk, is such that, as a general matter, there are substantial
    grounds for believing that any civilian returned there, solely on
    account of his presence there, faces a real risk of being subjected to
    serious harm within the scope of Article 15(c).


23. In my judgement, the decision of FtT Judge Garrett is infected by a
    material error of law and must be set aside.  I must then consider
    whether to remit the case to the FtT, or to re-make the decision
    myself. On the same day that the decision of FtT Judge Garratt was
    promulgated, the Upper Tribunal issued updated country guidance in AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC).  I
    do not preserve any of the findings made by FtT Judge Garratt.  In
    reaching my decision, I have also taken into account paragraph 7.2 of
    the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  In
    my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and extent of any
    judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The parties will be
    advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


 1. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Garrett is set
    aside.


 2. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
    with no findings preserved.


Signed        Date 10th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable, there can be no fee award


Signed        Date 10th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

