
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02243/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely By Skype for Business                |On 27 January 2021            |
|On 17 December 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     I H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, instructed by NLS Solicitors (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  12  February
    1984.  He claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  19  August
    2003.  On 28 June 2012, he applied for leave to remain relying upon Art
    8 of the ECHR.  That application was refused on 15 February  2013  with
    no right of appeal.  Thereafter, the appellant absconded.

 3. On 9 March 2017, the appellant applied for leave to remain under the 10-
    year route based upon private and family life.   That  application  was
    refused on 16 November 2017 and certified such that there was  only  an
    out of country right of appeal.

 4. On 7 December 2017, the  appellant  claimed  asylum.   That  claim  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 6 June  2018  and  his  subsequent
    appeal was dismissed on 27 July 2018.  The appellant  was  subsequently
    refused permission to appeal by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Moore)
    on 8 October 2018 and by the Upper Tribunal on 21  December  2018.   He
    became appeal rights exhausted on 8 January 2019.

 5. On 15 November 2019, the appellant lodged further  submissions.   Those
    were treated by the Secretary of State  as  raising  fresh  asylum  and
    human rights claims.  On 18  February  2020,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection  and
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 15 July 2020, Judge Lever dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
    all grounds.  The judge, in line with the earlier findings made by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moore) in the  appellant's  earlier  appeal,
    made an adverse credibility  finding.   He  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant's marriage, to his wife who was born a Hindu but converted to
    Islam, was unacceptable to his family and that he would be at risk  (or
    would his wife) on return to Pakistan.  Further, the judge  found  that
    the appellant, together  with  his  wife  and  children,  could  go  to
    Pakistan.  It was in the children's best interests to remain with their
    parents and there would be no breach of Art 8 if the family returned to
    Pakistan.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but, on  11
    September 2020, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Perkins) granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal against the adverse finding in respect of Art 8 of
    the ECHR.

 8. On 2 October 2020, the Secretary  of  State  filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

 9. As a result of the COVID-19 crisis, the appeal was listed for a  remote
    hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on 17 December 2020.  I was
    based in court at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre  and  Mr  Dieu,  who
    represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Howells,  who  represented   the
    Secretary of State, joined the hearing remotely by Skype for Business.

10.  During  the  course  of  the  proceedings  I  pointed   out   to   the
    representatives that I had been the UT judge who refused the  appellant
    permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  his  earlier  appeal
    proceedings.  Both representatives indicated that they had no objection
    to my hearing the present appeal.

The Judge's Decision

11. Before Judge Lever  it  was  accepted  that  the  earlier  2018  appeal
    decision of Judge Moore was to be taken as the starting point  applying
    Devaseelan.  In that appeal, Judge Moore had rejected  the  appellant's
    account that he claimed put him at risk from his family in Pakistan  on
    the basis that they did not accept his marriage to an  Indian  national
    who was born a Hindu but converted  to  Islam.   Further,  Judge  Moore
    found  that  it  would  be  a  proportionate  interference   with   the
    appellant's Art 8 rights if he, together with  his  family,  return  to
    Pakistan.

12. Before Judge Lever, the appellant and  his  wife  gave  evidence.   The
    appellant again relied upon the risk to him (and  his  wife)  from  his
    family in Pakistan as a result  of  their  inter-faith  marriage.   The
    appellant relied upon a number of background documents  in  his  appeal
    bundle and an expert report from Dr Panjwani  dated  12  July  2019  at
    pages 20-44 of the appellant's bundle.

13. At para 19, the judge set out the appellant's case as follows:

         "The appellant's case in summary  is  that  he  is  a  Muslim  from
         Pakistan.  In the UK in  about  2011  or  thereabouts  he  met  his
         partner who is a Hindu from India.  She converted  to  Islam.   His
         family rejected and threatened him when he told them that  she  was
         now his partner based on her nationality/religion and also  because
         they had planned for him to marry his cousin.   The  appellant  and
         partner now have two children and  it  is  said  cannot  return  to
         Pakistan or India".

14. The judge then, referring to Devaseelan,  said  this  at  paras  20-21:



         "20.     It was agreed by both parties that the case of  Devaseelan
             applies before me.  To some extent that is reinforced  by  the
             fact that the first judge's decision was promulgated only  two
             years ago and survived  the  onward  appeal  route,  no  error
             having been found.  That decision  is  therefore  my  starting
             point.  I need to consider any fresh evidence.   Although  the
             appellant and his wife have made witness  statements  dated  1
             July 2020 they are short statements and  add  nothing  to  the
             original statements and evidence heard by the judge in 2018.

         21.  There is an expert report which so far as I can  see  was  the
             only new evidence upon which the Respondent  decided  that  it
             amounted to fresh submissions giving rise  to  this  right  of
             appeal.  The expert report in part relies upon the credibility
             of accounts given by the Appellant and  wife  to  sustain  the
             conclusions reached.  He of course can  comment  upon  whether
             the facts related by the appellant and his wife are plausible.
              However, plausibility does  not  necessarily  translate  into
             credibility.  Further, much of  that  which  is  said  by  the
             expert can be found within the country material.  I have  also
             looked at country material  provided  within  the  appellant's
             bundle."

15. The judge then went on to set out Judge Moore's findings in the earlier
    appeal at 22-23:

         "22.     I have carefully examined the first judge's decision where
             both the appellant and his wife had the opportunity of  giving
             evidence.  They confirmed that to myself.  The judge  had  set
             out in detail the facts of the appellant's claim.  I note that
             the appellant's evidence before the first judge  was  that  he
             had received a 'fatwa' against him but such  only  arrived  as
             late as December 2017.

         23.  The judge made findings on the evidence at  paragraphs  28  to
             40.  Those findings were based on  detailed  analysis  of  the
             evidence and clear reasonings.  I do not repeat in detail  all
             those findings.  In summary the judge found  that  there  were
             substantial inconsistencies in the evidence  provided  by  the
             appellant and indeed between evidence given  by  him  and  his
             wife.  He did not find, given the multiple  reasons  provided,
             that the appellant had provided a credible  account.   He  did
             not accept for a number of reasons, and in line  with  Tanveer
             Ahmed, that the 'fatwa' was reliable although he accepted  the
             respondent's concession that an  original  document  had  been
             produced.  He did not accept that the appellant's  family  had
             arranged a marriage for him with his cousin.   Whilst  he  did
             not dispute the appellant's sister may have been  divorced  he
             found  no  nexus  between  that  fact  and   the   appellant's
             behaviour.  He did not accept evidence given  at  the  hearing
             for the first time that the  appellant's  wife  had  told  his
             mother that she would be following two religions.  He did  not
             find the marriage was unacceptable to the  appellant's  family
             nor did he accept  as  credible  the  claim  that  two  family
             members (uncle and cousin) had powerful  connections  and  had
             threatened him.  He did not find the appellant and his wife to
             be at risk if returned to the home area of Islamabad, but also
             found perhaps theoretically, in any event [there was]  nothing
             to suggest they could not relocate elsewhere or seek  adequacy
             of protection.  In this latter respect he followed the country
             guidance law of KA CG UKUT [2016]."

16. At paras 24-25, the judge considered the expert report which, as he had
    identified earlier, was the  new  evidence  upon  which  the  appellant
    placed a reliance.  The judge said this:

         "24. I  have  considered  the  expert  report.   It  is  reasonably
             lengthy.   In  large  part  it  deals  with  generic  features
             relating to culture, treatment of women and  the  police.   In
             terms of dealing  with  the  appellant's  case  a  significant
             feature raised by the  expert  in  respect  of  faith  in  the
             marriage is the existence of  a  fatwa.   However,  the  judge
             found for multiple reasons that such document  was  unreliable
             and for separate reasons did not find that  threats  had  been
             issued against the appellant by  his  family  based  upon  his
             partnership.   The  expert  report  does  not  provide   fresh
             evidence to undermine those findings.  It does not engage with
             the reasons given by the judge in respect of his  findings  in
             terms of pointing out  inconsistencies  between  his  view  on
             country material and the findings  made  by  the  judge.   The
             report largely provides information within the  public  domain
             and  matters  which  are  not  unfamiliar.   It  provides  the
             author's views upon faith, internal relocation and  the  issue
             of effective protection.  However, it  does  not  provide  any
             evidence to suggest that the original  judge's  core  findings
             are unreliable or should be departed from.  Further, I find no
             proper basis within that report or country  material  provided
             to depart from the country guidance case  of  KA  [2010].   In
             terms of adequacy of protection even if  such  was  necessary.
             In respect of inter-faith marriage there is evidence with  the
             CPIN June 2020 and the earlier  CIG  January  2016  (page  141
             onwards, appellant's bundle) regarding the marriage of  Muslim
             men to Hindu women.  Such marriages it acknowledges exist  but
             the information is provided in  the  context  of  Hindu  women
             being forcibly converted to Islam prior to the marriage.  That
             clearly occurs.  The difficulty is  when  the  women  complain
             about such forcible conversion.  The fact that a  Hindu  woman
             is forcibly converted to Islam indicates that thereafter  such
             a marriage from the point of view of the Islamic faith and the
             authorities is valid and recognisable  in  Pakistan.   In  the
             case before me there is no question of  a  forced  conversion.
             The  evidence  is  that  the  appellant's  partner   willingly
             converted to Islam over eight years ago and they now have  two
             children, the proper inference being that those  children  are
             brought up as Muslims.

         25.  In summary, I find no evidence to suggest  that  I  should  or
             need to depart from the findings of the first judge  that  the
             appellant can be returned to Pakistan without risk."

17.  Accordingly,  on  that  basis  the  judge  rejected  the   appellant's
    international protection claim on asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.  At paras 26-27, the judge considered Art 8, again  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal on that basis:

         "26.     Further, the judge  had  looked  at  the  case  under  the
             Immigration Rules, and  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and  taking
             account of Section 55 of the Borders Act  1955  (sic),  namely
             the best interests of the children.  Again, I  find  no  fresh
             evidence to indicate that I should depart from his findings in
             respect of those matters.  I find  no  recent  case  law  that
             changes the situation.  The children's best  interests  remain
             being with their parents.  They are by inference  Muslim  with
             now two Muslim parents with no  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan
             largely in Muslim country.  I note as  an  addendum  that  the
             appellant's wife is from the Gujarat area of India which has a
             reasonably high proportion of Muslims.

         27.  In summary therefore, I do not  find  that  the  appellant  is
             entitled  to  international  protection  nor  that  to  return
             himself and family to Pakistan would be a  breach  of  his  or
             their protected rights under the ECHR  nor  that  such  return
             will be a disproportionate breach of Article 8 of  the  ECHR."



18. Consequently, as can be seen from paras 26 to 27, the judge found  that
    the appellant,  and  his  family,  could  return  to  Pakistan  without
    breaching Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Grounds

19. The appellant's grounds of  appeal,  upon  which  UTJ  Perkins  granted
    permission, are relatively brief.

20. The Grounds do not seek to challenge the  judge's  adverse  finding  in
    respect of the appellant's international protection claim.  At para  8,
    it is specifically stated:

         "the Immigration Judge made findings in respect of the  appellant's
         risk in Pakistan, as were open to him to do so, and  therefore  has
         concluded the asylum aspect of this matter."

21. Instead, paras 9-13 only challenge the judge's adverse conclusion under
    Art 8 of the ECHR.  Paragraph 9 contends that the judge erred:

         "in that he has failed to consider the Art 8 ECHR  aspect  of  this
         claim, and the practicalities of the family life continuing outside
         the UK".

22. Paragraphs 10-12 set out a specific challenge to the  judge's  findings
    in relation to Art 8:

         "10. It was submitted to the  Tribunal  that  appellant  could  not
             reside in India or his wife reside in  Pakistan  for  anything
             more than a three-six month period (if at all given  the  poor
             relations between Pakistan and India).

         11.  It respectfully submitted that  contrary  to  the  refusal  of
             permission to  appeal,  evidence  to  this  affect  (sic)  was
             produced.  It was one of  a  number  of  matters  specifically
             addressed in the expert report.  Attention was  drawn  to  the
             specific paragraph during submissions.

         12.  That being the case the family unit could not be preserved and
             the best interests of the children could not be met."

23. Paragraph 13 of the grounds contends  that  this  point  could  not  be
    subject to Devaseelan as it was not a point considered in  the  earlier
    appeal.

24. As will be clear, therefore, the only challenge was  to  Judge  Lever's
    decision to dismiss the appeal under Art 8.  Further, in that context a
    single point was raised, namely that the judge had failed to take  into
    account expert evidence showing that the appellant could not reside  in
    India and his wife could not reside in Pakistan for "anything more than
    a three-six month period (if at all given the  poor  relations  between
    Pakistan and India)" and that therefore the family unit "could  not  be
    preserved and the best interests of the children could not be met".

25. In granting permission, UTJ Perkins referred  to  the  expert's  report
    and, in para 2 of his decision said this:

         "I have found little to support the contention that the appellant's
         wife could not get permission to settle in  Pakistan.   Subject  to
         argument, Paragraph 11.18 certainly supports the  Appellant's  case
         but it might not be thought to be very weighty."

26. Although, UTJ Perkins went on, in para 3  of  his  decision,  to  grant
    permission on the renewed Grounds, in fact, the point he raises in para
    2 is the sole point contended  in  the  grounds  to  give  rise  to  an
    arguable error of law.

The Submissions

27. In his submissions, Mr Dieu, on behalf  of  the  appellant,  sought  to
    broaden out the challenge to Judge Lever's adverse decision under Art 8
    of the ECHR.  He submitted, in essence, that the judge  had  failed  to
    take into account the expert  report  which  showed  difficulties  that
    would  be  faced  by  the  appellant's  wife  in  Pakistan,   including
    discrimination against women, children and societal attitudes to inter-
    faith marriages.  The latter,  he  submitted,  arose  even  though  the
    appellant's wife had converted to Islam.

28. As regards the actual grounds, Mr Dieu accepted that the judge had  not
    decided the appeal on the basis that the appellant and his family could
    return to India.  The decision was restricted  to  their  returning  to
    Pakistan.  He was  unable  to  identify  in  the  expert's  report  any
    specific paragraph, mirroring what was said in para 10 of the  Grounds,
    that the appellant's wife would only be able to reside in Pakistan  for
    up to three-six months or, perhaps, not at all.  He accepted that  para
    11.18, referred to by UTJ Perkins, concerned  the  appellant  returning
    with his wife to India not Pakistan.

29. Mr Howells submitted that the sole ground of  appeal,  and  upon  which
    permission had been  granted,  related  only  to  the  ability  of  the
    appellant's wife to live with the appellant in Pakistan.  He  submitted
    that there was nothing in the expert's report that supported para 10 of
    the Grounds to suggest that a visa could not be obtained by her to live
    in Pakistan.  Indeed, Mr Howells referred to para 11.3 of the  expert's
    report where it was stated, that her profession and conversion to Islam
    was "sufficient for her to live in Pakistan with her  child",  even  if
    the  expert  report  went  on  to  identify   problems   arising   from
    discrimination, etc. if she were living  there.   Further,  Mr  Howells
    submitted that at para 6.3 of the expert  report  it  was  specifically
    accepted that she could obtain a visa where it was  stated  that:  "...
    [the appellant's spouse] can follow the visa  procedure  to  settle  as
    [his] spouse ...".  Mr Howells drew my attention to footnote  20  where
    the Pakistan High Commission website in London was cited  (accessed  10
    July 2019) after that statement.

30. Mr Howells submitted  that  the  judge  had  rejected  the  appellant's
    international  protection  claim,  which  included  findings  that  the
    appellant (and his wife) could safely return to Pakistan.  The  judge's
    findings had not been challenged and it was clear that  the  judge  had
    taken into account the expert report in reaching those findings.

Discussion

31. As I have already indicated, the grounds of  appeal  focus  exclusively
    upon Art 8 and raise a single point, namely that the  judge  failed  to
    take into  account  the  expert  report  which  demonstrated  that  the
    appellant's wife could not reside in Pakistan for anything more than  a
    three-six month period, if at all.

32. In granting permission, UTJ Perkins appears to have misread para  11.18
    of the expert report.  That paragraph is in the following terms:

         "finally, [the appellant]  will  find  it  difficult  to  become  a
         settled spouse of [his wife] should he return  to  India  with  her
         because whilst laws now remove obstacles in  converting  a  tourist
         visa to a dependent visa, these do not apply to  Pakistani  nations
         (sic)."

33. Clearly, that would have been relevant if the  judge  were  considering
    whether the appellant and his family, when removed, could live in India
    - the country of which the appellant's wife is a citizen.  However,  as
    Mr Dieu accepted in his submissions, that was not the  judge's  finding
    in paras 26-27 of his decision where he found that  the  appellant  and
    his family could return to Pakistan.  Paragraph 11.18 of  the  expert's
    report  is  not  relevant  to  that  issue.   Further,  as  Mr  Howells
    submitted, to the extent that the expert  does  deal  with  the  family
    going to Pakistan, he recognises that the appellant's wife could follow
    the visa procedure in order to obtain entry there as his  spouse.   The
    expert specifically recognises this in para 6.3 of  his  report  having
    consulted the relevant page for spousal visas on  the  website  of  the
    Pakistan High Commission in London.  The expert's  report  is,  rather,
    concerned with the position of the appellant's wife  when  in  Pakistan
    and not whether she would be able to gain entry in order to live  there
    with the appellant.

34. It follows, therefore, that the appellant cannot succeed  on  the  sole
    basis asserted in the grounds of appeal to give  rise  to  an  arguable
    error of law.  UTJ Perkins commented in para 2 of his decision that  it
    was  "regrettable  that  the  Grounds  do  not  specify  the   relevant
    paragraphs that are said to support the case".  Paragraph 11.18is not a
    paragraph  that  supported  para  10  of  the  grounds  insofar  as  it
    challenged the judge's (only relevant) finding that the  appellant  and
    his family could reside in Pakistan without a breach  of  Art  8.   For
    these reasons, therefore, the appellant's grounds of appeal, upon which
    permission to appeal was granted, do not establish any error of law  in
    the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

35. Mr Dieu did not seek permission to  amend  the  grounds  of  appeal  to
    include a broader challenge to the judge's  decision  under  Art  8  to
    encompass what formed the majority of his oral submissions, namely that
    the judge had failed to take into account the expert report  concerning
    discrimination and societal attitudes that would face  the  appellant's
    wife and children in Pakistan, not least  because  of  the  appellant's
    inter-faith marriage with his wife.  Mr Howells did not formally object
    to my considering the broader challenge and made  submissions  inviting
    me to reject Mr Dieu's submissions in this regard. On that basis, I  am
    content to deal with the broader challenge

36. Mr Dieu contended  the judge had failed to  recognise  that  there  was
    "fresh evidence" - the expert report - that he  had  to  consider  when
    taking Judge Moore's earlier adverse findings, albeit in the context of
    the appellant's international protection claim, as a  'starting  point'
    applying Devaseelan.

37. Whilst it is true that at para 26, when considering the appellant's Art
    8 claim, Judge Lever said there was "no fresh evidence to indicate that
    I should depart from" the earlier judge's findings, that is not, in  my
    judgment, a statement that implies that the judge failed to  take  into
    account the expert report.  At para 21, again in  the  context  of  the
    international protection claim, the judge specifically noted  that  the
    expert report was the "new evidence" which had  led  the  Secretary  of
    State to accept that the appellant's further submissions amounted to  a
    fresh claim.  Further, in para 20, Judge Lever  specifically  said:  "I
    need to consider any fresh evidence".  Then,  having  considered  Judge
    Moore's earlier findings, the judge did precisely that, by  considering
    the "expert report" at para 24 of his determination.

38. I agree with Mr Howells' submission that in para 26 what the judge  was
    saying was not that there was "no fresh evidence", but rather there was
    no such evidence that indicated that  he  should  "depart"  from  Judge
    Moore's earlier findings in relation to Art 8.  That  is  a  conclusion
    based upon his earlier assessment of the "fresh evidence" in the expert
    report.

39. While Mr Dieu sought, with his usual diligence, to invite me  to  treat
    what the expert said in  his  report  as  establishing  discrimination,
    etc., which would be  faced  by  the  appellant's  wife  on  return  to
    Pakistan and that Judge Lever had not taken  that  into  account,  that
    submission cannot succeed in the  light  of  para  24  of  the  judge's
    determination.  The judge clearly had the expert's report well in mind.
     The appellant's claim that he (and his wife)  was  at  risk  from  his
    family  because  of  his  inter-faith  marriage   was   factually   not
    established.  The judge took into account  that,  on  return,  although
    there was  evidence  concerning  the  position  of  Hindu  women,  that
    concerned those who had forcibly been converted to Islam prior to their
    marriage.  The appellant's wife had not been forced to convert but  had
    done so willingly.  There was  undoubtedly  evidence  in  the  expert's
    report relevant to the plight of the appellant's wife in Pakistan.   It
    was, however, taken into account  by  the  judge  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's international protection claim and there is  no  reason  to
    conclude that, two paragraphs later in  his  determination,  the  judge
    failed to take that evidence into account under  Art  8  of  the  ECHR.
    Judge Moore had already found, in the earlier appeal, that it would  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant, his wife and children to return  to
    Pakistan.  The appellant had not established any risk from  his  family
    due to his marriage to an Indian citizen who had  converted  to  Islam.
    Having taken into account the background evidence, the judge rationally
    found that the family (returning as a whole) to Pakistan would be  both
    in the children's best interests and proportionate.

40. Even, therefore, having regard to Mr Dieu's submissions  which  extend,
    without permission to amend the grounds of appeal, beyond the terms  of
    the Grounds, Judge Lever did not err in law  in  reaching  his  adverse
    finding under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

41. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law.  That decision, therefore, stands.

42. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             15 January 2021

