
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02598/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 5th February 2018                                                  On
9th April 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                    MR EX
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                              Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T D Hodson Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors (London)
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. The appellant is a national of Albania born in June 1999. In December
   2015 he claimed protection. At that stage he was 16 years of age. In
   February 2016 he was screened under the protocol for children. He said he
   lived with his parents and 12-year-old brother. He left school in
   November 2015. He admitted attempting to enter the United Kingdom at
   Heathrow airport in 2013 along with his father pretending to be Italian.
   The deception was discovered and they were returned. On 27 November 2015
   using an agent he flew from Albania to Italy, again with his father.
   After spending a week or so there he alone entered the United Kingdom
   hidden in a lorry in December 2015.

2. In a statement he said his father was an active member of the Albanian
   Democratic Party. In the 2013 elections his father was responsible for
   monitoring ballot boxes. The rival Socialist Party promised him favours
   if he spoilt votes cast for the Democratic Party which he did. The
   Socialist party won the election but did not give his father all they had
   promised. His father then decided to go to the United Kingdom to look for
   work and brought the appellant with him. Hence the visit as Italians.

3. Despite his treachery he claimed the Democratic Party offered to help
   him if he supported them again. Further to this, in December 2015 he
   encouraged people to demonstrate against the Socialist Party. The
   appellant said his father was then threatened by the Secret Service who
   said they would harm the appellant. It was decided the appellant should
   leave the country. He repeated this account in his substantive interview
   of May 2016.

4. In support of his claim he submitted a document said to be from the
   Democratic Party of Albania confirming that the appellant and his mother
   were members of the party and that his father had been an observer at the
   election centre for the 2015 local elections. He also produce a statement
   from his father saying he had been engaged with the Democratic Party for
   many years but in 2013 changed to the Socialist Party who promised him
   favours when they won the election. The favours did not come to pass. He
   then refers to coming to the United Kingdom with his father pretending to
   be Italians when they were caught out and returned. He states in the 2015
   elections his father began to work for the Democratic Party in the hope
   of reward. He states however he was threatened by a number of men. There
   is also a letter from the appellant's mother stating she had supported
   her husband in his political activities. In 2015 he had been threatened
   and they decided to send the appellant away for his safety.

5. The respondent refused the claim in February 2017. Based on the
   appellant's account and the documents provided it was accepted his father
   was a member of the Democratic Party. However it was not accept that the
   appellant faced any problems because of this. The appellant had not been
   consistent as to who had threatened his father.

6. The appellant had produced what purported to be a membership card for
   the Socialist Party dated 2012 in respect of his mother and father. This
   was at odds with the chronology given for his father's political
   allegiances. This was not consistent with the claim he was a member of
   the Democratic Party until he left in 2013. He was also inconsistent as
   to whether his mother had any interest in politics.

The First tier Tribunal

7. His appeal was heard by First tier Judge Anstis at Hatton Cross in April
   2017. A statement had been prepared for the appeal in which the appellant
   changed the original account he had given. He stated that rather than
   being in the Democratic Party up until the 2013 elections as originally
   said he in fact had been involved with the Socialist party. Then, just
   before the elections, he switched to the Democratic Party. He sought to
   explain this on the basis he did not know anything about politics and was
   mixed up. This account was not reflected in his father's statement .He
   sought to explain this by saying his father felt it was best to carry on
   with the original version.

8. At paragraph 23 the judge records a letter from the appellant's father
   saying he joined the Socialist Party in 2012 and then left after the 2013
   elections when he joined the Democratic Party. Paragraph 25 of the
   decision refers to the certificate and membership cards as prompting him
   to change his account. In submissions, the appellant's representative
   contended that he had become muddled and his father, rather than
   correcting matters sought to go along with the error.

9. At paragraph 36 the judge refers to the changed account. The judge
   refers to the original account in the statement provided by the
   appellant. This was of his father being involved with the Democratic
   Party; then working for the Socialist Party in the 2013 elections and
   later on changing allegiance, yet again, back to the Democratic Party.
   However, this chronology was undermined by the membership card produced
   stating his parents were members of the Socialist Party in early 2012. At
   paragraph 38 the judge records the appellant's attempt to explain this.
   At paragraph 39 the judge found it hard to accept the appellant would not
   have a basic knowledge of which political party his father supported.

10. The decision records at paragraph 27 that the judge asked the appellant
   was specifically about what he knew of the threats. The judge records the
   appellant said his father told him the Secret Service had made the
   threats. At para 40 on the judge refers to the appellant's father
   continuing with his political activities after the appellant left
   Albania. The judge made the point that no action was taken against him.
   The judge referred to the odd situation described, whereby the security
   services, instead of threatening the appellant's father said they would
   harm him.

11. The judge at paragraph 42 refers to matters in the round. His father's
   willingness to engage in deception here was highlighted. The judge then
   refers to the different accounts of shifting political allegiance. His
   father and the rest of his family meantime were unharmed. The judge
   refers to allowing for the appellant's age and the low standard of proof.
   Ultimately, the judge did not believe the appellant.

The Upper Tribunal

12. The grounds contended the judge misunderstood the nature of the threat.
   It is suggested that from the letter provided by the appellant's father
   indicated the source of the threat was one or other political party. The
   father did not say the threats came from the Secret Service but only that
   the people making the threat said that. The second ground refers to a
   letter provided on behalf of the appellant said to be from the local
   police station recording his father's complaint.

13. The rule 24 response opposes the appeal and states the judge considered
   all of the evidence and had not misunderstood the case being made.

14. The oral argument followed the lines on which permission to appeal had
   been sought and the rule 24 response.

Conclusions

15. I find that the judge has carefully analysed the issues. Essentially,
   the appellant has been clearly caught in a lie. He gives an initial
   account about his father supporting the Democratic Party and then for his
   own gain abusing his position in the 2013 elections to advance the
   Socialist Party. When they failed to reward him he later switched
   allegiance back to his original party who welcomed him back. This account
   was repeated in a statement. Clearly, he had time to reflect upon the
   account given. His father repeats that account. The lie unravels when he
   outsmarts himself by submitting documents in support of the claim. One
   document state his father was in the Socialist Party in 2012.There is
   then a convoluted attempt to explain this by an account of more changes
   of allegiance. I find the lie is quite clear and there is no confusion on
   the part of the judge.

16. The argument about whether the threat emanated from the security
   services or was a hearsay account has no merit. The underlying claim is
   untrue. Reporting such an incident does not make it any the more true.

17. The judge has carefully considered all of the issues and has generously
   sought to look at matters in the round. The judge has considered the
   appellant's age. The judge considered the accepted deception by his
   father in coming to the United Kingdom with the appellant and pretending
   to be an Italian. The judge makes the very legitimate point that on the
   account his father has continued his political activities and yet is
   unharmed. There was inconsistency about whether the appellant's mother
   was involved in politics. The appellant at interview suggested that his
   father would blow with the wind and could not be relied upon. He is
   proven to continue in this vein by providing a letter supporting one
   account which he now says was incorrect only to change it later. The
   judge has given cogent reasons for rejecting the claim and I find no
   material error of law established.

Decision

No material error of law has been demonstrated in the decision of First
tier Judge Anstis. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appeal shall
stand

Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
              2nd April 2018
