
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02836/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 21 February 2020                 |On: 5 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                     SR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sellwood, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James, promulgated on 2 December 2019. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 8 January 2020.




Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is  reiterated  below  because
    this is a protection matter and the appellant has been  diagnosed  with
    PTSD.

Background

 3. The appellant, who is a national of Bangladesh, arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom on 20 September 2007 as a Tier 4 student. His  leave  continued
    until 28 June 2013. He then overstayed his visa and eventually  claimed
    asylum on 4 January 2017. The basis of his claim  is  that  he  was  an
    active BNP member who was attacked in Bangladesh. There are  now  false
    cases against him. He has been active for the BNP in  the  UK  and  has
    been attacked in the UK by Awami League activists. He would be at  risk
    of serious harm from the Awami League if returned to Bangladesh.

 4. By way of a letter dated 13  February  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the asylum claim raising numerous  concerns  about  credibility
    issues, not least the timing of the appellant's claim for  asylum.  The
    respondent did not accept that the appellant  would  be  persecuted  if
    returned to Bangladesh.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant was identified as a vulnerable witness. It was decided at
    the outset of the appeal that it was not appropriate for  him  to  give
    evidence. The Judge heard oral evidence from one witness Mr Ahmed.  The
    judge acknowledged that the  appellant  was  diagnosed  with  PTSD  and
    depression but found him not to be a reliable witness for  reasons  set
    out her decision.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal  were  twofold.  Firstly,  that  the  Judge  made
    material misdirection in law in that she applied too high a standard of
    proof and failed to take into account  background  evidence.  Secondly,
    that the Judge failed to take into account material evidence by finding
    that a witness who had attended the appeal did not attend  and  placing
    no weight on his evidence; by failing to take into account  the  expert
    medical evidence and making other errors of fact.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  clearly  an
    arguable error of law to reject evidence on the basis  that  a  witness
    did not attend when the witness had attended and given evidence.  While
    ground 2 was described as arguable, permission was not refused  on  any
    ground.

 8. The respondent did not submit a Rule 24 response.

Decision on error of law

 9. At the outset of the hearing  Mr  Tarlow  conceded  that  there  was  a
    material error of law and that ground 2 at paragraph 10 of the  grounds
    was made out.

10. At the appeal the appellant did not give oral evidence. It is  accepted
    by all parties that a witness Mr Ahmed,  A  BNP  official  in  the  UK,
    attended the appeal,  adopted  his  two  witness  statements  and  gave
    evidence in respect of the appellant's 'sur place' political activities
    in the UK. The witness was cross examined and the Judge questioned him.
    At [31a] of the decision the Judge records that a witness attended  the
    appeal. It is agreed that Mr Ahmed was the only witness in the appeal.

11. At [57[ the Judge states;

       'In regard to the witness statement of Shamin Ahmed  claiming  to  be
       the organising Secretary of BNP-UK, Mr Ahmed failed to attend to give
       oral evidence at the hearing, and no documents to support the reasons
       why he was unable to attend were submitted. He thus was  not  present
       at the  hearing  to  give  evidence  nor  tender  himself  to  cross-
       examination to test his evidence. Thus I give it no weight'.

12. Mr Tarlow conceded that the Judge's failure  to  acknowledge  that  the
    witness attended the hearing, to record his evidence or analyse it  was
    a fundamental error which rendered the  proceedings  unfair.   He  also
    conceded that the error was material because this evidence was  crucial
    to  the  assessment  of  the  extent  of  the   appellant's   political
    involvement with the BNP in the UK and thus risk to him on  return.  On
    this basis, I do not go onto consider any of the remaining  grounds  of
    appeal.

13. The error mentioned above suffices to render unsafe the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal and I set aside that decision in its entirety.

14. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  him  of   such
    consideration.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor, with a time estimate of 2 hours by any  Judge  except  First-tier
Tribunal Judge James.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Further directions

There will a  Case  Management  Review  hearing  prior  to  the  substantive
hearing for the parties to agree what if  any  measures  should  be  put  in
place due to the appellant's vulnerability and to  give  further  directions
in respect of the voluminous evidence.


Signed:     R J Owens                                    Date:  21  February
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens
