
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02174/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 February 2019                   |On 28 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                    O D S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Gardner
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national  of  Somalia.   On  13  September  2017  he
    claimed asylum and humanitarian protection.  His claim was rejected  by
    the respondent in a decision dated  26  January  2018.   The  appellant
    appealed against that decision under Section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His appeal came before the First-tier
    Tribunal and was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mathews  in  a
    decision promulgated on 29 October 2018 on all grounds.

2.   The appellant sought permission to appeal  against  that  decision  and
    permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Keeffe  in  a
    decision dated 29 November 2018.  Judge  O'Keeffe  found  that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge's finding that the appellant previously  had  a
    Somali passport was based in part on a  mistake  in  finding  of  fact,
    namely that the appellant had disclosed a passport number on a previous
    Visa Application Form.  It is stated in the grant that it is  certainly
    arguable that this has influenced the Judge's application  of  existing
    country guidance to the facts as  found.   It  was  also  found  to  be
    arguable that the judge had failed to give proper consideration to  the
    modification of the N v United Kingdom [2005] UKHL 31 test as  set  out
    in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State [2018] EWCA Civ 64.

3.   The appeal therefore comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to
    determine whether or not there was a material error or errors of law in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   At the hearing Mr  Howells  confirmed  that  notwithstanding  the  fact
    there was no Rule 24 response the respondent was contesting the appeal.
     I heard submissions from both representatives.

5.   Ms Gardner submitted that the grounds were thorough and detailed.   The
    first ground related to the First-tier Tribunal's  alleged  failure  to
    apply the proper test in relation to the appellant's medical condition,
    namely Type 1 diabetes.  It is  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to
    reference the lead cases of AM (Zimbabwe) and Paposhvili.  In paragraph
    34 of the decision where the Judge's reasoning was set out,  there  was
    no explicit reference to the relevant case law.  The  appellant  needed
    access to four insulin injections a day and the expert evidence  of  Dr
    Goldwyn was that his health would decline.  Even if it was not the case
    that the Judge had erred in failing to refer to relevant case law,  the
    matters in grounds 2 and 3 had to be considered.  There was  a  failure
    to take into account material factors.  There was no acknowledgment  in
    the decision of the additional complications affecting the  appellant's
    condition when the judge concluded that the appellant could  work.   It
    was accepted by the expert that there  were  significant  complications
    which affected his ability to work but these were not considered in the
    determination.  The appellant's diabetes was not well controlled in the
    UK and according to the expert's evidence, namely that of Dr Hoehne, he
    needed to be working four to five hours a day in order to  be  able  to
    afford treatment.  Further,  he  had  never  worked  in  a  school  and
    therefore was not a qualified maths  teacher  and  that  had  not  been
    addressed in terms of accessing treatment.  Further, the Judge did  not
    take into account that the rate of unemployment in Somalia was  66%  in
    Mogadishu.  The appellant had never  lived  in  Mogadishu  and  had  no
    family support there.  Further, the Judge concluded that the  appellant
    was not without significant financial support from abroad and that  was
    irrational on the basis that it was accepted that he was in the UK  and
    his diabetes was not under control and he had a chaotic lifestyle.  The
    fact that he had  friends  who  would  provide  him  with  a  sofa  was
    different from providing funds for the insulin he required.  His family
    in the UAE were migrant workers and low paid and unlikely to be able to
    provide financial support on return.

6.    Further,  in  relation  to  the  Judge's  comments  on  his   previous
    immigration applications, he had applied to join as a spouse  and  that
    relationship had broken up and there was no  support  from  his  former
    spouse.

7.   In relation to ground 4 the appellant's evidence was that  he  did  not
    have a passport and that had been his evidence throughout.  He did  not
    enter the UK on a passport and it added to the  complications  that  he
    would have to fund a passport and insulin injections.

8.   Mr Howells submitted  that  the  judge  clearly  addressed  himself  at
    paragraph 34 of the decision in relation to the requisite  test  to  be
    applied with regard to the medical evidence.   The  test  was  a  point
    clearly and strongly made  by  Counsel  on  the  day  in  his  skeleton
    argument and the Judge noted listening with care.  The  Judge  was  not
    persuaded that the appellant  would  not  have  access  to  appropriate
    treatment and medical support and in the circumstances there  would  be
    any short term or medium term deterioration in his health.  The form of
    words used by the Judge was similar to  that  at  paragraph  40  of  AM
    (Zimbabwe).

9.   Mr Howells then submitted that grounds 2 and  3  were  interlinked  and
    asserted that material  factors  were  not  taken  into  account.   The
    evidence before the Judge was that he was educated in the  United  Arab
    Emirates and had unofficial work as a maths teacher and it was open  to
    the Judge at paragraph 27 to find that  he  could  generate  a  limited
    income as a maths teacher.  It was also open to him to find that he had
    family and friends he could rely on when required.  Paragraph 29 showed
    that the Judge was alive to the evidence of Dr  Hoehne's  report  about
    the cost of his treatment in Mogadishu  and  Somaliland.   The  Judge's
    findings were reached on the basis that he would go to Somaliland where
    his clan was dominant where he lived and worked.   The  Judge  was  not
    contemplating him settling in Mogadishu but being there temporarily  to
    make onward arrangements.

10.  With regard to ground 4 it was accepted that  there  was  an  error  in
    relation to the finding that he must have had a passport, however  this
    was not a material error as the Judge noted at  paragraph  31  that  it
    might take several weeks in Mogadishu before he could find the  support
    of clan and he referred to the presence  in  Mogadishu  of  Isaaq  clan
    elders with the possibility that  they  would  be  able  to  help  make
    arrangements for onward travel and this was dealt with at paragraph 31.

Discussion and Reasons

11.  Ground 1 relates to the alleged failure to apply  the  proper  test  in
    relation to medical treatment and Article 3.  The appellant argued that
    he was an insulin dependent diabetic and would be unable to access  the
    required insulin if returned to Mogadishu and there was either  a  real
    risk of a significant reduction in life expectancy or that he would  be
    subject to a rapid and irreversible decline in his health resulting  in
    intense suffering.  The appellant's skeleton argument outlined the test
    and referred to the case of AM (Zimbabwe)  in  which  it  was  held  at
    paragraph 37 and 38 that the protection of Article 3 against removal in
    medical cases is now not confined to  deathbed  cases  where  death  is
    already imminent when the applicant is in  the  removing  country.   It
    extends  to  cases  where  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that the applicant although not at imminent  risk  of  dying,
    would face a real risk,  on  account  of  the  absence  of  appropriate
    treatment in the  receiving  country  or  a  lack  of  access  to  such
    treatment, of being  exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid  and  irreversible
    decline in his or her state of health resulting in intense suffering or
    to a significant reduction in life expectancy.  Therefore, the boundary
    of Article  3  protection  has  been  shifted  from  being  defined  by
    imminence of death in the  removing  state  to  being  defined  by  the
    imminence of intense suffering or death in the receiving  state,  which
    may only occur because of the non-availability in  that  state  of  the
    treatment which had previously been available in the removing state.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted at paragraph 24 that  he  had  read
    the medical references and reports before him  and  accepted  that  the
    appellant was either a  Type  1  diabetic  or  had  a  rare  MODY  type
    diabetes.  He also found that he had further neurological symptoms  and
    visual problems which are consistent with the condition.   He  accepted
    at paragraph 25 that he required  four  insulin  injections  a  day  to
    control his condition.   He  noted  at  paragraph  28  that  Dr  Hoehne
    confirmed that all major  cities  in  Somaliland  had  drugs  including
    insulin available to treat diabetes and that the particular  issue  was
    financial capability rather than availability of medication.   He  also
    noted that many households have fridges required to  store  drugs.   At
    paragraph 29 he found on  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  the
    ability to fund the medication he required from his  employable  skills
    in mathematics, together with the support of family and friends that in
    his judgment supported him in the UK.  He also noted that at  paragraph
    35 of the report Dr Hoehne assessed the cost of treatment in Somalia at
    about US$200 and a man's potential earning  to  be  between  US$200  to
    US$400 in Hargeisa, and US$150 to US$350 in Mogadishu.  He  found  that
    with the support of well-wishers that the appellant had had since  2013
    he could fund the medication he required which was available in Somalia
    either in Hargeisa or Mogadishu.  He then found at paragraph 34 that he
    would have access to appropriate  treatment  and  medical  support  and
    said:

         "It follows that I am not persuaded that his return from the United
         Kingdom will cause any short term deterioration in  his  health  or
         medium term deterioration in his health.  I have considered all the
         authorities advanced before me but simply do not find that he is at
         risk of health deterioration as claimed.  I find that  he  will  be
         able to access the medication that will allow many years of  stable
         health".

13.  The Judge therefore specifically noted that he was taking into  account
    the authorities he had before  him  but  found  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that the appellant would have access to employment  and  funds
    from well-wishers which would mean that he could afford the insulin  he
    required.  I find that if the Judge was correct in the  sense  that  it
    was open to him to find as a fact that the appellant would be  able  to
    afford the requisite medication and that that would  mean  there  would
    not be either a short term  or  a  medium  term  deterioration  in  his
    condition, it could not be material that he did not specifically  refer
    to the test in AM (Zimbabwe) because any reference or  the  failure  to
    make any reference would have not made any difference to the outcome as
    on the basis of his findings there was  no  risk  of  either  death  or
    intense  suffering  in  the  receiving  state.   In  the  circumstances
    therefore, in the light of his findings there was no need  for  him  to
    expressly refer to the test in AM.

14.  In  order  for  the  appellant  to  succeed  in  this  appeal  he  must
    demonstrate that material factors were not taken  into  account  and/or
    the findings in regard to the appellant's ability to access insulin and
    findings in relation to family support were irrational.

15.  It is asserted in relation to ground 2 that material evidence  was  not
    taken into account in concluding that the appellant was  able  to  work
    and that such employment would be sufficient to pay  for  his  insulin.
    It is said that the Judge failed to take into account that his diabetes
    was not controlled in the UK and that he  had  generalised  upper  limb
    large fibre neuropathy and damaged sight which ultimately would lead to
    blindness.  Further, it is said that the respondent's own evidence  was
    not taken into account which establishes that Type 1  diabetics  either
    die or leave  the  country,  and  that  the  Judge's  analysis  of  the
    likelihood of being able to obtain four doses of chilled insulin a  day
    ought to  have  been  based  on  the  practical  reality  of  what  the
    statistical  evidence  established  rather  than  on  the  hypothetical
    possibility of obtaining sufficient work.  It is  also  said  that  the
    judge failed to take into account Dr Hoehne's evidence at paragraph  42
    and 44 that he would need to work consistently for the necessary  three
    to four hours each day, five days a week  to  be  able  to  afford  the
    necessary insulin to keep him alive and the  increased  hospital  costs
    that he would be likely to encounter due to his  medical  complications
    arising from diabetes which would increase  by  US$200  to  US$300  for
    every stay in hospital.  It is also submitted that the judge failed  to
    take into account that unemployment in Mogadishu was at  66%  and  that
    the appellant was a relatively old man in Somali terms at the age of 36
    who had never lived in Mogadishu or southern Somalia and had no friends
    or family there, and that he also failed to take into  account  country
    guidance in AM and others [2011] UKUT 00445 that he would  be  unlikely
    to get the assistance from the Isaaq clan in the city.

16.  I have already set out the Judge's findings in relation to his  ability
    to work on return and the ability to access treatment.

17.  The appellant relied on two key reports, namely the medicolegal  report
    of Charmian Goldwyn dated 4 October  2018  and  the  report  of  Markus
    Hoehne PhD, Somali expert from the University of Leipzig, undated.   It
    is not in dispute that either expert had the expertise  to  comment  on
    this case.  According to Dr Goldwyn the appellant has the  worst  HbA1c
    test results that he has ever seen  and  his  results  have  been  very
    serious.  He describes a chaotic lifestyle and sofa-surfing which makes
    it difficult for him to maintain good control.  There is reference to a
    report from consultant clinical neurophysiologists  which  states  that
    there is neurophysiological evidence of generalised  upper  limb  large
    fibre motor peripheral neuropathy due to  diabetes.   In  his  clinical
    opinion the appellant has diabetes which is under poor control  and  if
    returned to Somalia and if he does not get the treatment he requires he
    states at paragraph 58 that he cannot say whether  he  will  die  first
    from diabetic coma or whether he will get an overwhelming infection for
    which there may not be treatment in Somalia.  In his opinion there will
    be a serious and rapid decline in his health, he would be likely to die
    from a  hypoglycaemic  coma  and  problems  relating  to  eyesight  and
    peripheral  neuropathy   would   also   become   more   evident.    His
    cardiovascular system could also become compromised  and  it  would  be
    impossible to quantify how soon he would die.   Without  that  and  the
    absence of injectable insulin his  health  would  deteriorate  quickly,
    leading to death.  He said there is a  real  risk  of  death.    It  is
    therefore clear that in the absence of being able to obtain the insulin
    he  requires  he   will   undoubtedly   satisfy   the   test   in   AM.



18.  Dr Hoehne reports  on  the  situation  in  Somalia,  specifically  with
    regard to this ground as to  healthcare  in  general  in  Somalia,  and
    specifically treatment for diabetes  and  the  appellant's  ability  to
    obtain it.  He states that in all major cities in  Somaliland  although
    there can be shortages many drugs are available.   Drugs  for  diabetes
    Type 1 medications are widely available and accessible for  all  people
    and the issue is financial capability.  Many households  have  fridges.
    Many drugs can be found most of the time, at least  in  urban  centres.
    The cost in all places is the issue.  At paragraph 35  he  states  that
    for the medication he would face costs  of  UD$200  and  the  appellant
    would need US$250 in Hargeisa in order to secure a stable supply and in
    Mogadishu the cost would be $20 to $30 less monthly.   In  relation  to
    the issue of whether the appellant would  be  able  to  gain  a  stable
    income, he states that unemployment amongst people aged 50 to 64 is 54%
    in Somalia and in Mogadishu there is 66% unemployment  and  it  is  the
    world's most fragile city.  He states that those who find jobs  usually
    have substantial family support and  additionally  they  would  ideally
    have a university degree or a  certificate  in  a  profession  that  is
    hardly regarded.  He estimates that as a private teacher he could  earn
    between US$200 and US$400 a month, possibly a bit  less,  in  Hargeisa,
    and $150 to $350 in Mogadishu depending on the number of classes he was
    teaching.  A problem he foresees is that if he is unable  to  regularly
    teach for several hours a week, three to four hours a day, five days  a
    week, due to his health issues and of his  health  deteriorating  there
    was no unemployment money or Social Services money.  He would  need  at
    least $350 to $400 a month.  He concludes  at  paragraph  44  that  the
    appellant  would  face  severe  challenges  to   establishing   himself
    economically.  He assumes that health problems would prevent  him  from
    working stably full-time  which  would  lead  to  economic  destitution
    having a negative impact on his health and a downward spiral.

19.  I conclude, having had regard  to  the  expert  evidence  that  I  have
    summarised and the relevant passages in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that adequate consideration was not given to material factors
    in the medical evidence as  highlighted  in  the  grounds,  namely  the
    complications arising out of the appellant's diabetes,  the  fact  that
    the appellant would need to work consistently and the fact that even in
    the UK his diabetes is poorly managed, the high unemployment  rate  and
    the increased costs as a  result  of  medical  complications.   In  the
    absence of any reference  to  these  difficulties  highlighted  by  the
    experts, I find that the Judge's conclusion that the appellant would be
    able to access insulin due to his ability to work is flawed.

20.  It is also said in ground 3 that the findings in  relation  to  finance
    are irrational and I find that the Judge did  take  immaterial  factors
    into account at paragraph 23 in that it does not follow from  the  fact
    that the appellant  made  previous  applications  that  he  would  have
    financial support in view of the fact that his marriage has ended.

21.  The respondent concedes that  the  judge  made  an  error  of  fact  in
    relation to ground 4 but argued that it was not material.  The evidence
    before the court from the appellant was that he did not have a passport
    but there was reference at A1 of the appellant's bundle to  a  passport
    number otherwise all other references throughout the material  were  to
    the absence of a passport.  I accept the  appellant's  submission  that
    the reference at A1 was in fact simply the assertion  of  his  date  of
    birth and it cannot safely be concluded from this  that  the  appellant
    had a passport.  The appellant argued in his skeleton argument that the
    assessment that the appellant as a member of the Isaaq  clan  would  be
    able to secure a passport in order  to  travel  to  Somaliland  and  be
    assisted by officials in Mogadishu was contrary to the  extant  country
    guidance in AMM that was clearly referenced in the appellant's skeleton
    argument.

22.  It is clear that returns are to Mogadishu and  that  from  the  country
    guidance in AMM a person from Somaliland will not  be  able  to  travel
    overland without a risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.  The Tribunal  held
    that Isaaq clan members were unlikely to be favourably disposed to  the
    Somaliland authorities and to have much to offer by way  of  assistance
    to a person arriving in Mogadishu  who  wished  to  go  to  Somaliland.
    Further, that in most cases it would be impractical  for  returnees  to
    obtain old green passports in southern and central Somalia in order  to
    be able to make the return journey to Somaliland because of the dangers
    in getting such documentation.  I therefore find the Judge's conclusion
    that the appellant would be able to obtain a passport or had a passport
    in the past are also material errors.

23.  For those reasons I conclude that the appeal should be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing with no findings preserved  before  a
    judge other than Judge Mathews.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 26 March 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
