
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02523/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 October 2016                   |On 28 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    h c l
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Lee of Counsel, instructed by ATM Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge K. Swinnerton, promulgated on 13 April 2016, in which he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

 2. As this is an asylum case I make an anonymity direction.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "It is arguable that the determination does not provide  sufficient
         reasons for the negative credibility findings,  particularly  where
         the preceding paragraphs cite country background  material  capable
         of supporting the claim."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral submissions from both
    representatives, following which I announced that I found the  decision
    involved the making of a material  error  of  law,  and  that  my  full
    reasons would follow.

Submissions

 5. Mr. Lee relied on the grounds of appeal.  He accepted, as  set  out  in
    the grant of permission that, following the  decision  in  Hossain  and
    Others [2016] EWHC 1331, the ground of appeal relating to the  Detained
    Asylum Casework process had fallen away.

 6. He  submitted  that  there  were  two  reasons  why  the  decision  was
    unsustainable:  the  reasoning  was  circular  and  inadequate,  and  a
    material factor had been left out.  He  referred  to  the  grounds,  in
    particular paragraphs 4, 5, 7 and  8.   In  relation  to  the  material
    factor which had been left  out,  he  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence was that he was  a  trafficking  victim.   According  to  Home
    Office guidance, and general common sense, the fact that someone claims
    to be a victim of trafficking should be taken into account.

 7. In response Ms Isherwood relied on the Rule 24 response.  She submitted
    that the Respondent had  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    trafficked.  In paragraph 47 of the  decision  the  judge  acknowledged
    this.  In paragraph 53 the  judge  had  gone  through  the  Appellant's
    witness statement, and in paragraphs 89 and 90 had taken  into  account
    the  expert  evidence.   Ms  Isherwood  referred  to  the   significant
    differences in the accounts given by the  Appellant  at  his  screening
    interviews, in particular his name and date of birth.  Paragraph 92  of
    the decision indicated that the judge was not ignoring the  claim  that
    the Appellant had been trafficked.

 8. Ms Isherwood accepted that the  findings  were  brief.   However,  with
    reference to paragraphs 92 to 95, she submitted that the  claim  itself
    had not been detailed.   The  judge  had  considered  the  evidence  in
    paragraphs 89 and 90 when coming to the conclusion in paragraph 95.  It
    was submitted that  the  Appellant's  claim  had  changed  to  fit  the
    changing situation in Vietnam.

 9. In response Mr. Lee repeated his  submission  that  the  reasoning  was
    inadequate.

Error of law

10. The "findings of fact and reasons" are set out from paragraphs 85 to 96
    of the decision.  However,  despite  the  heading,  not  all  of  these
    paragraphs contain  findings,  but  instead  set  out  the  Appellant's
    account and some of the background evidence.  It is only paragraph  85,
    the finding of the Appellant's nationality and age, and  paragraphs  92
    to 95 which contain findings and reasons.  The entirety of the  judge's
    findings and reasoning are set out in five short paragraphs.

11. In paragraph 92 the judge states "I do not find the overall account  of
    the Appellant to be plausible".  He then sets out  the  differences  in
    the accounts given by the Appellant in  his  two  screening  interviews
    (paragraphs 92 and 93).  He does not set out the "overall account",  or
    give reasons for finding that it is not plausible, but refers  only  to
    the screening interviews.  In paragraph 94 he states:

         "I do not accept the explanation provided by the Appellant that  he
         had not disclosed the truth in his first screening interview as  he
         had been told to act in that  way  by  those  he  claimed  to  have
         trafficked him from  Vietnam  to  the  UK.   I  did  not  find  the
         Appellant to be a credible witness."

12. This is the extent of  the  judge's  findings  as  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility.  There are  no  reasons  given  for  why  the  explanation
    provided was not accepted.  There is no reference made to the fact that
    he claims to have been trafficked, notwithstanding the  fact  that  the
    Respondent did not accept that he had been  trafficked.   There  is  no
    more than a simple statement that the judge did not find the  Appellant
    to be a credible witness because his explanation was not  accepted.   I
    find that the judge  has  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  not
    accepting the explanation, and therefore for finding that the Appellant
    was not a credible witness.

13. In relation to  the  reliance  on  the  screening  interviews  and  the
    discrepancies between them, in addition to the fact that the judge  had
    not given sufficient reasons for rejecting the explanation provided  by
    the Appellant, I was referred to the case of JA Afghanistan [2014] EWCA
    Civ 450, set out  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  at  paragraph  10.   No
    consideration has been given  to  this  case  law  by  the  judge  when
    considering the discrepancies between the accounts  given  at  the  two
    screening interviews.

14. In paragraph 95 the judge states: "However, even if the  Appellant  had
    been detained as maintained and been involved in the demonstrations  as
    claimed in Hanoi City, I do not find that  the  Vietnamese  authorities
    would actively pursue the Appellant if he were  returned  to  Vietnam."
    It was submitted by Ms Isherwood that the judge had taken into  account
    the background evidence to which he referred at  paragraphs  89  to  91
    when coming to this conclusion.  However, there is no reference to  the
    background evidence in this paragraph.  Having set out this  background
    evidence,  which  states  that  participants  in   demonstrations   are
    monitored by the police, the judge gives no reasons  for  finding  that
    the Appellant would not be so monitored.  There are  no  reasons  given
    for the finding that he would not be pursued by the authorities.

15. I find that the judge has failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings, which are very brief.  I  find  that  this  failure  to  give
    adequate reasons on material matters amounts to  a  material  error  of
    law.

16. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set it aside.  No findings are preserved.

18. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 27 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

