
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02635/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 April 2021                     |On 26 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SMK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan. By a Transfer  Order  made
    on 3 March 2021, I heard the resumed hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  on
    27 April 2021. The initial hearing had been  heard  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Bruce.

 2. Setting aside the First-tier Tribunal decision,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Bruce directed that the Tribunal's findings at  [22-34]  be  preserved.
    Those findings are as follows;

         22.  It is necessary for us to determine whether the Appellant is
         politically active towards Kashmir independence and if so whether
         he has attracted the adverse attention of the Pakistan authorities
         and the Jamat Al Dawah.

         23.  Notwithstanding the adverse credibility findings outlined
         below, we are satisfied to the requisite standard of proof that the
         Appellant is an active member of the JKNAP.

         24.  In reaching that conclusion, we have dismissed many of the
         arguments of the Respondent contained within the Refusal. We do not
         accept that the Appellant was vague in interview. We find that he
         answered questions asked of him in sufficient detail. We do not
         find his failure to detail the nature of his speeches during
         protests in the United Kingdom to be undermining to his
         credibility, given that he was not asked for this information. In
         fact, we find that the Appellant adequately answered all questions
         asked of him and was able to provide specific information. Whilst
         much of this information is available upon research, it
         nevertheless enhances his credibility. We do not accept that he
         wrongly named the UK president of the JKNAP and accept his
         subsequent explanation that his answer in interview was clearly in
         the past tense. It has been accepted by the Respondent that the
         name given is the name of a previous president.

         25.  We give significant weight to the Appellant's attendance and
         participation in protests in the United Kingdom and the fact that
         he has addressed a Select Committee at Westminster. We note that
         there is no dispute that he is from Kashmir and so some ideology
         one way or another about Kashmir independence is plausible.

         26.  We also give weight to the supportive letters that the
         Appellant has adduced and the evidence, both in writing and orally,
         from Mr Rajar.

         27.  The fact that we accept the Appellant's political affiliations
         enhances the credibility of his account of events in Pakistan.
         However, there are various features of the evidence that
         significantly undermine his credibility:

             a.   His assertion that he was released by Jamat Al Damah
             after three days so that he could obtain medical attention and
             that he was told that if he did not join their cause they
             would "finish" him is inconsistent with the fact that
             thereafter he was not approached by the group, despite
             remaining at his home address in Pakistan for several months
             before leaving Pakistan in 2011. Similarly, he encountered no
             difficulties upon his return in 2013;

             b.   The Appellant returning to Pakistan in 2013 is
             inconsistent with his assertion of fear. We do not accept as
             credible that he believed that the situation had improved in
             Pakistan. He could have made enquiries before returning to
             inform him whether he would be safe. We do not consider it
             credible that having retuned he would attract potential
             adverse attention to himself by attending a further protest;

             c.   Despite the Appellant's account that his problem started
             in 2010, during which he was detained by both the Pakistan
             authorities and Jamat Al Dawah, he failed to claim asylum upon
             arriving to the United Kingdom in April 2011. He did not claim
             asylum until over six years later. This is particularly
             notable as upon returning to Pakistan in 2013 he says he was
             advised by the President of the JKNAP that he believed that
             the Appellant would be targeted by the Pakistan authorities.
             His assertion that upon return to the United Kingdom from
             Pakistan in 2013 he did not claim asylum as he had hoped that
             the country situation would improve is not credible given his
             assertion that it had not improved between 2011 and 2013.
             Further, such a hope would not prevent him claiming refugee
             status as a grant of asylum would not preclude him voluntarily
             returning to Pakistan upon a change in circumstances. He has
             failed to give a reasonable explanation for the substantial
             delay in claiming asylum and we find this damaging to his
             credibility, pursuant to section 8 of the Asylum and
             Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.

         28.  We note the objective evidence within the Home Office Country
         Policy and Information Note entitled 'Pakistan: Background
         information including actors of protection, and internal
         relocation', published in June 2017, which details that "document
         fraud is endemic in Pakistan", for example, FIRs. In light of the
         aforementioned credibility findings, together with the features
         below, we are not satisfied that the FIR and the arrest warrant are
         reliable documents:

             a.   At paragraph 23 of his witness statement, dated 21st
             March 2018, the Appellant states that the FIR was lodged in
             2013 and he found out about it in 2016. This is inconsistent
             with his oral evidence in which he said that he found out
             about it in 2013;

             b.   The reliability of the arrest warrant is undermined by
             the fact that it requires his presentation at court two years
             prior to the date of the document. We do not accept his
             account of this being a clinical error is persuasive. Also, it
             includes references to crimes that do not correspond with the
             details within the FIR, such as adultery, and whilst he
             Respondent identified this within the Refusal, the Appellant
             has offered no explanation. The reference to the amount for
             bail being "Nil" undermines the document. We do not accept
             that this is to indicate that he would not be permitted bail
             as if that was the case we find it would be detailed upon the
             document; and

             c.   Neither document details the Appellant's full name.
             Whilst he told us that he often does not use the name "K", he
             stated that the name "K" is upon his identification documents
             including his passport. As such, there is no adequate
             explanation as to why it has not been included on documents
             purporting to be formal court documents.

         29.  We have considered the evidence of the Mental Health
         Assessment Worker, to whom the Appellant has given a consistent
         account of events in Pakistan to that which he has pursued in his
         claim for asylum. The author details that the Appellant has told
         him that his General Practitioner has diagnosed high blood pressure
         resulting from stress. Whilst we do give some weight to that
         evidence, we note that it reiterates information provided by the
         Appellant and so his credibility is material when considering the
         weight to assign. We do note however that his General Practitioner
         records indicate that he has been assessed as having high blood
         pressure. We also note that stress, and high blood pressure, may
         have arisen simply as a result of the Appellant wishing to remain
         in the United Kingdom yet not having lawful status to do so, rather
         than an indicator of previous trauma.

         30.  We note the written evidence of Mr Liaqat Hayat, who is the
         president of the Jammu Kashmir National Awami Party in Pakistan,
         and we note that he was unable to attend the hearing to have his
         evidence tested as he lives in Pakistan. He outlines how the FIR
         was obtained and that it was he that notified the Appellant of it.
         However, we note that he has failed to give details as to when he
         undertook these activities. Nevertheless, we do assign weight to
         this evidence and consider this in the round with all of the
         evidence in the case.

         31.  We do give weight to the evidence of Mr Raja. We note that at
         paragraph 7 of his witness statement he details that he was told by
         Mr Hayat that the Appellant had problems in Pakistan, although he
         does not know the details. He details at paragraph 11 that it is
         generally dangerous for party members in Jammu Kashmir and may be
         targeted by the authorities and other groups. He has also visited
         and spoken to the Appellant's family. We give that evidence weight,
         although note that he is not an independent witness and that he
         clearly shares a friendship with the Appellant. We consider it in
         the round with all of the evidence in the case. Further, in his
         oral evidence he detailed that JKNAP membership is illegal in
         Pakistan, but that members are generally unmolested. This is
         exemplified by the fact that he, as President of the UK unit, was
         able to travel to Pakistan and attend a party convention without
         any adverse attention from the authorities or other groups.

         32.  The Appellant has adduced other letters supporting his
         struggles in Pakistan but we note that these letters are from
         people who are generally repeating what they have been told, rather
         than detailing what they have personally witnessed.

         33.  We give weight to the objective evidence adduced by both
         parties. The Appellant relies upon objective evidence that is
         summarised within a helpful key passage index. It refers to the
         arrest and physical abuse against protestors. There are examples
         given of arrests against protestors within the UNHCHR document,
         dated July 2019.

         34.  We note the evidence within the Home Office 'Country Policy
         and Information Note - Pakistan: Security and humanitarian
         situation, including fear of militant groups', dated January 2019,
         which lists organisations that have been determined by the Pakistan
         Ministry of Interior as proscribed organisations. JKNAP is not upon
         that list.

 3. At the resumed hearing, which took place remotely, the  appellant  gave
    evidence  with  the  assistance  of  an   interpreter.   Although   the
    appellant's first language is Urdu, he told me that  he  was  able  and
    willing to speak in Punjabi, the language in which the interpreter  was
    authorised. The standard and burden of proof are as stated at [8-10] of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision. I shall not repeat them.

 4. The appellant adopted his witness statement of 10 August  2020  as  his
    evidence in chief. He was cross examined by Mr Tan,  who  appeared  for
    the Secretary of State. He was asked about Mr Raja, the United  Kingdom
    Chairman of JKNAP, the party  with  which  the  appellant  is  actively
    engaged. The appellant  acknowledged  that  Mr  Raja  had  returned  to
    Pakistan in 2017. Mr Raja had been able to complete his  visit  and  to
    return to the United Kingdom 'unmolested'.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. The appellant now relies on the expert  report  of  Dr.  Farhaan  Wali,
    Lecturer in Religious Studies in the School of History, Social  Science
    and Philosophy at Bangor University. Mr Tan's submissions  focussed  on
    this report, which firmly concludes that the appellant would be at real
    risk on return to Pakistan on account of his support for JKNAP. Mr  Tan
    submitted that parts of the analysis of Dr Wali were not  supported  by
    the citation of source materials. For example, at [50] Dr Wali  writes:
    'There are some Human Rights reports indicating that JKNAP members have
    been targeted by ISI. Therefore, Mr K may face security threat from the
    Pakistani intelligence agencies. It is my opinion that Mr K  is  likely
    to face some  form  of  persecution  and/or  imprisonment  due  to  his
    membership in JKNAP. Moreover, Mr K is an active member of JKNAP, which
    may increase any potential threat.' No 'human rights reports' are cited
    in the text or the footnotes. As I understood his submissions,  Mr  Tan
    argued that the absence of citations should diminish the weight which I
    should attach to the entire report.

 7. The report of Dr Wali is a detailed document which seeks to  place  the
    particular circumstances of the appellant in the context  of  Pakistani
    politics. Mr Tan did not question the qualifications of Dr Wali and nor
    do  I.  Dr  Wali  has,  in  the  conclusion  to  his   report,   stated
    categorically that he considers that the appellant  would  be  at  risk
    anywhere in Pakistan on account of his political opinions. Mr Tan makes
    a valid criticism of the expert's failure in parts of the report (other
    parts are heavily referenced) to cite the sources  of  information.  Is
    that failure sufficiently serious for me to  reject  the  report  as  a
    whole and, in particular, its unequivocal conclusions? If I attach less
    weight to the parts of the report which lack citations, there remains a
    significant quantity of  evidence  in  the  report  which  is  properly
    referenced, which Mr Tan did not directly challenge and which indicates
    that the appellant would face a risk on return. I am reminded  also  of
    the relatively low standard of proof in an appeal of this kind. I  have
    concluded that Dr Wali's evidence,  though  in  parts  flawed  for  the
    reasons advanced by Mr Tan, is not entirely vitiated by error such that
    I cannot attach weight to its conclusions.

 8. Mr Tan's second challenge concerned Mr Raja. He asked how it  could  be
    that the appellant, the President of JKNAP in the United Kingdom, would
    be at risk as whilst the party's most senior officer, the chairman,  Mr
    Raja, had been able to visit Pakistan 'unmolested' for several weeks in
    2017. He submitted that it must follow that, if the most  senior  party
    member had not suffered problems, then the appellant would not do so.

 9. Again, Mr Tan's submissions are well made. The appellant did not  offer
    any explanation for the fact that Mr Raja had not  encountered  trouble
    from either  state  or  non-state  actors  during  his  2017  visit  to
    Pakistan. However, the reasons for Mr Raja's untroubled visit  are  not
    clear. The state authorities and Mr Raja's political opponents may have
    had reasons for not challenging such  a  high  profile  member  of  the
    party; it may not necessarily follow that a lower profile member  would
    be equally safe. Moreover, Pakistani politics are notoriously unstable;
    how the state authorities behaved towards an opponent  four  years  ago
    may be an unreliable  indicator  of  how  they  may  respond  in  2021.
    Thirdly, Mr Raja was in Pakistan for a few weeks and then  returned  to
    the United Kingdom . He has, I understand, not been back. It is  likely
    that the Pakistan authorities considered that they were able to monitor
    and contain a political opponent for a limited period of time.  If  the
    appellant returns, it will be to remain indefinitely and  consequently,
    he would pose a different kind of threat.

10. In my opinion, whilst Mr Raja's experiences in Pakistan are part of the
    totality of the evidence, it is important to consider the  profile  and
    circumstances of the appellant himself. Mr Tan did  not  disagree  with
    evidence that that indicates that JKNAP is  now  an  illegal  party  in
    Pakistan (notwithstanding the  First-tier  Tribunal's  observations  at
    [34] (see above)) and  although  the  respondent  raises  valid  points
    regarding Dr Wali's expert opinion those points do  not  undermine  his
    report  entirely;  Dr  Wali's  unequivocal  conclusion   is  that   the
    appellant will be at  real  risk  on  return.  Carefully  weighing  the
    background  material,  the  expert  report  and  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant himself, I have concluded that there are substantial  grounds
    for finding  that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant,  a
    genuinely committed supporter and activist of JKNAP, a  party  outlawed
    in Pakistan, would be at real risk on return. Accordingly, I allow  his
    appeal against the Secretary of State decision on asylum and Article  3
    ECHR grounds.



        Notice of Decision

        The appeal is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds.


        Signed                               Date 27 April 2021
        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

