

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02819/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15 November 2016                       |On 17 November 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     FT
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chakmakjian, instructed by Leonard Cannings
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) we continue the anonymity order made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 21 September 2016
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith which refused the appellant's asylum
    appeal but allowed the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection/Article  3
    grounds.

 3. The ground of challenge here was narrow, relating only to  the  refusal
    of the asylum claim. The parties were in agreement at the hearing as to
    there being an error on a point of law and also as to the re-making  of
    the asylum appeal as allowed.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith found at [39] that  the  appellant  had
    left Eritrea illegally and was of an age that meant that by doing so he
    had avoided military service. Indeed, as [39] indicates, the respondent
    had accepted that to be so.

 5. The judge went on  to  disagree  at  [41]-[45]  with  the  respondent's
    submission that the risk identified in MO (illegal exit-risk on return)
    Eritrea [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC) for  an appellant with this profile was
    no longer made out because of new country information. At  [45],  Judge
    Keith indicated that the new material relied upon by the respondent:

         "... did not provide a sufficient basis to depart  from  the  clear
         findings in MO that the Appellant faced a real risk of serious harm
         so  that  he  was  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  (if  not
         protection as a refugee, because he did not belong to a  particular
         social group, or hold particular political opinions)."

 6. At [52], Judge Keith went on to say:

        "52) For the reason set out above (namely the absence of membership
             of a particular social group or political opinion),  I  do  not
             find that the Appellant meets the requirements of  the  Refugee
             Convention as a "refugee", but I do  find  that  he  meets  the
             criteria   for   subsidiary   humanitarian    protection,    as
             demonstrating that if he were returned to Eritrea, there  would
             be a real risk of suffering serious harm, on the basis  of  the
             case of MO. While I do  not  conclude  that  the  risk  to  the
             Appellant of death is sufficiently certain to engage Article 2,
             I do conclude that the Appellant's removal would breach Article
             3 in this context."

 7. Those comments, in our view, showed a material misreading of  MO  which
    confirmed that illegal departure  from  Eritrea  whilst  of  draft  age
    amounted to an imputed political opinion, thus bringing  the  appellant
    within one of the categories set out in the Refugee Convention. This is
    indicated in the head note of MO at (iv):

         "(iv) The general position adopted in  MA,  that  a  person  of  or
         approaching draft age (i.e. aged 8 or over and still not above  the
         upper age limits for military service, being under 54 for  men  and
         under 47 for women) and not medically  unfit  who  is  accepted  as
         having left Eritrea illegally is reasonably likely to  be  regarded
         with serious hostility on return, is reconfirmed ....

         (v) Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum  seekers
         as such are not generally at real risk of  persecution  or  serious
         harm on return, on present evidence  the  great  majority  of  such
         persons are likely to be perceived as  having  left  illegally  and
         this fact, save for very limited  exceptions,  will  mean  that  on
         return they face a real risk of persecution or serious harm."

 8. As indicated at [45] and [52], the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  clearly
    intended to follow MO. If more were needed, the recent country guidance
    case of MST and Others (national service - risk categories) Eritrea  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC) at paragraphs 8 and 10 of the head note upholds
    paragraphs (iv) and (v) of the head note of MO.

 9. We therefore  found  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    disclosed an error on a point of law in the assessment of  whether  the
    appellant is a refugee  and  set  aside  that  part  of  the  decision.
    Following the reasoning above,  we  found  that  as  someone  who  left
    Eritrea whilst of draft age, the appellant has shown  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm on the basis of imputed political opinion  and  meets  the
    definition of a refugee under the Refugee Convention.

Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the appellant's asylum claim
    discloses an error on a point of law and is set aside.

11. The appeal on asylum grounds is re-made as allowed.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 15 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




