

                                                           [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal no:
PA/02504/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard At Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|on    05.02.2108                         |     on  16.02.2018               |


                                   Before:

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JOHN FREEMAN

                                  Between:

                                 khalid ali
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Althea Radford (counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller,
Oxford)
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Malcolm Parkes), sitting at  Birmingham  on  30  August
    2017, to  a deportation appeal by a  citizen  of  Somalia,  born  1974.
    Permission was given on the appellant's article 3 human rights grounds,
    on the basis that the judge was arguably wrong not  to  take  the  view
    that, if returned, he would have to  live  in  a  camp  for  internally
    displaced persons or the like.

 2. The appellant had come here in 1990, when he was  refused  asylum,  but
    given exceptional leave to remain, and, in 2001, indefinite  leave.  In
    2009 he was  convicted  of  the  attempted  murder  of  a  friend,  and
    sentenced to 16 years' imprisonment. In 2010 he  was  given  notice  of
    intention to deport him, but the  order  was  made  on  1  March  2017,
    presumably at the end of the normal custodial period of  his  sentence,
    taking account of credit given for days on remand.

 3. The judge who granted permission in the Upper Tribunal referred, as did
    Miss Radford, to FY (Somalia) [2017] EWCA Civ 1853, where  the  country
    guidance in MOJ & others  (Return to Mogadishu) (CG)  [2014]  UKUT  442
    (IAC) was discussed,. As in the present case, it was accepted  in  both
    of those that having to  live  on  return  in  a  camp  for  internally
    displaced persons would present an article 3 risk. The question in each
    was whether that was reasonably likely to happen to  the  appellant  in
    question.

 4. The relevant part of the country guidance is set out by Thirlwall LJ at
    paragraph 13 of  FY;  but  I  have  restored  the  Tribunal's  original
    numbering, at paragraphs 407 - 408:

    407.       f.   A person returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
             absence will look to his nuclear family, if he has  one  living
             in the city, for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and
             securing a  livelihood.  Although  a  returnee  may  also  seek
             assistance from his clan members who are not  close  relatives,
             such help is only likely to be forthcoming  for  majority  clan
             members, as minority clans may have little to offer.
          g.  The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has  changed.
             Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms  and
             assistance with access to livelihoods, performing  less  of  a
             protection  function  than  previously.  There  are  no   clan
             militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence,  and  no  clan  based
             discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.
          h.  If it is accepted that a person facing a return  to  Mogadishu
             after a period of absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all
             of the circumstances. These considerations will  include,  but
             are not limited to:
             (i)    circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
             (ii)   length of absence from Mogadishu;
             (iii)  family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
             (iv)   access to financial resources;
             (v)    prospects of securing a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                employment or self employment;
             (vi)   availability of remittances from abroad;
             (vii) means of support during the time  spent  in  the  United
                Kingdom;
             (viii) why his ability to fund the  journey  to  the  West  no
                longer enables an appellant to secure financial support  on
                return.
          Put another way, it will  be  for  the  person  facing  return  to
          Mogadishu to explain why he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the
          economic opportunities that have been produced  by  the  "economic
          boom",  especially  as  there  is  evidence  to  the  effect  that
          returnees are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never
          been away.

    408.      It will, therefore, only be those  with  no  clan  or  family
          support who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and
          who have no real prospect of securing access to a  livelihood  on
          return who will face the  prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
          falling below that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection
          terms.

 5. The Court of Appeal did not introduce any modification of that  country
    guidance: on the other hand, they upheld, as consistent  with  it,  the
    first-tier judge's decision, upheld in turn by the Upper Tribunal, that
    the appellant in FY did face an article 3 risk through not  being  able
    to find  work,  and  so  accommodation,  on  return  to  Mogadishu.  As
    Thirlwall LJ  said  at  24  "...properly  analysed  this  appeal  is  a
    straightforward attack upon findings of fact which led to a  conclusion
    with which the SSHD does not agree". So, regardless of  any  similarity
    with FY on the facts, this case still has to be decided on the  country
    guidance in MOJ & others .

 6. As already seen, the appellant's likely situation in Mogadishu was  the
    point on which permission was  given.  The  grounds  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal also included a challenge to the judge's remark  at  28  about
    finding it difficult to see how the writer of the OASys report [AB  50]
    had been able to assess him as presenting a low risk of serious harm to
    others, either in the community or in  custody,  at  a  time  when  his
    behaviour in the community had not been tested. As Miss Radford pointed
    out, the writer had already made allowances for this difficulty, at  s.
    10.8 of their report [AB 27].

 7. The reason why in my view this point is not material is  that,  as  the
    judge also noted  at  27,  the  OASys  writer  had  also  assessed  the
    appellant as presenting a high risk to a known  adult,  presumably  his
    victim, when in the community. This was something the judge  was  fully
    entitled to take into account, with other relevant factors, as she  did
    at 30, in reaching his decision that the appellant had not rebutted the
    presumption raised by s. 72,  and  so  was  excluded  from  refugee  or
    humanitarian protection. There is nothing in  IH  (s.72;  'Particularly
    Serious Crime') Eritrea [2009] UKAIT 00012 to forbid finding someone  a
    danger to the community on the basis of a high risk to  one  member  of
    it.

 8. It follows that the sole issue before  me  is  whether  the  judge  was
    wrong, in the light of MOJ & others , and the facts of this appellant's
    case, in deciding that he was not  entitled  to  article  3  protection
    either. The judge set out the main basis for his  conclusions  on  this
    very concisely at 41:

       The Appellant may not be familiar with the working of the clan system
       in Somalia but that is the country of his birth and  he  lived  there
       till he was 16 [so] it would be surprising that he has no ability  to
       locate their support if needed. Given the finding that the  Appellant
       can reasonably be expected to find work and  to  support  himself  he
       does not come within the categories of risk in  Somalia  and  I  find
       that he is not in need of international protection.

 9. The first challenge to these findings is based on what was said in  MOJ
    & others at 152, under the heading 'Significance of  clan  membership':
    the Tribunal begin, quoting one of the 'country  experts'  before  them
    (Dr Hoehne), and going on to refer to the other

           "Moreover, clan protection does not function automatically.  ...
           Clans support and protection is also sometimes dependent on  the
           "value" a clan members has for the community. If  a  person  is,
           for instance, very poor, a drug addict, a notorious criminal  or
           a prostitute, relatives  will  not  or  only  unwillingly  offer
           support and protection."

       That evidence is consistent with the view offered by Dr Mullen of the
       declining significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  and  the
       analysis that clan membership is now more relevant to  the  issue  of
       social support rather than protection.

10. It is of course social support, rather than protection,  which  is  the
    relevant point in this case;  and  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to rely on the appellant's membership of  a  sub-clan  of  the
    majority Darod clan in deciding whether or not he would  get  it.  Miss
    Radford suggested that he might found himself excluded  from  it  as  a
    'notorious criminal'; but she was unable to refer me to any evidence as
    to the clan membership of the appellant's victim, without which  it  is
    hard to say that he would be regarded in  this  light  by  his  fellow-
    clansmen.

11. Miss Radford's next point was on MOJ & others at paragraphs 342 - 343:

   342. It follows from this that for a returnee to Mogadishu  today,  clan
        membership is not a potential risk factor but  something  which  is
        relevant to the  extent  to  which  he  will  be  able  to  receive
        assistance in re-establishing himself on return, especially  if  he
        has no close relatives to turn to upon arrival. [at this point  the
        Tribunal quote another of the 'country experts', Ms Harper]
   343. We understand that to mean that while there was no  guarantee  that
        help would be available from clan members outside the close  family
        network of a returnee, at least there is more likelihood of such  a
        request being accommodated than if made to those unconnected by the
        bond of clan membership. That  is,  perhaps,  wholly  unsurprising.
        However, it should be noted that in the UNHCR January  2014  report
        the view was  expressed  that  a  returnee  might  be  rather  more
        confident of receiving help from his clan, if not a  minority  clan
        member ...

12. It was the view taken by UNHCR which  was  reflected  in  the  guidance
    given at points (f) and (g) (see 4). Clan  support  was  open  to  this
    appellant, as a majority clan member: since he has no nuclear family or
    close relations in Mogadishu, what is required is 'careful  assessment'
    in the light of the factors at (h).

13. The first factor which Miss Radford suggested had gone unconsidered was
    (ii), the length of time the appellant had been away from Mogadishu. It
    goes without saying that the very experienced judge had been well aware
    of this: see the concise history he gave  at  17;  but  Miss  Radford's
    complaint is that he did not take account of it in  his  assessment  of
    the appellant's situation on return.

14. I do not regard this as tenable, in view of the  way  the  judge  dealt
    with the appellant's situation  at  41  (see  8).  The  judge  reminded
    himself that the appellant had been here since he was 16, and, if  only
    because he gave evidence before him, must have been well aware that  he
    was now in his 40s. That was the context in which the  judge  made  his
    finding on clan support.

15. Miss Radford's other point on the judge's conclusions at  41  was  that
    his words "... surprising that he has no ability to locate clan support
    if needed." do not equate to a finding that there was no real  risk  of
    his not getting it. While that would certainly have been the  best  way
    of putting what obviously was the judge's conclusion on this  point,  I
    regard the objection to the way he did so as semantic, rather  than  of
    any real significance.

16. At this stage Miss Radford went on to the judge's  findings  about  the
    appellant being able to get work on return to Somalia.  These  came  at
    39:

       The real question from MOJ turns on the Appellant's ability  to  gain
       employment. To  that  end  the  Appellant  has  obtained  skills  and
       qualifications whilst in prison and has worked in the UK in a  number
       of jobs. The evidence  provided  in  the  various  reports  does  not
       undermine the final point from MOJ that the  Appellant  has  to  show
       that he would be unable to access employment, The evidence  does  not
       show he would be unable to do so. There is nothing in the evidence to
       suggest that an individual in the Appellant's situation would need to
       be able to speak Somali, or that the Appellant has no ability at  all
       in that language.

17. The judge was of course right in  what  he  said  about  the  effective
    burden of proof on this point: see the last part of  the guidance  from
    MOJ & others from paragraph 407, at 4, which appears, more conveniently
    for  reference  purposes,  at  (x)  of  the  judicial  head-note.  Miss
    Radford's complaint was that he did not take account of the fact  that,
    by this time, the appellant has been in prison and out of work for  the
    last nine years. However, the judge's findings at 39 expressly refer to
    the appellant's time in prison, and the skills  and  qualifications  he
    has (to his credit) obtained  while  there.  It  cannot  reasonably  be
    suggested that he did not have this period well in mind in reaching his
    conclusions.

18. Though I have taken account  of  Mr  Clarke's  helpful  submissions  in
    reaching my conclusions, there is no need to set them out here,  beyond
    referring to the detailed conclusions in MOJ &  others  at  349  -  352
    which formed the basis for what appears in the country  guidance  about
    the 'economic boom' and  the  large  numbers  of  people  returning  to
    Mogadishu.

19. In reply, Miss Radford objected that, contrary to the advantages in the
    employment market for those returning, identified by  the  respondent's
    'country expert' (Dr Mullen) at  351, there was nothing  to  show  that
    this appellant, with only low-level prison courses to his  name,  would
    be seen on return as better educated or more resourceful than those who
    had remained in Somalia.

20. However, in the end the question whether this appellant would  be  able
    to support himself, with whatever help he could get, was  one  of  fact
    for the judge (who referred accurately to this appellant's  skills  and
    experience at 39), just as in FY. There the first-tier judge had  found
    in that appellant's favour, and at 19 Thirlwall LJ said this

       It is uncontroversial to observe that having a criminal  record  does
       not make it easier to get work.  ... It is a negative factor.

21. However, in the prevailing circumstances in Somalia, and short  of  any
    significant evidence to show that he would be regarded as a  'notorious
    criminal' there (as to which see 10);  or,  still  less,  that  PNC/CRB
    records would be available to prospective employers there, as  here,  I
    do not think the country guidance or that authority obliged  the  judge
    in this case to do more than bear this appellant's record in  mind,  as
    he clearly did. The result is that there was no material error  of  law
    on the part of the judge.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
