

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/02224/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 March 2018                     |                  On 1 May 2018      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                   MRS T M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Popal
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1982.  She appealed against
    a decision of the Secretary of State made on 16 February 2017 to refuse
    her application for asylum.

 2. The basis of her claim is that she fears she will be killed by her  ex-
    husband who wished to gain custody of her son  born  in  2006.  He  has
    connections  throughout  her  home  region  of  Tamil  Nadu.   She  was
    seriously assaulted in 2009.  Members of her family were threatened and
    assaulted.


 3. Her claim was not believed.  In summary, there was no evidence such  as
    statements and medical reports to support the claim  of  the  assaults.
    It was not credible had she been under surveillance as she claimed that
    she would have been able to travel to live with relatives elsewhere  in
    Tamil Nadu without her ex-husband knowing of it.  Also, she was able to
    live there for a time untroubled and her child continued to do so.  Her
    claim, having come to the UK, that she had moved address and  abandoned
    her studies because she had been told her address in  London  had  been
    discovered by her ex-husband was also not believed.


 4. Further, she had delayed for several years before claiming asylum.  Her
    claim  that  she  had  been  given  bad  advice  by  her   then   legal
    representative was not believed.


 5. She appealed.


    First tier hearing


 6. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 2  October  2017  at  which  the
    appellant and another witness gave oral evidence, Judge of  the  First-
    Tier Oliver dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.


 7. His findings are at paragraphs 32-35.  He did not believe the  account.
    In summary, no supporting documents or statements  had  been  submitted
    from family members; her ex-husband having, she claimed, been  able  to
    find her address in east London it was surprising he was  not  able  to
    find the address she moved to in west London; he had also  been  unable
    to locate her son in India.  Further, it was  not  credible  she  would
    have left her son in India if she feared he would be discovered by him,
    particularly if he had powerful connections, a matter which she had not
    provided evidence of.


 8. In addition there was no reason to believe  that  if  her  ex-husband's
    main interest was to have an heir he would not have used his power  and
    resources to find another partner to provide that need.


 9. The judge found that the appellant would not be a lone woman on return.
     She has family support.


10. Finally, in brief consideration of human rights the  judge  found  that
    the appellant had not established family life here sufficient to engage
    article 8. Also he placed little weight on any private life established
    while her immigration status was precarious.


11. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  29
    December 2017.


    Error of law hearing


12. At the error of law hearing before me Miss Popal's  point was that  the
    judge had made no reference to a psychiatric report dated 28 March 2017
    from a Consultant  Psychiatrist  which  indicated  that  the  appellant
    suffers from a severe depressive illness and that if she faced  removal
    "the risk of suicide will increase dramatically." The medical  evidence
    gave support to her claim to have been a victim  of  domestic  violence
    and the effect that traumatic experience is making on her mental state.


13. Mr Nath's response was that the  judge  had  given  sound  reasons  for
    finding the account not credible and that she would not be a lone woman
    if returned.   He  questioned  whether  consideration  of  the  medical
    evidence could have made any difference.


    Consideration


14. In considering this matter I find  that  the  decision  shows  material
    error of law.


15. The judge in his analysis of the asylum and human right claim  gave  no
    consideration to the medical evidence that was before him.  Indeed,  he
    made no reference to it whatsoever in his decision.


16. The main item is by Dr Adefope who is described as "Specialty Dr to  Dr
    S Nauroze,  Consultant  Psychiatrist",  Ealing  Crisis  Assessment  and
    Treatment Team, West London Mental Health NHS Trust  (28  March  2017).
    It is headed "Confidential Psychiatric Report" but  is  more  a  letter
    than a report.


17. Criticisms can be made of the letter.  It is  not  indicated  what  the
    writer's  qualifications  and  experience  are.   Nor  whether  he  has
    personally seen the appellant or been involved in her  treatment.   The
    normal diagnostic criteria have not been shown.


18. Nevertheless, the letter does indicate  that  the  appellant  has  been
    treated for many months for a depressive illness by her GP and had been
    referred for specialist treatment  "due  to  the  lack  of  significant
    improvement in her mental health".


19. She is being treated with "high dose anti-depressant medication".


20. The doctor states that her illness has been "precipitated by her asylum
    and immigration issue".  He states  "She  remains  very  frightened  to
    return to India because she remains convinced that her ex-husband  will
    find her and kill her." The  doctor  gives  the  opinion  that  she  is
    "suffering from a severe depressive illness from which  she  is  making
    limited recovery because of her fear of being deported back to  India".
    The doctor adds that he is "very concerned" that if  her  appeal  fails
    and "the  threat  of  deportation  becomes  real,  she  will  suffer  a
    significant deterioration in her mood and  the  risk  of  suicide  will
    increase dramatically". He  ends  by  stating  that  it  is  of  "vital
    importance that her mental health situation is strongly  considered  in
    any decision making about her asylum application appeal."


21.  In failing to give consideration to material evidence and give it what
    weight he considered appropriate, the judge  erred.  Such  should  have
    included in the context of the asylum claim,  as  Ms  Popal  submitted,
    whether the medical letter was capable of  supporting  the  appellant's
    claim of past events.


22. I would add that the appellant is a "vulnerable adult"  as  defined  in
    the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010.  Such may also have
    relevance as to how her evidence given at the hearing was assessed.


23. Nowhere is it recorded in the decision that the judge was alert to  the
    fact that the appellant was vulnerable (per para 15 of the Guidance).


24. I note also AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 in  which  the  court
    stated (at [30]) that failure to follow the guidance (and the  Practice
    Direction "First-Tier and Upper Tribunal Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
    Sensitive Witnesses" issued by the Senior President in 2008) "will most
    likely be a material error of law."


25. In light of the errors the decision cannot stand and the case  requires
    to be heard again.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of  the
case is such that it is appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and of Practice Statement 7.2  to
remit the case for an entirely fresh  hearing  before  a  judge  other  than
Judge M R Oliver. No findings stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  members  of  their  family.   The  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

