
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02042/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 11th July 2019                    |On 19th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     HE
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Alis, heard on 12th April 2019, and  promulgated  on  16th  April
    2019.  In the determination, the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia, and was  born  on  1st  January
    1998.  She appealed against a decision of the  Respondent,  dated  29th
    January 2019, refusing her application for asylum and for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she fled Ethiopia  on  her
    own and travelled to Sudan.  Her father had opposed the government.  He
    had been asked to hand over his land.  This land he had inherited  from
    his father  and  grandfather.   He  refused.   The  soldiers  from  the
    government began firing shots.  One of the shots killed her uncle.  Her
    father killed one of the government officials who  had  come  onto  the
    land.  Her father then fled.  The Appellant's mother also left with the
    remaining children.  The Appellant did not now know whether her  father
    had been involved in politics.  She knew very  little.   Her  relatives
    advised her to go to Sudan.  She  fled  to  Sudan.   She  worked  as  a
    housemaid there for seven years.  She was forced to do this work.   The
    money she was paid was collected by the agent on a monthly basis.  When
    she left she was given  3,000  guineas.   She  believed  that  she  was
    exploited whilst working in Sudan.  This was subsequently confirmed  by
    the competent authority who concluded that the  Appellant  had  been  a
    victim of human trafficking (see the judge's determination at paragraph
    30).  In Sudan also, the Appellant was raped.  She fell pregnant.   She
    gave birth to her daughter on 8th February 2016.   When  she  left  and
    travelled through Italy and France she did not claim asylum there.  She
    now fears return to Ethiopia.  She fears that she will be re-trafficked
    (see paragraph 35  of  the  determination).   Moreover,  she  would  be
    returning as a single parent with no qualifications and one would  find
    it difficult to support herself and a child.  She would be at risk  not
    only of domestic servitude but also of sexual exploitation.  She  would
    also be forced to have her daughter circumcised.  She herself had  been
    circumcised as a child (paragraph 35).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed that in assessing the Appellant's credibility he had
    taken into account that she was 10 years of age when she left Ethiopia.
     This was accepted by the Respondent Secretary of State.  Also accepted
    by the Respondent Secretary of State was the fact that there  had  been
    previous concession that the Appellant  had  been  trafficked  in  both
    Sudan and Libya by being required to work as a "modern day slave"  (see
    paragraph 56 of the determination).  Nevertheless, the judge  concluded
    that  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  been  trafficked  did   not
    necessarily mean that she would be at risk.  This is because "there are
    significant steps being taken to address the issue and I do not  accept
    that returning this Appellant, even as a single mother, would mean that
    there is a heightened risk  of  trafficking.   The  evidence  does  not
    support this argument" (paragraph 75).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the  judge's  reliance  on  a  US
    State  Department  Report  (at  paragraph  72  of  his  decision)   was
    characterised as "post-hearing" research.  It  is  true  that  this  US
    Report was in the Appellant's bundle.  The judge had himself  correctly
    identified it at paragraph 71  of  the  determination.   Moreover,  the
    Appellant's bundle made it clear that it was an abstract from a  report
    that dealt with trafficking in various countries.  However,  the  judge
    then proceeding to look at this on the basis of "post-hearing" research
    meant that the Appellant had not been given the chance to comment  upon
    this, and this amounted to a procedural unfairness  to  the  Appellant.
    Second, the judge was wrong to have considered that, in  examining  the
    four tiers of trafficking risks, the judge had regard to the fact  that
    Ethiopia was ay tier 2, just as Iceland and Ireland  were,  because  an
    attempt to equate the position in Ethiopia with  that  in  Iceland  and
    Ireland was an irrelevance as far as the Appellant was concerned.   She
    was not claiming to be at risk in either of these other  two  countries
    but only to be at risk in Ethiopia.

 7. For his part, Mr Bates, appearing on behalf of the Respondent Secretary
    of State, stated that the judge's engagement in "post-hearing" research
    did not amount to an error of law because what he was doing was  simply
    looking at a document that the  Appellant  had  herself  put  into  the
    proceedings at page 99 of the Appellant's bundle.  The  difficulty  was
    that this was simply an extract.  What the judge had set out to do  was
    to examine it more fully.  This he was entitled to do in the privacy of
    his chambers by undertaking his own research.  Secondly, the judge  was
    entitled to conclude that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  in
    Ethiopia.  This is because the Appellant had not been  trafficked  from
    Ethiopia.  The evidence shows that she had been trafficked from  Sudan.
    This was a third country.  The return now was to Ethiopia.   The  judge
    had concluded that "there are significant steps being taken to  address
    the issue" in Ethiopia (paragraph 75).  On the evidence, the judge  was
    entitled to come to this conclusion.  Third,  the  Appellant  had  been
    trafficked as a 10 year old.  She was now returning as an  adult.   She
    would be a person who was altogether much more aware of the  risks  and
    would be able to protect steps to guard herself against the risk of re-
    trafficking.  Fourth, the suggestion that her child may be  subject  to
    FGM was not in the original grounds.  It was asserted subsequently  and
    was not properly argued.

 8. In reply, Mr  Wood  submitted  that  he  had  himself  represented  the
    Appellant at the hearing below.  He can quite  categorically  say  that
    there was evidence, and submissions made by  him  before  the  Tribunal
    below, that the Appellant was trafficked in Ethiopia, because there was
    complicity by her parents  in  enabling  her  to  leave  that  country.
    Otherwise, it would not be possible for a 10 year old to leave Ethiopia
    and go to Sudan.  The judge makes a passing reference to this  when  he
    observes that "she went on to explain she was sent away because of fear
    she could be targeted as the eldest child ..." (paragraph  61).   That,
    submitted Mr Bates, was a reference to the parents  sending  the  child
    away themselves.  If the Appellant were now to be returned to Ethiopia,
    she could not expect any help from her parents who had themselves  been
    instrumental in despatching her  away  from  Ethiopia.   The  objective
    evidence showed that in  Ethiopia  there  was  a  practice  of  parents
    actually being complicit in the trafficking of their own children.

Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, although  it  is  a  case
    that I do not accept, notwithstanding Mr  Wood's  valiant  attempts  to
    persuade me otherwise, that the judge's undertaking of a "post-hearing"
    research was something that amounted to  procedural  unfairness,  I  do
    find that there was a failure to factor in the modern slavery component
    of the claim by the Appellant into her present condition, where she was
    with a child, having been raped in Libya, and would be facing return to
    Ethiopia.  The reason why there is nothing in the first  point  of  the
    judge having undertaken "post-hearing" research  is  that  this  was  a
    report that the  Appellant  had  herself  put  into  issue  before  the
    Tribunal and it was only to the judge's credit that he  had  made  time
    available to undertake a more fulsome research into this report with  a
    view to understanding what it meant to place Ethiopia in  "tier  2"  of
    the four categories of risks.

10. However, there is substance in Mr Wood's submission that the  Appellant
    had been trafficked from Ethiopia because there was complicity in  this
    on the part of her parents.  Ethiopia is a source country.   There  are
    scarce economic opportunities in that country.  There is dire  poverty.
    Families compel their children to leave.  As the grounds of application
    made clear "families  continue  to  play  a  major  role  in  financing
    irregular migration, and may force  or  coerce  their  children  to  go
    abroad or to urban areas in Ethiopia for employment".  The ground  made
    clear  that  "girls  from  Ethiopia's  impoverished  rural  areas   are
    exploited in domestic servitude and commercial sex within  the  country
    ...".  But even if this is not so, the judge's  acceptance  that  there
    was a problem in Ethiopia meant that this had to be factored  into  the
    wider aspect of the claim, namely, that the Appellant was a  victim  of
    human trafficking, who was now a lone parent with a small child.

11. The judge observes (at paragraph 75) that "whilst I accept there is  an
    ongoing problem in Ethiopia, I am satisfied that there are  significant
    steps being taken to address the issue ..." (paragraph  75).   However,
    in this regard, what the judge did was to say that he was not satisfied
    that this "would mean that there is a heightened risk  of  trafficking"
    (paragraph 75).  The requirement that there be a "heightened  risk"  is
    one that is not commensurate  with  the  requirements  of  the  law  in
    refugee cases.

12. Second, given the judge's acceptance (at paragraph 15) that  there  was
    evidence from a competent authority in the UK that the Appellant was  a
    victim of modern slavery who had been trafficked in  Sudan,  the  judge
    ought (at paragraph 56)  to  have  factored  into  the  matrix  of  the
    considerations there that the Appellant  as  a  victim  of  modern  day
    slavery, was now with a child, as a result  of  having  been  raped  in
    Libya.

13.  The  judge  only  states  that  "in  assessing  the  credibility   and
    reliability of the Appellant's evidence, I have taken into account that
    she was 10 years of age ..." and  that  she  had  been  trafficked  (at
    paragraph 56).  There is no account there taken of the  fact  that  the
    Appellant is now with a child.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge  Alis,
    pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement.

15. An anonymity direction is made.

16. This appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th August 2019





