
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02425/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th September 2018                        |On 12th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                     E M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Jaquiss (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  his  protection
    claim was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet ("the judge") in
    a  decision  promulgated  on  29th  May  2018.   The  judge  found  the
    appellant's  evidence  and  that  of  his  spouse  wholly  lacking   in
    credibility and concluded that the appellant would not be  at  risk  of
    persecution or ill-treatment on return.  He also found that there  were
    no very significant obstacles to integration into Pakistan  on  return,
    for the purposes of the Immigration Rules ("the rules"), and that there
    were no exceptional circumstances in the  case,  meriting  leave  under
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, outside the Rules.

2.   In grounds of appeal, it was contended that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    credibility assessment.  There was no engagement with  the  appellant's
    case that he had been living unlawfully in the United Kingdom and  that
    his wife and youngest child had been kidnapped and held captive by loan
    sharks.  His other children had fled and he was later  told  that  they
    were in Dubai.  In those circumstances, it was entirely to be  expected
    that he and his wife would be unable to give precise details  of  their
    whereabouts.  The apparent inconsistency between the appellant's  claim
    that he had no family in Pakistan and his  evidence,  later,  that  his
    mother and seven siblings lived there required the  judge  to  consider
    the appellant's specific evidence that there had been family conflicts,
    as a result of which he had no contact with any members since coming to
    the United Kingdom in 2005.  The adverse inference drawn by  the  judge
    was unwarranted as it was  understandable  that  the  appellant  should
    regard himself as having no family in Pakistan.  So far as the date  of
    kidnap was concerned, dates of 2009 and 2010 were given but, again, the
    judge erred in drawing an adverse inference  without  considering  that
    the events described by the appellant occurred between eight  and  nine
    years ago.

3.   The judge also erred in summarising the  evidence  about  the  loan  or
    repayment agreement as equivocal.  There was no  proper  basis  for  an
    adverse inference here either.  The judge's finding that  the  evidence
    did not include a loan agreement document failed to take  into  account
    that the people the appellant described and feared  would  act  outside
    the law and so the absence  of  full  documentation  was  unsurprising.
    Overall, the adverse finding was not properly supported by adequate  or
    sustainable reasons.

4.   The unsafe credibility finding bore  on  the  judge's  conclusion  that
    there were no significant obstacles to integration and  no  exceptional
    circumstances justifying leave  outside  the  rules.   The  credibility
    finding was central to the outcome.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 21 June 2018.  There  was  no  Rule
    24 response from the respondent.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Ms Jaquiss said that ground 2 stood or fell with ground  1.   The  loan
    shark aspect of the case was relevant to  obstacles  to  reintegration.
    Paragraph 38 of the decision was key as it was  there  that  the  brief
    findings on credibility appeared.  The appellant's case was that  these
    were not sufficiently reasoned.

7.   The judge found that the appellant and his wife  were  vague  in  their
    evidence regarding the whereabouts of their seven other  children.   He
    did not explain how they were vague and his  finding  appeared  not  to
    take account of the appellant's evidence that he did not know where his
    children were and so, inevitably, what he  said  of  their  whereabouts
    would be vague.  Paragraph 15 of the decision summarised  the  evidence
    the judge heard and contained a clear account that  the  appellant  did
    not know where the seven elder children were, although he thought  they
    were in Dubai in view of he was told.  So far as  the  account  of  the
    presence of family members in Pakistan was concerned, paragraph  17  of
    the decision  recounted  the  appellant's  evidence  about  this.   The
    appellant had no contact with his family after he left for  the  United
    Kingdom and there were conflicts.  The judge might have  rejected  that
    explanation for what appeared to be an  earlier,  inconsistent  account
    that he had no family in Pakistan but the  decision  appeared  to  show
    that the judge had not considered the explanation or dealt with it.

8.   The appellant accepted that there was a difference between the  account
    given in the screening interview and the later account,  regarding  the
    date on which his wife  and  children  were  kidnapped.   He  corrected
    himself in the later account.  The  important  point  was  whether  the
    event took place or not.  The appellant was in the  United  Kingdom  at
    the time and not present in Pakistan when the events unfolded.

9.   The  judge  did  not  explain  how  the  evidence  regarding  the  loan
    agreement or repayment agreement was equivocal.  At paragraph 20 of the
    decision, the judge summarised the evidence regarding the loan and  the
    repayment  document.   Loan  sharks  would  hardly  prepare  a   formal
    agreement as they acted outside the law.  The document at  page  11  of
    the appellant's bundle recorded the terms of  repayment.   It  was  not
    sufficient for the judge merely to say that the evidence was equivocal.
     What was required was an explanation of how the appellant  equivocated
    in his evidence.

10.  So far  as  ground  2  was  concerned,  the  assessment  of  the  claim
    regarding loan sharks bore directly on whether there  were  significant
    obstacles to integration on return or not.

11.  Mr Avery said that the decision  was  brief  but  that  may  well  have
    reflected the lack of strength in the appellant's case.  The key points
    were the claimed loan and the difference in the evidence regarding  the
    date of the claimed kidnap.  There was a significant discrepancy there,
    of a year.  Kidnapping was a serious event, and the appellant might  be
    expected to get the date right.  The judge  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the difference cast doubt on  the  appellant's  credibility.   The
    judge's comments on the nature of the loan were accurate and  reflected
    the evidence.  The details were very  sparse  regarding  what  happened
    with the loan and the judge was entitled to  find  that  this  was,  of
    itself, an adverse factor.   The  lack  of  detail  reflected  how  the
    evidence emerged and the  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    protection claim was not made out.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12.  The judge's reasoning appears in paragraphs 38 and 39 of the  decision.
      Those  paragraphs  were  preceded  by  a  summary  of  the  evidence.
    Paragraph 38 sets out the adverse findings on the  vagueness  regarding
    the whereabouts of the older children, the difference in  the  accounts
    about family members in Pakistan and the different dates regarding  his
    wife's alleged detention and torture.  In relation  to  each  of  these
    aspects, the appellant  provided  an  explanation.   The  grounds  draw
    attention to what he said and Ms Jaquiss developed  the  case  in  oral
    submissions.   What  is  missing  from  paragraph  38  is  the  judge's
    engagement with each explanation,  although  it  is  apparent  that  he
    disbelieved the account overall. I accept Ms Jaquiss's submission  that
    the finding that the alleged loan or repayment agreement was  equivocal
    required some elaboration, so that the due weight to be  given  to  the
    document might be clear.

13.  Paragraph 39 deals with obstacles to integration on return.  The  judge
    records part of the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  notes  the
    presence of family members in Pakistan, the  state  of  health  of  the
    appellant and his  wife  and  the  circumstances  of  their  son  here.
    However, if the adverse finding regarding the claimed  risk  from  loan
    sharks is  undermined,  so  too  is  the  finding  that  there  are  no
    significant obstacles to integration.

14.  In summary, I conclude that the grounds  are  made  out  and  that  the
    decision contains a material error of law.  The decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside and must be remade.  In a  short  discussion
    regarding the  appropriate  venue,  both  representatives  agreed  that
    extensive fact finding will be required and the credibility  assessment
    remade.   In  these  circumstances,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  the
    appropriate venue.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It will be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross, before a  judge  other  than  Judge
Sweet.  The hearing will be de novo and no findings of fact are preserved.


Signed                                       Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell         8th October 2018


ANONYMITY

I make a direction prohibiting the identification of the  appellant  or  any
member of his family during these proceedings.  This direction,  made  under
Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, shall  remain
in force until set aside or varied by a Court or Tribunal.


Signed                                       Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell         8th October 2018

