
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02810/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 January 2018                     |On 07 February 2018                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JLD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U. Dirie, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury, promulgated on 11 September  2017,
    in which she dismissed JLD's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse a grant of asylum,  but  allowed  his  appeal  under
    Article 3 ECHR.

 2. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Secretary  of  State  as
    the Respondent, and to JLD as the Appellant, reflecting their positions
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "However  what  appears  difficult  to  reconcile  is  findings  of
         credibility and the conclusions upon risk  on  return.   The  judge
         rejected the notion that the Appellant would have been sought as  a
         recruit for Boko Haram and appears to have  rejected  the  prospect
         that he was wanted by the authorities or police for  supposed  Boko
         Haram activities.  On the other hand he appears to accept that  the
         reports support the Appellant's suggestion that he was detained and
         beaten by the police.  So far as I can see the reason given by  the
         Appellant for his ill treatment at the hands of the authorities was
         the supposed activities.  There is  an  arguable  inconsistency  in
         that matter which produces the somewhat inconsistent  finding  that
         the Appellant is not at risk for GCreason  (sic)  but  is  at  risk
         under A3."


 5. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.

Submissions

 6. Mr. Avery relied on the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that the Judge
    had made a classic mistake by  not  considering  the  evidence  in  the
    round.  She had made discrete findings, and had not considered these in
    the light of  her  other  findings.   She  had  considered  the  expert
    reports, but had not considered them alongside her other findings.  She
    had not addressed why the Appellant had been detained  by  the  police,
    given that she had not accepted that he had had any contact  with  Boko
    Haram, for good reasons.  There was no finding as to why the  Appellant
    would be of interest to the police if it was not  due  to  Boko  Haram.
    She found that the Appellant was wanted by the police on the  basis  of
    the reports, but also found that he was not credible.  She accepted the
    evidence before her that it was unlikely that  Boko  Haram  would  have
    tried to recruit him in the first place.

 7. In response Ms Dirie submitted that, on the face of it, it may seem  to
    be a strange decision but, on the evidence before her,  the  Judge  was
    properly  entitled  to  come  to  these  findings.   The  Judge  had  a
    psychiatric report and a scarring report before her.  I was referred to
    A9 of the psychiatric report where it was stated that  the  scars  came
    from mistreatment by the authorities not from Boko  Haram.   The  scars
    were highly consistent with mistreatment.  I was referred  to  [27]  of
    the decision - this was another part of the evidence which enabled  the
    Judge to make her findings.

 8. Ms Dirie then referred to the authentication report.  It dealt with the
    summons at A65 and A66.  The witness's expertise in  Cameroon  was  not
    challenged.  The expert had been through each element  of  the  summons
    when considering whether or not it was authentic.  The stamps were also
    considered.  The second summons was also considered  to  be  authentic.
    The Judge was entitled to find that the documents  were  authentic  and
    that they showed that the Appellant was wanted.  They did not say  what
    he was wanted for, but he was a wanted man.

 9. I was referred to [31] of the decision.  The Judge perhaps did not find
    that the Appellant was wanted for the reason claimed, but she  accepted
    that he suffered ill treatment and harm.  Therefore she did  not  allow
    the appeal under the Refugee Convention but under Article 3.  She found
    that the Appellant had been mistreated by the authorities, irrespective
    of the attribution for this mistreatment.  At [43] paragraph  339K  was
    being applied, although not expressly stated.  Past persecution was  an
    indication of future persecution.  I was referred to  Demirkaya  [1999]
    EWCA Civ 1654.  The Judge had given reasons.  She had considered all of
    the evidence before her.  I was referred to Mukarkar  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1045.  There was nothing to stop the Judge from coming to her findings,
    she was entitled to come to them.

10. Ms Dirie referred to [3] of the grounds of  appeal.   A  complaint  had
    been made by the Appellant to his previous solicitors  regarding  their
    conduct of the appeal.   The  previous  decision  had  been  set  aside
    because  of   poor   representation   by   the   Appellant's   previous
    representations.

11. In response  Mr.  Avery  submitted  that  the  reports  only  took  the
    Appellant so far.  The scarring report was evidence that the  Appellant
    had been mistreated, but it was not evidence of by  whom  he  had  been
    mistreated.  The same problem lay with  the  psychiatric  report.   The
    authentication report said on the face of it that  the  documents  were
    not forgeries, but the report did not address whether they  could  have
    been obtained  through  bribery.   The  fact  that  a  document  looked
    authentic did not necessarily mean that it was authentic.

12. The Judge had compartmentalised the evidence.  She had  not  considered
    it in the round with her credibility findings, particularly in relation
    to Boko Haram.  These findings should have fed into her  assessment  of
    whether or not he had been detained by the police.  Her failure to take
    into account her credibility findings  rendered  the  decision  unsafe.
    The crux of the problem was that she had failed to  take  the  evidence
    into account in the round.

Error of law

13. The Judge first considers the  expert  reports,  of  which  there  were
    three, a scarring report, a psychiatric report, and a report  assessing
    the police summons.  She found that the  scarring  report  "lends  some
    corroborative weight  to  the  Appellant's  account"  [26].   At  [28],
    relating to the medical reports, she states:


         "I find therefore on the lower standard of  proof  that  these  two
         reports present compelling evidence that the Appellant was in  fact
         detained and tortured in the way he describes."


14. The Judge then turns to the report assessing the  police  summons.   At
    [29], in reliance on the report, she finds that "the  summons,  on  the
    lower standard of proof, are  genuine".   At  [30]  she  addresses  the
    Respondent's submissions regarding inconsistencies in  the  Appellant's
    evidence.  The Judge attributes these to the Appellant's PTSD  and  the
    issues regarding the witness  statement  which  she  accepts  had  been
    prepared without the assistance of an interpreter.  At [31] she states:


         "Given the totality of the evidence put before me  I  find  on  the
         lower standard of proof that this Appellant is wanted by the  state
         authorities and has suffered from torture and ill treatment.   This
         has been evidenced by the various expert reports I have referred to
         above.  I have no reason to doubt the authenticity  of  the  police
         summons."


15. The Judge concludes  in  reliance  on  the  expert  evidence  that  the
    Appellant is wanted by  the  state  authorities  prior  to  giving  any
    consideration to the Appellant's own evidence.  She attaches no  weight
    to  the  Respondent's  concerns  regarding   inconsistencies   in   the
    Appellant's evidence.

16. At [32] the  Judge  considers  the  Respondent's  submission  that  the
    Appellant would not have been able to leave Cameroon if he  was  wanted
    by the police.  She states that she has  not  been  provided  with  any
    evidence that this is the case, and then states:


         "What I have been presented with is seemingly authentic and genuine
         police summons,  demonstrating  their  on-going  interest  in  this
         Appellant."


17. Although nothing was made of it at the hearing, the  Judge  appears  to
    introduce a note of doubt  here  when  stating  that  the  summons  are
    "seemingly" authentic and genuine.  However, she gives  no  reason  for
    this.  At [33] she finds that there is no evidence to suggest that  the
    injuries  were  self-inflicted,  or  had  arisen  through   every   day
    activities.

18. Accordingly at the end of her assessment of the expert  reports  alone,
    the Judge has already found that the Appellant was "wanted by the state
    authorities and has suffered from torture and ill treatment".  She  has
    not made any express finding as to who tortured him or at  whose  hands
    he suffered ill-treatment save to state that the  medical  reports  are
    "compelling evidence" that he was detained and tortured "in the way  he
    describes" [28].

19. At [34] the Judge turns to consider the Appellant's own evidence.   She
    considers his claim to have encountered Boko Haram, and to be  regarded
    by the state authorities as having links with Boko Haram.  She states:


         "What however the Appellant has failed to do is  establish  on  the
         lower standard of proof that he had the encounter with  Boko  Haram
         as claimed or that he is regarded as having Boko Haram links by the
         state authorities.  I cannot  discern  a  1951  Refugee  Convention
         reason for the Appellant's asylum claim and find I  have  not  been
         provided with the whole of the Appellant's account."


20. This finding is  particularly  significant.   It  is  a  very  negative
    finding regarding the Appellant's  credibility  as  a  whole,  and  his
    failure to be truthful with the Tribunal.  The finding that he has  not
    provided the whole account does not sit well with her finding  that  he
    has been detained and tortured "in the way he  describes".   As  stated
    above, the Judge has made no express finding  as  to  who  it  was  who
    tortured him.  She now finds that she has not been  provided  with  the
    whole of his account.  However, she has given no details either in [28]
    as to the "way he describes", either  by  setting  that  out,  or  with
    reference to particular evidence, or in [34] when she finds that he did
    not have the encounter with Boko Haram as claimed.  She has set out the
    basis of his claim at [5] to [9], but she does not refer back  to  this
    record in her findings.

21. At [35] to [42] the Judge sets out the  reasons  why  she  rejects  the
    Appellant's claim regarding the encounter with Boko Haram.  She  states
    at [38] that she cannot accept that Boko Haram would want the Appellant
    to join them.  At [39] she states that she raised this concern with  Ms
    Dirie at the hearing, and concludes:


         "The voluntary  recruitment  of  Christians  into  the  Boko  Haram
         movement makes a nonsense of their stated ideology."


22. She  therefore  completely  rejects  the  Appellant's  account  of  the
    encounter with Boko Haram.  She takes  into  account  the  case  of  HK
    (Sierra Leone) [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 in relation to  making  assessments
    of inherently unlikely claims [40] and [41].  There is no error in  her
    assessment of this, and there was no cross-appeal on  the  decision  to
    dismiss the asylum claim.

23. At [42] the Judge states:


         "For the reasons I have given at paragraphs  33  onwards  I  cannot
         accept that this Appellant is wanted by the  state  authorities  in
         connection with Boko Haram because I reject his account  that  this
         group would want to recruit him.  I cannot find on the totality  of
         the evidence that the authorities would impute an adverse political
         opinion onto him.  There is  no  1951  Convention  reason  in  this
         appeal."


24. At [43] she finds that the Appellant "has faced treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3, i.e. endured torture and ill treatment".  She finds that  he
    "is in fact wanted by the police".  However, at [42] she has found that
    there is no evidence that the  "authorities  would  impute  an  adverse
    political opinion onto him", and has rejected his  claim  for  why  the
    police would have had any interest in him.  To make a finding  that  he
    is wanted by the police having rejected the reason that  he  said  that
    the police were interested in him  requires  reasons  to  be  given  to
    explain why and how this can be the case, yet none are given.

25. The Judge dismisses the basis of the  Appellant's  claim  for  why  the
    authorities are interested in him.  As set out at [5] to [9]  the  only
    reason that he claimed that the authorities were interested in him  was
    following his  encounter  with  Boko  Haram.   He  claim  is  that  the
    authorities, or Boko Haram, are interested in him due to his  encounter
    with Boko Haram.

26. I find that the Judge accepted the expert reports,  but  dismissed  the
    Appellant's own account.  Given her failure  to  make  clear  to  which
    parts of the Appellant's account she is  referring,  her  findings  are
    contradictory.   On the one hand she finds  that  the  scarring  report
    "lends some corroborative weight to the Appellant's account" [26],  and
    that compelling evidence has been provided that  he  was  detained  and
    tortured "in the way he describes" [28], but  on  the  other  hand  she
    rejects his account [42].

27. There is a gap in the decision caused  by  the  failure  to  take  into
    account the evidence as a whole.  The Judge accepts that the  Appellant
    has been detained and tortured, but she rejects the reason given by him
    for why this is.  She has failed to take into account the  evidence  in
    the round, and assess her findings that his account  of  the  encounter
    with Boko Haram was not credible, and that she has not been  given  the
    whole story, together with the expert evidence which supports the claim
    that he had been detained and tortured.

28. I find that the decision involves the making of an error of law in  the
    failure to take into account the evidence in the round.

29. In relation to materiality, I find that although  the  expert  evidence
    supports the genuineness of  the  summons,  just  because  the  summons
    appears to be authentic does not  mean  it  genuinely  applies  to  the
    Appellant.  No consideration was given either by the expert or  by  the
    Judge as to whether the Appellant could have bribed someone in order to
    obtain the summons.  Given that the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    reasons why he was wanted by the police, her failure  to  consider  why
    such  documents  would  have  been  issued  against  him  is  material.
    Similarly, although the medical reports support the  Appellant's  claim
    to have  been  detained  and  tortured,  the  Judge  has  rejected  the
    Appellant's account of why this would be the case.  Further reasons are
    needed for accepting the expert evidence in the light of  this  adverse
    finding.

30. The Judge dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal, and there  has  been
    no cross-appeal on this issue.  She found that he would face  treatment
    contrary to Article 3 on return, but the basis of this  claim  was  the
    same as the basis of his claim for  asylum.   She  rejected  this,  but
    found in favour of him on Article 3 grounds.  I find that she failed to
    consider the evidence in the round  in  coming  to  her  findings,  and
    failed to give reasons for why, even though she rejected his account of
    the encounter with Boko Haram, she nevertheless accepted  that  he  had
    been detained, tortured, and that there  were  summons  issued  against
    him.

31. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I am mindful that this  case  has  been  remitted
    before, but given the nature and extent of the  fact-finding  necessary
    to enable this appeal to be remade, having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

32. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.

33. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.

34. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Chowdhury or Judge Walker.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 5 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
