
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02967/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2017                          |On 25 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     BA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, instructed by Halliday Reeves,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, BA, is a citizen of Iran and  was  born  in  1991.   His
    appeal was subject to  a  decision  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor which was promulgated on 14 March 2017.



 2. Upon the making of a transfer order, the appeal has been transferred to
    me for disposal.  The resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal took  place
    on 19 June  2017  when  the  appellant  gave  oral  evidence  with  the
    assistance of a Kurdish Sorani interpreter.

 3. The appellant was cross-examined regarding the  answers  which  he  had
    given at the screening interview.  In answer to question  3.3  ('Please
    outline your journey to the United Kingdom') the appellant had replied:

         "I left around three years ago.  I  went  to  Sulaymaniyah  city  I
         started working.  A  year  ago  I  went  back  to  my  country.   I
         leafleted for the Kurdish party.  I went back to  Sulaymaniyah.   I
         left a month ago and went to Turkey Istanbul.  I stayed  there  for
         three or four days.  I was put in  a  lorry.   I  changed  lorries.
         Three or four times.  Sometimes I was put in a flat.  I  was  in  a
         flat controlled by agents and put in a lorry."

 4. The appellant was asked what documents he had used in Sulaymaniyah  for
    his stay there of two years.  The appellant replied that he had resided
    in a "little village" near the border.  The appellant  said,  "I  could
    cross the border easily since there were a number of  villages  on  the
    border".  The appellant said that he had to report  at  a  registration
    department every month.  The appellant was  asked  more  than  once  in
    cross-examination why he had not stayed in Sulaymaniyah.   He  replied,
    "if someone's in trouble, there is a treaty between the IKR  and  Iran.
    I would be returned to Iran.  The  peshmergas  are  in  breach  of  the
    treaty.  I would have been handed over to the Iranian government".

 5. I have considered the  evidence  of  the  appellant  according  to  the
    appropriate standard of reasonable likelihood.  The burden of proof  is
    on the appellant  to  show  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing there to be a real risk that he would be persecuted  or  ill-
    treated if returned to  Iran.   I  have  considered  what  he  said  in
    evidence very carefully.  I have also considered it in the  context  of
    the preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal (see paragraph 15  of
    Judge O'Connor's decision: the First-tier Tribunal  have  accepted  the
    appellant to be an Iranian national and of Kurdish ethnicity  but  have
    rejected every other aspect of his claim save for  his  assertion  that
    the appellant had left Iran legally - "a matter upon  which  there  had
    been no finding").  The appellant has been an unreliable witness before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  It is appropriate to  consider  the  evidence
    which he gave to the Upper Tribunal in the context  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment of his credibility.  In particular, there was  no
    reason at all, in my opinion,  to  reverse  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    rejection of the appellant's claim to have  been  involved  in  Kurdish
    politics.  The appellant's statement at 3.3 of the screening interview,
    therefore, in which he claims that he had "leafleted  for  the  Kurdish
    party" I  find  to  be  untrue.   I  also  do  not  find  truthful  the
    appellant's  claim  made  under  cross-examination  before  the   Upper
    Tribunal that he had been compelled to leave  Sulaymaniyah  because  he
    might be regarded as "someone in trouble".  I do not find that he  left
    Sulaymaniyah for that reason.  I find that it is reasonably likely that
    he left Sulaymaniyah because he wished to travel to the United  Kingdom
    for reasons wholly unconnected with a fear of the Iranian government to
    which he has never shown opposition.  I find that the appellant's claim
    that he had to leave Sulaymaniyah because of his fear  of  some  treaty
    between the Iranian government and the Kurdish  authorities  is  wholly
    fabricated.  I find that the appellant's claim that he  had  to  travel
    clandestinely with an agent is bound up with his claim to have fled for
    fear of the Iranian authorities and I reject that  part  of  his  claim
    also.  Given the appellant had nothing to fear at all from the  Iranian
    authorities and appears to have been content living in Sulaymaniyah,  I
    can identify no rational motivation which  would  have  caused  him  to
    leave Iran illegally and, in doing so, expose himself to risk.   Having
    considered the evidence as a whole, I find the appellant has failed  to
    establish that he did leave Iran illegally.

 6. I am grateful to Ms Cleghorn for the extensive skeleton argument  which
    she provided and for her oral submissions.   I  have  considered  those
    submissions very carefully together with all the evidence including the
    expert report of Roya Kashefi.  I note that Ms  Cleghorn's  submissions
    are predicated on the basis  that  (i)  the  appellant  is  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity and (ii) that he left Iran illegally; (iii) that he may be at
    risk having travelled to  the  United  Kingdom  where  he  has  claimed
    asylum.  It follows from what I have found above that the appellant has
    not established (ii); I do not find that he  left  Iran  illegally.   I
    have considered the risk which  may  be  posed  to  this  appellant  by
    reference to the recent country guidance  case  (SSH  and  HR  (illegal
    exit: failed asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT  308  (IAC).   The
    headnote of SSH reads as follows:

         [(a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who  does
         not possess a passport, will be returnable  on  a  laissez  passer,
         which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on proof  of  identity
         and nationality.

         (b) An Iranian male in respect of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
         previously been manifested by the Iranian State  does  not  face  a
         real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights  on  return
         to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or  being  a
         failed  asylum  seeker.  No  such  risk  exists  at  the  time   of
         questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
         exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have  been  established.  In
         particular, there is not a real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
         imprisonment.

    I do not disagree with Judge O'Connor's observation that "SSH does  not
    provide country guidance on the issue of risk to Kurds".   However,  it
    is clear from SSH [50]  that  the  authorities  in  Iran,  operating  a
    sophisticated  security  and  surveillance  system,  are  "looking  for
    persons who have a particular profile, criminal and/or political".  The
    appellant does not have such a profile.  He does not even have,  in  my
    finding, the profile of a person who has left Iran illegally.   It  may
    be the case that the appellant has disposed of any  passport  which  he
    has possessed and that he may need to be returned by a document  issued
    by the Iranian Embassy.  However, the appellant has failed to establish
    that there would be no exit record relating to him in Iran.  Indeed,  I
    was directed  to  no  evidence  which  would  provide  details  of  the
    immigration procedures  operated  in  Iran,  in  particular  for  those
    leaving the  country  legally.   Moreover,  I  note  from  the  country
    guidance of BA (Demonstrators in Britain -  risk  on  return)  Iran  CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) that "while returning from Britain  is  a  present
    and increased risk factor the mere fact that an appellant is  returning
    from Britain does not lead to a risk of persecution".  Ms Cleghorn,  in
    her skeleton argument at [8], submits that, "therefore, returning  from
    Britain can be considered as something which  would,  at  least  to  an
    extent, further pique the interest of the authorities, in  addition  to
    already being identified as having illegally exited Iran".  The  second
    part of that sentence does not apply  to  this  appellant.   I  see  no
    reason, on the facts in this case as I have found them,  to  go  behind
    the clear country guidance provided on this point in BA.

 7. Given that the appellant did not leave Iran illegally and in  light  of
    the fact also that he has failed to show that, even if he returns on  a
    document issued by the Iranian Embassy  in  London,  he  would  not  be
    regarded as a person who has left illegally, he  will  not,  having  no
    criminal or political profile before the Iranian authorities, face  the
    real risk of being interrogated and  ill-treated  during  interrogation
    upon return or at any other point whilst living in  his  home  area  of
    Iran.  I have, however, considered the possibility  that,  because  the
    appellant is a Kurd (not in itself without any  other  profile  a  risk
    factor) he may yet be interrogated upon return.  I have  predicated  my
    analysis on the background material relating to the  sophistication  of
    the Iranian security system.  Although a sophisticated  operation,  the
    Iranian security forces would not appear to have  limitless  resources.
    I find that those forces  are  likely  to  seek  to  concentrate  their
    efforts upon those returnees whom they consider likely to pose  a  real
    threat to the Iranian state.  This  appellant  does  not  pose  such  a
    threat.  I do not, therefore,  consider  it  likely  that  the  Iranian
    authorities will waste time and resources interrogating or ill-treating
    this appellant when the only possible motive for their doing so is that
    he is a Kurd.  I find it likely that the Iranian authorities will  know
    at the outset of any questioning of him that  the  appellant  does  not
    pose any kind of threat which  they  would  need  to  investigate.   Ms
    Cleghorn submitted that, even an individual who  has  no  political  or
    criminal profile, may be forced  under  torture  and  interrogation  to
    confess to, for example, an involvement in Kurdish opposition  politics
    when he or she had no such involvement.  In response to  that,  I  say,
    first, that it is not likely that the appellant will be interrogated in
    such a manner and, secondly, that if he is  questioned,  the  appellant
    may be expected to tell the  truth,  namely  that  he  is  an  economic
    migrant to the United Kingdom who has failed in his attempt to  deceive
    the United Kingdom authorities with his false story of  involvement  in
    Kurdish politics. I do not find that the revelation of that truth  will
    expose the appellant to risk.

 8. In the light of my findings and by assessment of risk, I find that  the
    appellant's appeal should be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

 9. This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date 10 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 10 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

