
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02019/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 March 2018                              |On 2 May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR N B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Smith of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal. To avoid confusion I will refer to  the  Secretary
    of State as such throughout and to Mr N B as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Egypt who was born on 15 May 1980.  He  is
    and was born a Coptic Christian. He last entered the UK (having visited
    several times previously) on 3 June 2014 with his parents.  He  claimed
    asylum on 6 June 2014.  The  basis  of  his  claim  is  that  he  fears
    persecution, because of his religion, from non-state  actors  in  Egypt
    and that there is not a sufficiency of protection from the state.

 4. The Secretary of State  refused  the  claimant's  asylum  claim  on  10
    February 2017. It was accepted that he was a Coptic Christian  but  the
    account of persecution, assault and detention were  not  accepted.  The
    Secretary of State considered that the claimant could  relocate  safely
    within Egypt.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The claimant appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on 7 December 2017 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S K Kaler allowed the claimant's appeal. The First-
    tier Tribunal found that the claimant faced persecution at the hands of
    one particular individual who was influential and  that  the  appellant
    did seek to relocate but was not safe.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  against  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  on  4  January  2918  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan granted permission to appeal.

 7. The grounds of appeal in essence argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge failed to  consider  adequately  the  issues  of  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal relocation. It is agued that the  judge  failed
    to adequately analyse the evidence,  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    reasons or adequate reasons for departing from a country guidance  case
    and that the judge failed to consider properly the objective evidence.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

Submissions

 8. Ms Isherwood submitted that the decision was extremely brief  and  that
    there had been no proper assessment  of  the  claim.  She  referred  to
    paragraph 33 of the decision and submitted that it is  clear  that  the
    judge has not assessed the evidence as a whole. The evidence was simply
    that the claimant had received a phone call after  he  had  re-located.
    Nothing had actually happened to the claimant after he had  moved.  The
    claimant was offered an inflated price for his property - this does not
    demonstrate that he was being 'shoved out'. The judge has not  reasoned
    and analysed the evidence.

 9. Ms Isherwood noted that the case law of MS (Coptic  Christians:  Egypt)
    CG [213] UKUT 611 IAC makes clear that even if  an  claimant  does  not
    fall within the risk categories identified (which  this  claimant  does
    not) they may be able  to  establish  a  risk  of  persecution  on  the
    particular facts of a case if he/she have been the  target  of  attacks
    because he/she is a Coptic Christian. In this case  there  is  no  real
    assessment by the judge as to whether or  not  the  claimant  has  been
    targeted because he is a Coptic Christian. The judge  has  not  engaged
    properly with the conclusions reached in MS. She referred in particular
    to paragraphs 119 - 122 and 137-139. The judge has not  applied  MS  to
    the facts of this case in particular  there  is  no  real  analysis  of
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

10. She referred to paragraph 31 of the decision and argued that the  judge
    has failed to explain why so  much  weight  should  be  placed  on  the
    reports of Dr Joffe and Dr Green so as to depart from the  CG  case  of
    MS.

11. Miss Smith relied on the Rule 24  response.  There  are  2  grounds  of
    appeal by the Secretary of State - i) failure to deal  adequately  with
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation and ii)  insufficient
    evidence for the judge to depart from the MS case. She  submitted  that
    it was incorrect to say that the judge has departed from the  MS  case.
    The judge specifically refers to the case, notes that there has been an
    increase in violence since MS was decided but this observation was  not
    a departure from the case as is  plain  from  the  judge's  comment  in
    paragraph 32 where the judge notes that the categories are  not  closed
    and one must look at the circumstances  of  each  case.   The  claimant
    accepts that he does not fall within the four specific risk  categories
    identified in MS. Reliance is placed on paragraph 151(7) of MS.

12. The judge applied MS to the facts of the case.  Having  considered  the
    evidence at paragraphs 22-31 the judge gave reasons  why  she  accepted
    the claimant's evidence and found that the claimant had  been  targeted
    because he is a Coptic Christian and had established  a  real  risk  of
    persecution on the particular facts of the case.

13.  The  judge  did  consider  sufficiency  of  protection  and   internal
    relocation. There is no appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  the
    finding that the claimant's persecutor was 'influential'. In this  case
    the claimant had attempted to avoid persecution by relocating. The  man
    had tracked him down and had made threatening phone  calls.  The  judge
    had considered the objective evidence when considering  sufficiency  of
    protection. She considered  the  evidence  of  two  well-known  country
    experts. Dr Joffe's report at paragraph 166-170  gave  details  of  the
    difficulties  faced  by  Coptic  Christians  seeking  to  relocate.  He
    explained that it is relatively easy for an influential person to  gain
    access to systems.  He  set  out  that  there  was  no  adequate  state
    protection  from  personal  attacks,  which  is  consistent  with   the
    claimant's account. Ms Smith took  me  to  various  paragraphs  in  the
    reports. Both experts considered  internal  flight  was  not  a  viable
    option. The judge  took  this  objective  evidence  together  with  the
    claimant's account into consideration. The  finding  was  open  to  the
    judge.

14. In reply Ms Isherwood submitted  that  the  fact  that  the  claimant's
    representative had had to take me at length to  various  paragraphs  in
    the reports supported the fact that the judge had  not  adequately  set
    out the reasons for her  findings.  The  judge  has  simply  noted  the
    matters raised in the reasons for refusal letter but there has been  no
    analysis of the Secretary of State's arguments  -  the  judge  has  not
    given a balanced view. It is not clear from the decision how the  judge
    arrived at her conclusions.





Discussion

15. Dealing firstly with the assertion that the judge departed from the  CG
    case of MS. I accept Ms Smith's submission that the judge  did  not  in
    fact depart from the MS case when the decision is  considered  overall.
    With regard to the claimant's risk  of  persecution  from  a  non-state
    actor and state protection, at paragraph 32, the judge refers to the MS
    case:

         "... Coptic Christians do face discrimination and acts of  violence
         in Egypt. The government has tried to impose changes  but  all  the
         background evidence tells me that they have not been very effective
         and the changes promised have not been  implemented.  The  numerous
         reports submitted for the Appellant show that violence and acts  of
         persecution have increased since the case  of  MS  was  decided  in
         2013. The categories mentioned are not closed and one must look  at
         the circumstances if each case.

         33.   I  have  accepted  that  this  Appellant  faced   persecutory
         treatment at the hands of one particular individual  in  Cairo  who
         was influential because he  managed  to  get  his  "supporters"  to
         target this Appellant. It may be that he wanted to chase him out of
         his apartment so as to "cleanse " the block..."

16. The Secretary of State accepted at the hearing (as set out above)  that
    a claimant does not have to fall within the identified risk categories.
    There was no appeal against the factual findings made by the judge with
    regard to the claimant's account of what happened to him, the  lack  of
    response and failure by the police to take action and that Mr El  Banan
    was influential. As set out in paragraph 7 of the headnote to MS:

         "7.  None of the above necessarily precludes a Coptic Christian  in
         Egypt from being able to establish a real risk  of  persecution  or
         ill-treatment in the particular circumstances of their  case,  e.g.
         if such an individual has been the target of attacks because he  or
         she is a Coptic Christian."

17. On the  facts  of  this  case  the  finding  that  the  claimant  faced
    persecution at the hands of a non-state persecutor and that  the  state
    was not willing to take action to protect him was open to her  and  was
    not a departure from the case of MS.

18. The main thrust of the Secretary of State's  argument  is  the  judge's
    analysis of internal relocation. It is asserted that  the  analysis  is
    inadequate and that failure to act at one police station does not  mean
    there is an insufficiency of protection nationwide.

19. MS at headnote 6 sets out:

   "If a claimant is able to establish that in their home  area  they  fall
         within one or more of the risk categories identified in 3  (i)-(iv)
         above or that they  come  from  an  area  where  the  local  Coptic
         population  faces  a  real  risk  of  persecution,  it   will   not
         necessarily  follow  that  they   qualify   as   refugees   or   as
         beneficiaries  of  subsidiary  protection   or   Article   3   ECHR
         protection. That will depend on whether they can  show  they  would
         not have a viable internal relocation alternative.  In  such  cases
         there will be need for a fact-specific assessment but,  in  general
         terms, resettlement in an area where Islamists are not strong would
         appear to be a viable option."

20. I accept that the analysis of  internal  relocation  by  the  judge  is
    brief. The judge at paragraph 19 records the  claimant's  evidence  and
    notes that:

         "... Following this incident, [the assault] the family relocated to
         an uncle's villa 100 miles from Cairo  in  February  2014.  In  May
         2014, the Appellant received a telephone call from a man  who  said
         he was calling on behalf of El Banan and he was going to  find  the
         Appellant. The police advised him to stay away from El  Banan.  The
         Appellant returned home and tried to leave the country."

21. As set out above the judge, at paragraph 32, noted that the  background
    evidence indicates that the government's protection measures  have  not
    been very effective and the changes promised have not been implemented.



22. In MS it was considered that in general terms internal relocation to an
    area where Islamists are not strong was a viable option. However, if an
    appellant can show that he does not have a viable  internal  relocation
    option then he will qualify as a refugee. As stated in MS there must be
    a fact specific assessment.

23. In the headnote at paragraph 1 in MS it was noted that:

         1.   Notwithstanding that there is inadequate state  protection  of
         Coptic Christians in Egypt, they are  not  at  a  general  risk  of
         persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3, ECHR.

24. The judge accepted  the  claimant's  account  of  persecution  and  the
    failure of the police in Cairo to take any action,  that  he  relocated
    some 100 miles away, that despite relocation  he  was  subjected  to  a
    threatening phone call, and that in response the police merely told him
    to keep away from El Banan. Although the Secretary of State argued that
    'all that happened was a phone call' in the place  of  relocation  this
    does not reflect the background. The facts as  accepted  by  the  judge
    were that the appellant had been assaulted, had his car burnt out, been
    intimidated regarding purchase of  his  apartment,  been  arrested  and
    detained, that his dog had been poisoned and other incidents. The  fact
    that the persecutor was influential and had managed to track  him  down
    after such incidents is the background against which the phone call  is
    to be assessed. The judge did undertake a fact specific  assessment  of
    the claimant's internal relocation option.  Her  findings  were  not  a
    departure from the MS case.

25. Although the reasoning was brief when considered as a whole  the  judge
    gave sufficient reasons for her decision. The findings were  ones  that
    were open to her on the facts of the case.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 27 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

