
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02059/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 January 2021                 |On 18 February 2021                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                Q M a (Iraq)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Draycott, Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Ana Cunha, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  order.   I  continue  that  order
pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008:
unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall identify  the  original
appellant, whether directly or  indirectly.   This  order  applies,  amongst
others, to all parties.

Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

                            Decision and Reasons

 1. The appellant appeals against the respondent's decision on 21  February
    2019 to refuse his international protection and human rights claims and
    to refuse to revoke the deportation order made against him on  15  June
    2016.

 2. The appellant is a foreign criminal, by reason of a conviction for drug
    dealing on 30 September 2015 which attracted a prison  sentence  of  15
    months, triggering the automatic deportation provisions of  section  32
    of the UK Borders Act  2007,  and  section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

 3. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Iraq,  a  Sunni  Muslim  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity, from Kirkuk. He arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2004,
    leaving his mother and sister in Tikrit, and travelling alone through a
    number of countries en route.  The appellant's parents  are  dead:  his
    father died in Iraq when he was 9 years old, and his mother in December
    2012, while the appellant was still in immigration detention  following
    a robbery conviction which was subsequently overturned on appeal.

 4. The appellant learned of his mother's death in January 2013.  He has  a
    married sister who still lives in Tikrit. He says he is estranged  from
    her and that she has not called him for a couple of years.  His  sister
    and her husband considered that the appellant's imprisonment,  and  his
    drug use, were un-Islamic and brought shame  on  the  family.   On  the
    appellant's account, and that of his friend LE, they both cut ties with
    him when they learned of his criminality, some time in 2017.

Vulnerable witness

 5. The appellant has  serious  mental  health  problems  (depression  with
    psychotic features) and has made  several  suicide  attempts  over  the
    period beginning with his first detention in 2011, and which his friend
    LE recorded as continuing up to the summer of 2020, when  LE  made  his
    most recent statement.

 6.  The  Tribunal  has  before  it  psychiatric  evidence  from  Professor
    Cornelius  LE  Katona  MD  FRCPsych,  instructed  by  the   appellant's
    solicitors and from Dr T S Ananthanarayanan MBBS, FRCPsych, DPM (Lond),
    DPM (RCSI), instructed by the respondent. Each of them gave a  separate
    opinion but there is also a joint opinion following a  meeting  between
    the experts on 19 November 2019, which is summarised in Appendix  1  to
    this decision. Both experts examined the appellant at the end  of  2019
    and both were satisfied that the appellant had active suicidal ideation
    and presented a high  risk  of  completed  suicide  either  during  the
    process of return to Iraq, or following soon after his return.

 7. The experts' joint opinion included  a  statement  that  the  appellant
    should not be asked to testify in the Tribunal proceedings. The  effect
    of that is that the appellant's credibility must be assessed solely  by
    reference to his  written  accounts  and  any  corroborative  material,
    whether personal or country evidence.

 8. The appellant is a vulnerable witness and has the benefit of the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note 2 of 2010 entitled Child,  Vulnerable  Adult
    and Sensitive Appellant Guidance.   The  respondent  has  in  the  past
    arranged for service of her decisions by  the  appellant's  solicitors,
    rather than directly.  In these proceedings, the only adjustment  which
    has been requested is that the appellant does not  attend  hearings  or
    give oral evidence.

Mode of hearing

 9. The appeal was heard remotely by Skype for Business with the consent of
    both parties.  A face to face hearing was not held because it  was  not
    practicable and no-one  requested  a  face  to  face  hearing.   I  was
    satisfied that all issues could properly  be  determined  in  a  remote
    hearing, particularly as no oral evidence has been called.

10. There were technical issues during the hearing: Ms Cunha, who  appeared
    for the respondent, had a weak broadband signal: she explained that she
    was sharing the broadband with her housemate, who was a teacher and was
    teaching in another room.  The  difficulties  resulted  in  Ms  Cunha's
    screen freezing from time to time, and sometimes her voice breaking up,
    but at the end of the  hearing,  neither  party  indicated  that  their
    participation in the hearing had been seriously affected.

11. I am  satisfied  that  the  hearing  was  completed  fairly,  with  the
    cooperation of both Counsel.

Documents before the Tribunal

12. The appellant relies on the evidence before the First-tier  Judge,  the
    expert   psychiatric   evidence   of   Professor    Katona    and    Dr
    Ananthanarayanan, his witness statements and  LE's  evidence,  and  the
    respondent's May 2019 CPIN Iraq: medical and healthcare issues, and  on
    two bundles of documents, a supplementary bundle running to 159  pages,
    and an additional bundle dealing with the availability of crystal  meth
    in Iraq and the attitude of the Pakistani authorities to drug use.

13. The most recent witness  statement  from  the  appellant  is  dated  29
    October 2018 and has never been tested in cross-examination.  He is not
    fit to testify now, as both  the  psychiatric  experts  agreed,  having
    interviewed  him  separately  in  2019  and  discussed  their  evidence
    together.

Procedural history

14. The appellant was born in Iraq on 1 March 1985,  and  is  a  Kurd  from
    Kirkuk.  He came to the United Kingdom in 2004, when he  was  19  years
    old, arriving clandestinely by lorry, after a long  journey  via  Iran,
    Turkey, Bulgaria, Greece, Italy  and  France.   The  appellant  claimed
    international protection  on  arrival.    The  respondent  refused  him
    refugee status under the 1951 Convention, humanitarian  protection,  or
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

15. The appellant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

2005: First-tier Judge Suchak's decision

16. The appellant did not appear at the hearing on 14 January 2005.  First-
    tier Judge  Suchak  dismissed  his  appeal.   In  the  absence  of  the
    appellant, he did not consider him  to  be  a  credible  witness.   The
    appellant became appeal rights exhausted on that appeal on 21  February
    2005.

17. In 2007, the appellant travelled to France, where he was stopped by the
    police and returned to the United Kingdom on 13 November 2007.  He made
    a further asylum claim.

18. On 11 February 2010, the appellant  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as part of the legacy exercise.

2011-2013:  Robbery conviction

19.  On  13  April  2011,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  robbery   at
    Peterborough Crown Court and sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment.  While
    in prison, his mental health deteriorated.  Unfortunately,  before  the
    conviction was quashed, the appellant had served his sentence and  also
    some  time  in  immigration  detention.   His  first  recorded  suicide
    attempts were during this period.

20. While in immigration detention, the appellant stopped eating for up  to
    a week, on several occasions.  In HMP Norwich, he hanged himself to the
    point of unconsciousness, and was shocked back to  life  with  electric
    pads.  He tried to hang himself, or to take an overdose of  his  pills,
    more often than he can now remember.  Following  a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House when bail was refused, the appellant tried to hang himself with a
    cord over the lavatory door, in the bathroom there.  He had brought the
    cord with him from the detention centre.  He was saved by the  security
    guards.

21. The respondent made  a  deportation  order  on  8  January  2013.   The
    appellant appealed successfully against  that  deportation  order:  the
    respondent reconsidered his case and made a second deportation order on
    29 August 2013.

2015: First-tier Judge Landes' decision

22. On 19 January 2015,  the  appellant's  challenge  to  the  August  2013
    deportation order  was  heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  her
    decision dismissing the appellant's  appeal,  First-tier  Judge  Landes
    noted that the appellant had not responded to correspondence  from  the
    First-tier Tribunal and did not attend the hearing.   She proceeded  to
    determine the appeal in his absence, taking the  decision  in  2005  by
    First-tier Judge Suchak as her Devaseelan starting point.

23. Judge Landes treated the appellant as a 'foreign  criminal',  based  on
    the 2011 robbery conviction: the appellant had been convicted  and  the
    sentence was more than 12 months, so that was correct at  the  date  of
    hearing.   As a  person  with  a  pending  appeal  against  a  criminal
    conviction, the respondent's policy was not to remove  him  until  that
    appeal was concluded.  The outcome of that  appeal  was  not  available
    when Judge Landes considered protection and human rights appeals.

24. Judge Landes approached her decision on the basis  that  the  appellant
    was not a credible witness, relying on the decision  of  Judge  Suchak.
    In the alternative, at [32], she did  not  consider,  even  taking  the
    appellant's account at its highest and applying the lower  standard  of
    proof applicable in international protection claims, that the appellant
    would be of any adverse interest now to anyone  in  Iraq,  or  that  he
    would face treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR on return.

25. Judge Landes' decision was sent to the parties on 4 February 2015.   In
    her decision, Judge Landes concluded as follows:

         "55.     Given that apart from the outstanding criminal  appeal,  I
         have found that there is no question  of  the  appellant's  removal
         being other than proportionate, I dismiss the appeal.  I  emphasise
         yet again that there is no question of the appellant actually being
         removed unless and until his criminal appeal is dismissed,  and  if
         it is, and if at  that  time  the  appellant's  circumstances  have
         changed or the position in Iraq has changed, the respondent will be
         bound to consider representations about such  circumstances  before
         the appellant is removed."


                                                            [Emphasis added]


26. The appellant did not challenge  the  decision,  so  he  became  appeal
    rights exhausted thereon on 23 February 2015. On 5 February  2015,  the
    appellant's appeal against the  criminal  conviction  for  robbery  was
    allowed.   The August 2013 deportation order was quashed.

2015: Drug-dealing conviction

27. On 30 September 2015, the appellant was convicted again at Peterborough
    Crown Court of possession with intent to supply, and being concerned in
    supplying, a Class B drug (cannabis).  The appellant was  sentenced  to
    15 months' imprisonment.  Despite having cleared his name  in  relation
    to the 2011 robbery conviction, he was once again  a  foreign  criminal
    from that date.

28. On 5 October 2015, the appellant applied for voluntary return to  Iraq,
    knowing that he would be unable to  cope  with  long  term  immigration
    detention. His evidence was that he planned to spend only one night  in
    Baghdad, then go to Turkey and try to find somewhere that  he  and  his
    partner and their child could live together.   The appellant  was  told
    to expect removal in 2-8 weeks from signing the papers,  but  by  March
    2016 he still had not been removed.  When the appellant  queried  this,
    immigration officers explained that he could not be removed because  of
    his pending appeal against the 2011 robbery conviction.  The  appellant
    withdrew his voluntary return application.

29. On 12 May 2016, the appellant was served with  notice  of  decision  to
    deport, and on 15 June 2016, the respondent again  made  a  deportation
    order against him.  That deportation order remains in  force.   Removal
    directions were set for 3 May 2017.

30. The applicant made  two  further  submissions  immediately  before  the
    proposed removal, relying in part on a 28 April  2017  Rule  35  report
    from Dr Arsiwala at the detention centre concerning  previous  torture.
    On 8 May 2017, his submissions  were  refused  and  removal  directions
    maintained. The removal  did  not  go  ahead  due  to  the  appellant's
    disruptive behaviour on the plane.   When  returned  to  the  detention
    centre, he was badly bruised.

31. On 2 July 2017, the appellant made another suicide attempt: he went  to
    the second floor of the detention  centre  and  jumped.   He  had  been
    telling prison officers that he planned to kill himself.   Fortunately,
    there was a net below and he sustained no lasting or serious  injuries.
    On 17 July 2017, another detainee hit the appellant  in  the  eye:  the
    same day, the appellant was recorded as being 'upset'  and  threatening
    to bang his head on the wall.

32. From October 2017 to October 2018, the appellant was  prescribed  150mg
    Amitriptyline daily.  He stopped taking his prescribed anti-depressants
    in early 2019, following a disagreement with  his  GP,  who  wanted  to
    change his medication.  It  is  unclear  whether  he  is  still  taking
    medication for his hypothyroidism.

33. Following a judicial review, by a consent order sealed in the Court  of
    Appeal on 5 November 2018, the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  her
    decision of 2 May 2017.  She wrote to the appellant asking for evidence
    of attempts to locate his missing family  in  Iraq.   Submissions  were
    received.

2019: Decision under challenge

34. On 21 February 2019, the respondent made a further decision  to  refuse
    the appellant's claims for international  protection  and/or  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  The appellant appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.   On 2 July 2019, First-tier Judge  Ford  dismissed  the
    appellant's asylum appeal,  but  allowed  his  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

35. The appellant and the Secretary of State both  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and on 11 October 2019, I set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Judge.



Remaking the decision

36. The  appeal  was  adjourned  to  await  expected  country  guidance  on
    conditions in Iraq, now reported as  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) CG Iraq [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC).  The appeal has been
    further delayed by reason of the Covid-19 pandemic.  It came before  me
    for hearing on 12 January 2021.

37. I take the unchallenged decision of First-tier Judge Landes in 2015  as
    my Devaseelan starting  point,  albeit  with  caution  because  of  the
    absence of any oral evidence from the appellant, and the changes in his
    health and the circumstances on the ground in Iraq since then.

38. I take no account of the 2011 conviction, which was  quashed,  save  to
    note the suicide  attempts  during  that  imprisonment  and  subsequent
    immigration detention.  This seems to have been  when  the  appellant's
    mental health began deteriorating.  I accept that he experienced trauma
    while in prison on both occasions.

Appellant's account

39. The appellant's 29 October 2018 witness statement is  his  most  recent
    account:  it  was  prepared  by  solicitors  and  checked  through   an
    interpreter.  The appellant referred to the Ba'ath Party connections of
    his late father and his paternal uncle, and to beatings from his uncle,
    which are supported by evidence of scarring on  his  back  seen  by  Dr
    Arsiwala in the detention centre in April 2017 (see Rule 35 Report).

40. While in Iraq, the appellant would pass out from time to time, and  was
    prescribed medication which he continued to take in the United  Kingdom
    when he could, at least until 2018  or  early  2019.   He  thought  his
    blackouts were probably caused by epilepsy. There is  no  corroboration
    of that and no discussion  whether  the  blackouts  were  related,  for
    example, to his hypothyroidism, for which he  has  received  medication
    while in the United Kingdom.

41. The appellant travelled alone to the United Kingdom, leaving his family
    in Tikrit, the home town of Saddam Hussein, where they  had  fled  when
    Kirkuk was liberated.  On arrival in the United  Kingdom  in  2005,  he
    made his asylum claim and registered with a local GP: he was prescribed
    medication for his depression and hypothyroidism.   In  2005-2006,  the
    appellant had six or seven sessions with a therapist, which helped him.
     He was not sure why the facility was withdrawn: it had  been  provided
    through his GP.   Following the failure of his first asylum  appeal  in
    2006, the appellant lost his NASS accommodation and  was  homeless  and
    destitute.  He went to live with people he knew in Peterborough.

42. The appellant has had  two  unsuccessful  relationships  while  in  the
    United Kingdom.  In early 2008, less than a month after his return from
    France, he met a Polish woman and went through an Islamic Marriage with
    her.  They began living together but in 2011, when he was imprisoned on
    the robbery charge, the broke down and his partner returned to  Poland.
    When the appellant's sentence was complete, he remained in  immigration
    detention and was not released.

43. While in immigration detention, the appellant tried to kill himself  on
    more than one occasion.  He tried  to  hang  himself,  or  to  take  an
    overdose of his pills, more often than he can now remember.  He stopped
    eating for up to a week, on several  occasions.   In  HMP  Norwich,  he
    hanged himself to the point of unconsciousness, and was shocked back to
    life with electric pads.  On another occasion, following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House when bail was refused, the appellant tried to hang himself
    with a cord over the lavatory door, in  the  bathroom  there.   He  had
    brought the cord with him from the detention centre.  He was  saved  by
    the security guards.

44. In November 2014, while staying with  a  friend  in  Peterborough,  the
    appellant met a  Lithuanian  woman  who  was  a  neighbour.   What  was
    initially a casual relationship became serious when she became pregnant
    with their child.  The appellant wanted to support and  care  for  her,
    and they moved in together.   The appellant  was  not  working,  so  in
    January 2015, he began to deal cannabis to get money  for  his  partner
    and their home together.  On the appellant's  account,  he  was  caught
    almost immediately.

45. The baby was born in July 2015, but on 30 September 2015, following his
    conviction on the drugs charges, the appellant  was  imprisoned  again.
    He did not try to commit suicide this time, but  he  did  refuse  food.
    His friends supported his partner, and she visited every week when  the
    appellant was in HMP Peterborough.  However,  when  the  appellant  was
    moved to HMP Maidstone, it became more difficult  for  his  partner  to
    visit and he suggested she come once a month, with the help of  friends
    who brought her there.

46. On 29 June 2016, the appellant was released and went to live  with  his
    partner and daughter, at her  sister's  home,  reporting  regularly  as
    required by the respondent.  His partner was working in  a  factory  in
    Peterborough, and the appellant was the main carer  for  his  daughter,
    who was now nearly 2 years old.

47. In January 2017, the appellant discovered that his  Lithuanian  partner
    been unfaithful to him.  There was a row, and the couple split up.  The
    appellant moved out, but continued seeing his daughter  every  day  and
    sometimes having her to stay  overnight.   In  early  March  2017,  the
    appellant told the respondent of his change in circumstances, and about
    a week later, on 27 March 2017, the appellant was detained with a  view
    to removal, and transferred to the Oxford detention centre.

48. There  was  some  initial  difficulty  in  the  appellant  getting  his
    medication in detention but eventually the detention  centre  contacted
    his general medical practitioner for his prescription  details.   While
    detained without his tablets, the appellant was not very well  at  all,
    upset and angry.  He needed his medication.

49. On 5 April 2017, officials from the Iraqi Embassy came and  interviewed
    the appellant. They only asked for his name, his date of birth and  his
    city.  On 26 April 2017, the appellant  was  given  a  ticket  back  to
    Baghdad and presumably, though he does not say so, a laissez passer.

50. The appellant was unwilling to go: he had to be tied up, handcuffed and
    carried to the plane, where he made such a fuss that he was returned to
    the detention centre.  His legs  and  arms  were  badly  bruised.   The
    appellant was very upset when he  returned  to  the  detention  centre,
    shouting and hitting his head  on  the  wall.   He  made  a  complaint,
    supported by a medical examination, but nothing came of it.  There  was
    a further attempt to  remove  him,  but  the  removal  directions  were
    cancelled.  The  appellant  remained  in  detention  and  his  suicidal
    impulses returned.  He was looking  for  tablets  to  save  up  for  an
    overdose, or other ways to end his life.

51. In either May or June 2017, the appellant's partner and child  returned
    to Lithuania.  He felt there was no reason to live.  On 1 July 2017, he
    jumped from the second floor, hurting himself but refusing to  see  the
    doctor.  He was moved between different detention centres: sometimes he
    could get his medication, sometimes not.   Two  days  before  his  bail
    hearing, another detainee punched the appellant in the eye.

52. On 4 August 2017, the appellant was released.  He went to live with LE.
     He also went to see his  general  medical  practitioner  and  was  re-
    prescribed the same medication, after  an  assessment.   The  appellant
    felt safer in the community, where he had a group of friends  who  were
    supportive, who would have him for dinner, and to stay over, and so on.
     They made sure that he was not left alone, as they were aware  of  his
    health issues. Whenever the appellant went to report,  he  was  worried
    that he might be detained again.

53. The appellant's relationship with his partner and  his  access  to  his
    child remained difficult.  His partner was not prepared  to  return  to
    the United Kingdom unless they could be together.  He had last seen his
    daughter in February 2018 and given his immigration  status,  he  could
    not travel to Lithuania to  see  her  as  he  would  have  wished.  The
    appellant just wanted to be safe: he wanted to have status so  that  he
    could travel to Lithuania once or twice a year and  see  his  daughter,
    and move on with his life.

54. The appellant's only family in Iraq were his sister  and  her  husband,
    who lived in Tikrit with their two children.  When they were  still  in
    contact, his sister told him that in both Kirkuk and Tikrit there was a
    lot of fighting  and  bombs,  and  conflict  between  Shi'a  and  Sunni
    Muslims.  His sister and her family could not  help  him,  nor  did  he
    think that he would get help in Iraq for his mental health issues: lots
    of people killed themselves in Iraq, because there was  no  support  or
    care for people there.

LE's evidence

55. The evidence of the appellant's deteriorating mental health  over  time
    is supported by three accounts from his friend, LE, whom he met  in  or
    about 2010.  LE is a former soldier who served in Iraq during the  war.
    He is now the National Business Manager for a home improvement company,
    managing over 30 branches.  When he first met the  appellant  in  2010,
    the appellant needed no help and was in good form.   He  described  the
    appellant  as  happy,  content  with  his  life,  smiling,  joking  and
    laughing.

56. LE's first statement was dated 13 June 2019.  In November 2019, he gave
    an account to Professor Katona, having  driven  the  appellant  to  see
    Professor Katona in his car.  Finally, he made another statement on  27
    July 2020.   LE was not able to attend the 12 January 2021 hearing,  so
    his account could not be tested in cross-examination; I  must  give  it
    such weight as it will bear, especially where  it  is  corroborated  by
    other evidence. LE knew the appellant before his mental health troubles
    began and has provided  steady  support  to  him  for  over  a  decade,
    including preventing a number of attempts by the  appellant  either  to
    hang himself or to take an overdose.

57. The appellant was a changed man when he came out of prison in 2015.  He
    would not hold his head up, talk to anyone, or look at anyone.  If this
    was what life was, the appellant  did  not  want  to  live.   When  the
    robbery conviction was quashed, the appellant wept.  He  could  not  be
    convinced that he now had the right to work again. Mr Elwood  was  then
    away from the United Kingdom for a couple of  years,  spending  limited
    time here, but staying in touch regularly with the appellant.  Most  of
    the time, the only solution he saw was to kill himself: Mr Elwood tried
    to reassure him, to let him know that he was not alone and  there  were
    people who cared about him.

58. Mr Elwood said that the  appellant  had  made  many  suicide  attempts.
    Sometimes they had come to blows when Mr Elwood prevented the appellant
    from completing his suicide attempts.  On one occasion, Mr Elwood found
    the appellant in a secluded part of a park,  throwing  a  rope  over  a
    branch and trying to hang himself.  Mr Elwood ran to the appellant  and
    wrestled him to the ground.  On another occasion,  Mr  Elwood  found  a
    large number of pills in the appellant's possession: his view was  that
    the only good reason to have so many was that the appellant planned  to
    kill himself with them.

59. The appellant was really paranoid about anything  and  everything:  any
    noise or something he saw could set him off.  Sometimes, he  would  run
    and hide, usually under bushes and trees in parks.  It  could  take  an
    hour to find him, or  days,  in  which  case  they  police  had  to  be
    involved.  The trigger was always the same: bad thoughts  and  memories
    about what happened in Iraq, and the appellant's belief that  he  would
    be killed if he returned there.  The appellant  said  he  would  rather
    kill himself in the United Kingdom than be killed in Iraq. It was  very
    hard for him to believe that things could improve.

60. Mr Elwood had experience in Iraq and had seen what happened there.  The
    brutality was 'like nothing you can imagine' and he had no  doubt  that
    the appellant was speaking the truth about his past  experiences.   His
    statement concluded:

         "34.     Over the years there  have  been  so  many  incidents.   I
         cannot detail every single event.  This is a serious situation.  If
         it is not taken seriously it will end with his death.  I have known
         [him] for several years and I am truly fearful for him.  There  are
         days when I have left work because I have not heard from him, and I
         am panicking that he has done  something  stupid.   It  is  like  a
         fulltime job just to make sure he is ok.   He  needs  his  daughter
         just as much as she needs him.  He needs to have hope and  to  feel
         safe. ...

61. LE lives in Peterborough, and when the appellant has  not  been  in  in
    prison, particularly since the breakdown of his relationship  with  his
    Lithuanian partner, the appellant lives with him and his family.  LE is
    the appellant's close friend, giving him support at first, and later  a
    place to live, food, clothing and pocket money.  LE has  his  own  past
    experience of suicidal ideation and attempts, following  the  breakdown
    of his marriage and his wife taking his child away.  He  recovered  his
    own mental health with the help of family and friends.

62. The Elwood family were the appellant's surrogate family in  the  United
    Kingdom and cared deeply for him.  Mr Elwood's mother  and  step-father
    helped to support the appellant: his step-father was a  policeman,  but
    also a hypnotist.  He had tried to use hypnotism to help the  appellant
    with  negative  thoughts.   The  step-father's  opinion  was  that  the
    appellant would not recover from  his  negative  feelings  for  several
    years after getting leave to remain, if that  happened.    Nothing  had
    gone right so far: the  appellant's  negative  view  of  his  life  was
    unchanged.

63. The appellant was heartbroken by his Lithuanian partner leaving him and
    taking his daughter to Lithuania with her. The situation regarding  the
    appellant's daughter was not good.  Social services in  Lithuania  were
    involved and her maternal aunt in Peterborough was  worried  about  the
    child.  The aunt's opinion was that she would prefer the  appellant  to
    be bringing up her niece, because the child's  mother  was  not  taking
    proper care of her, was bringing people back to the house, and was  not
    feeding the child.   When  the  appellant  had  video  calls  with  his
    daughter, she would cry and ask him to come and get her, as she was not
    getting any food.  Her aunt did not think the  situation  in  Lithuania
    was healthy for the daughter and Mr  Elwood  said  that  the  appellant
    would be happy just to have the child with him.

64. The appellant's daughter remained in Lithuania, but they were  able  to
    speak  more  often,  using  the  video  call  function  of   Messenger.
    Sometimes she called the appellant, other times, he called her, and  Mr
    Elwood said that you could see him light up like a completely different
    person during those calls. When the calls ended, the light went out and
    the appellant returned to his low mood and depression.

65. Mr Elwood confirmed that the link between the appellant and his  sister
    had broken down two years earlier.  The appellant always used  to  tell
    him when he had spoken to his sister:  it was she who called  him,  not
    the other way round.  The appellant's sister had been  upset  when  she
    found out that the  appellant  had  been  in  prison  for  drug-related
    offences: she felt he had not acted like  a  respectable  Muslim.   His
    brother-in-law had also fallen out with him.   The  appellant  did  not
    have his sister's phone number.  She had not called for about two years
    now.

66. LE's accounts  are  internally  consistent  and  show  the  appellant's
    declining mental health over time.  They are consistent also  with  the
    psychiatric expert reports and I am satisfied that it is appropriate to
    treat  his  evidence  as  a  credible  account   of   the   appellant's
    difficulties during the 10 years that LE  has  known  him  and,  often,
    accommodated him at his home.

Psychiatric evidence

Dr Ananthanarayanan's 2019 report

67. Dr Ananthanarayanan, who examined the  appellant  in  October  2019  on
    behalf of the respondent,  noted  that  there  was  no  record  of  any
    significant physical or mental health problems for the appellant before
    2011, despite his negative experiences  in  Iraq.   His  mental  health
    problems appeared to have begun  in  February  2011  and  were  clearly
    documented in Professor Katona's reports  of  30  October  2018  and  6
    December 2018.   The appellant's first episode of deliberate  self-harm
    came in October 2011, when he  tried  to  hang  himself.   His  friends
    prevented  him.   The  appellant  was  prescribed   Amitriptyline,   an
    antidepressant, and  Levothyroxine  for  hypothyroidism,  diagnosed  in
    detention.

68. Since October 2011, the appellant had frequent  suicidal  thoughts  and
    acts of deliberate self-harm.  In  detention,  he  threatened  to  harm
    himself many times, if his needs were not met, and banged  his  head  a
    few times or refused to eat.  On 7 May  2013,  being  upset  about  the
    prospect of deportation, the appellant took an overdose and was seen by
    a psychiatrist, Dr  Mohamed  Lafir,  who  noted  'emotionally  unstable
    personality traits'.  From 2013 - 2016, the appellant was  in  variable
    mental health: there were no signs of mental disorder,  but  he  became
    depressed, with thoughts of self-harm, and in 2013 he was treated  with
    an antidepressant, Mirtazapine.

69. On 28 April 2017,  while  in  detention,  the  appellant  had  told  Dr
    Arsiwala that in 2015 he was shot while in the United  Kingdom.   On  4
    September 2015, he had been referred to specialists for the removal  of
    a shot gun pellet lodged in his right cheek, which  gave  him  constant
    pain.  He could not keep the appointment, having been detained.  A rule
    35 report from Dr Arsiwala noted old scars on the appellant's back, and
    recorded the appellant's account that he had been beaten  regularly  by
    his uncle as a child and suffered mental health problems while in Iraq.



70. Following a failed attempt to remove him on 3 May 2017,  the  appellant
    had extensive bruises on both arms and the left  leg,  as  recorded  by
    Nurse Manager Babooram in the detention centre.  On 2  July  2017,  the
    appellant made another suicide attempt: Staff  Nurse  Masumpa  recorded
    that he went to the second floor of the detention  centre  and  jumped.
    Fortunately, there  was  a  net  below  and  he  sustained  no  serious
    injuries.  Before the attempt,  the  appellant  had  been  telling  the
    prison officers that he planned to  kill  himself.  On  17  July  2017,
    another detainee hit the appellant in the eye: on the same  day,  Staff
    Nurse Akem recorded that the appellant was 'upset and  threatening'  to
    bang his head on the wall.

71. The appellant was prescribed Amitriptyline 150mg daily  for  depression
    from October 2017 to October 2018, after which he  stopped  taking  it.
    It was  unclear  whether  he  continued  to  take  medication  for  his
    hypothyroidism.

Professor Katona's 2019 report

72. Professor Katona examined the appellant in November 2019, and  recorded
    his unchanged  opinion  that  the  appellant  had  suffered  trauma  in
    detention in 2017, which had caused 'a significant but relatively minor
    exacerbation of his overall mental distress'.  Professor  Katona  noted
    that the appellant did not remember seeing him in 2018,  nor  could  he
    say why he had been asked to come to see him now.  The  appellant  said
    that Professor Katona could explain: it was  'up  to  [him]'.   He  did
    remember having  seen  another  psychiatrist  recently,  presumably  Dr
    Ananthanarayanan, whom he had seen in September 2019.  The  appellant's
    mental health had deteriorated considerably since Professor Katona  saw
    him in 2018:  he now exhibited 'severe depression and marked  distress'
    and was not fit to testify.

73. His past history suggested that the  appellant  might  have  Borderline
    Personality Disorder (also known as  Emotionally  Unstable  Personality
    Disorder) but without more information it was not possible  to  confirm
    that diagnosis.  The diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder  was  based
    on five main symptoms: very low mood, most of the time, poor  appetite,
    disturbed sleep, difficulty concentrating, and past  suicide  attempts,
    together with 'an active wish to die and ...suicidal plans which he was
    unwilling to change'.

74. Professor Katona noted that  the  appellant  was  'extremely  dejected'
    throughout this second assessment.  His eye contact was very poor.   He
    was unkempt and unshaven, and smelled strongly of bad breath and  stale
    tobacco, suggesting  significant  self-neglect.   The  appellant  said,
    repeatedly, that he wanted the assessment over as soon as possible, but
    Professor Katona was able to  engage  him  'sufficiently  to  elicit  a
    reasonably complete account from him of his recent experiences and  his
    current situation'.

75. Professor Katona's professional conclusion  was  that  the  appellant's
    presentation 'reflects real distress rather  than  feigning  or  wilful
    exaggeration'.  In conclusion, Professor Katona set out his opinion  on
    the likely effect of a forced return to Iraq:

         "12.1    I remain of the opinion that if he were forced  to  return
         to Iraq, [the appellant] would experience considerable distress and
         anxiety, which would increase his already high risk of suicide. ...

         12.4     I am now also very concerned about [the appellant's]  risk
         of suicide in the context of forced return to Iraq. There is in  my
         view now a very  high  risk  that  [the  appellant]  would  attempt
         suicide (with potentially lethal consequences) if he were forced to
         return to Iraq.  The risk could be reduced to some extent, but  not
         eliminated, by reasonable precautions such as the removal of  means
         and close or continuous observation.  As I  noted  in  my  previous
         report,  [the  appellant]  has  in  the  past  found   such   close
         observation very distressing.  If he were  subjected  to  close  or
         continuous observation again, this would in  itself  be  likely  to
         worsen his mental condition."

Appellant's submissions

76. For the appellant, Mr Draycott's written submissions of 13 January 2020
    set out his case.  It is not necessary to rehearse them in detail here.
    The  appellant's  claimed  religion  (Sunni  Muslim)   had   not   been
    challenged.  His nationality, ethnic origin (Kurdish) and his home town
    of Kirkuk are not disputed.  It was common ground that he does not  now
    possess a CSID card and that he would be  returned  to  Baghdad.    The
    appellant  is  a  vulnerable  witness  by  reason  of  his  psychiatric
    difficulties.  He remains unfit to testify.

77. Mr Draycott's supplementary written  submissions  of  12  January  2021
    adopted the previous submissions, and argued that the rejection of  the
    appellant's core account by  First-tier  Judge  Suchak  and  First-tier
    Judge Landes should not limit the Upper Tribunal's ability to find  him
    credible.  Neither decision could properly be viewed as the  Devaseelan
    starting  point  for  the  present  appeal:   the  appellant  had  been
    consistently diagnosed as suffering from  a  major  depressive  episode
    from 2015 onwards and the factual matrix  was  significantly  different
    from that considered by either judge.

78. The appellant's assertion that his father had been killed in a reprisal
    attack in  1994  was  capable  of  amounting  to  paragraph  339K  past
    persecution, as were the beatings he received from his  paternal  uncle
    in childhood.

79. As regards the prospect of obtaining a CSID card from the Iraqi Embassy
    in the United Kingdom, it was common ground that the  appellant  lacked
    the documents required to prove his identity and his Iraqi  nationality
    and in any event, the Kirkuk CSA office now had an INID terminal, so  a
    proxy could not assist him (see above).

80. The respondent's  June  2020  CPIN  Iraq:  internal  relocation,  civil
    documentation and returns accepted that it was 'highly unlikely that an
    individual would be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi embassy  while
    in the United Kingdom.  Whatever document the appellant had  previously
    had been left behind when he fled his home in Kirkuk in early 2004  and
    there was no evidence to suggest that it could be recovered  now,  some
    17 years later.

81. The appellant's sister in Tikrit would not be able to help:  there  was
    no evidence that the identity document which the appellant had in  Iraq
    was still in her custody, and she had disowned the appellant  when  she
    found out about the drugs offence.  She had not  contacted  him  for  2
    years now.  The appellant relied on  the  contents  of  the  additional
    bundle about the prevalence of crystal meth in Iraq,  and  the  article
    entitled The Treatment of  drug  offences  in  Shari'a-based  countries
    [2014] IJHSS Vol 4 no 10(1).

82. Mr Draycott relied on Professor Katona's January 2020  report  for  the
    effect on the appellant of returning to Iraq,  increasing  his  already
    high suicide risk and making him vulnerable to abuse and  exploitation.
    The appellant would now rely on AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17 at [32]-[33].   The  respondent  had
    not dispelled any doubts as  to  the  existence  and  accessibility  of
    appropriate medical treatment, given her May 2019 CPIN  and  the  UNHCR
    paper already mentioned.

83. In addition, M�decins sans Fronti�res in their 24 September 2020  paper
    Covid-19 outbreak in Baghdad is 'very alarming'  and  the  Middle  East
    Institute's 8 December 2020 Iraq's Fragile State in the time of  Covid-
    19 reflected the parlous state of Iraqi medical services, such that the
    country had closed its borders to all but Iraqi nationals and  required
    even returning nationals to quarantine for 14 days on return.

84. The appellant could not travel within Iraq on a laissez passer: see SMO
    [374]-[380] nor could a proxy obtain an INID for him. There was no safe
    evidential basis for finding that the CSID he left behind  in  Iraq  in
    2004 still existed: the Kirkuk area was a Formerly Contested Area which
    had been under intermittent Daesh control during the years of conflict,
    and no member of the appellant's family still lived there.

85. Mr Draycott reminded me that the appellant was an extremely  vulnerable
    individual and witness, and asked me to look  at  the  report  from  Dr
    Ananthanarayanan,  the  respondent's  own  psychiatric  witness.    The
    appellant  presented  a  high  risk  of  suicide  and  needed   further
    treatment, which was unavailable in Baghdad, Kirkuk or Tikrit,  on  the
    evidence  before  the  Tribunal.   The   appellant   had   demonstrated
    exceptional compelling circumstances and the appeal should be allowed.





Respondent's submissions

86. For the respondent, Mr Kotas had prepared written submissions  dated  4
    March  2020,  which  Ms  Cunha  adopted  at   today's   hearing.    The
    respondent's position was that  the  appellant  would  be  returned  to
    Baghdad with a laissez passer, and could obtain a CSID  in  the  United
    Kingdom which would enable him to travel  from  there  to  Tikrit,  and
    rejoin his sister and her family.  A  CSID  would  also  allow  him  to
    access essential services and secure employment.

87. The respondent did not consider that the appellant met  the  Article  3
    ECHR threshold (this was before the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe)). Nor could he show 'very  compelling  circumstances'  under
    section  117C  of  the  2002  Act  which   would   render   deportation
    disproportionate.

88. In relation to credibility, Mr Kotas relied  on  the  appellant's  non-
    appearance at the hearings before First-tier Judge Suchak in  2004  and
    First-tier Judge Landes in 2015, neither of whom  found  him  credible.
    First-tier Judge Suchak found his account to  be  'wholly  without  any
    merit whatsoever'.

89. The appellant in his 2007 screening interview  had  said  that  he  had
    ended up in France after  having  got  drunk  at  a  friend's  birthday
    celebration, whereas in his witness statement of 29  October  2018,  he
    said he and his friends planned to go to  Italy  via  France,  as  they
    heard Italy was granting asylum.   In 2017, the appellant said  he  had
    no family in Iraq, but in 2019, Professor Katona recorded him as saying
    that he was in regular twice weekly contact with his sister in  Tikrit.
    The appellant should not be treated as a credible witness.

90. The respondent considered that the identity card  which  the  appellant
    had in Kirkuk but left behind, in 2004, must have been his CSID and  it
    should still be there.  He could ask his sister to send it on  to  him.
    Even if it was some other type of identity document, if she sent it  to
    him, he could use it to obtain a laissez  passer.   The  appellant  was
    plainly returnable to Iraq.

91. The appellant's home area was Kirkuk, but his mother had died and  only
    his sister remained in Iraq, living in  Tikrit  with  her  husband  and
    family.  That was a safe, reasonable and  feasible  place  of  internal
    relocation, on the facts.  The appellant's westernised  characteristics
    were not likely to put him at risk:  see SMO at [313] and [156].  Salah
    al Din was mainly Sunni Arabs, but there were Kurds there too.  68%  of
    those displaced had returned there.  The government  was  predominantly
    Sunni, as was the appellant.

92. The appellant and his sister were close: she had telephoned  him  twice
    weekly and sent him �5000 to assist him, a significant sum for an Iraqi
    person.  The Tribunal was invited to find that she would be willing and
    able to accommodate and support him.  That would assist with his mental
    health problems and her financial position would likely enable  her  to
    help him secure private medical and psychiatric health care.  At  [406]
    in SMO, the Upper Tribunal found that where there was a connection with
    an area, they should be able to obtain documentation to  settle  there.
    Exceptionally, therefore, internal relocation to Tikrit was  reasonable
    for this appellant.

93. The Tribunal was invited to  find  that,  given  the  appellant's  poor
    credibility, he was not telling the truth about his  document  in  Iraq
    and that he would be able to remember his family registration  details:
    see SMO at [391]-[392].   His statement was silent  as  to  whether  he
    could remember those details  and  the  medical  reports  did  not  say
    whether he had memory difficulties.  If  he  could  not  remember,  his
    sister could help.

94. As regards suicide risk, Mr Kotas relied  on  AXB  (Article  3  health:
    obligations; suicide) Jamaica  [2019] UKUT 397 (IAC)  which  reiterated
    that in cases not involving hostile actions of the receiving state, the
    appropriate standard remained that set in N v  United  Kingdom  [2008].
    That submission has been overtaken by the decision of the Supreme Court
    in AM (Zimbabwe) and the test is no longer the deathbed test.

95. The appellant was not taking any medication: he had stopped taking  his
    antidepressants at  the  beginning  of  2019,  which  had  'contributed
    significantly  to  [his]  deterioration'   according   to   the   joint
    psychiatric report of November 2019.   On return to Iraq, he  would  no
    longer suffer anxiety as to his immigration status  and would have  the
    support of his sister and access to essential services  via  his  CSID.
    The suicide risk fell well below the Article 3 ECHR standard.

96. In  relation  to  Article  8  ECHR  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  the
    appellant could not bring himself within that provision of the Rules on
    suitability grounds, as he is a foreign criminal.

97. Part 5A of the  2002  Act  contained  the  relevant  provisions.    The
    appellant could not bring himself within Exception 1 or Exception 2  so
    he would have to show very compelling circumstances over and above  the
    Exceptions, under section 117C(6), which was also available to  'medium
    offenders' such as the appellant: see  NA  (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at [25].  There  were
    no such circumstances in this case.  The appellant was not  financially
    independent  and  evidence  of  his  private  life  was  limited.   The
    Secretary of State relied on the presence of family in Iraq to help the
    appellant integrate  on  return.  As  regards  his  connection  to  his
    daughter in Lithuania, that would not change if the appellant  were  in
    Iraq.

98. There was a strong public interest in deterring drugs offences: despite
    the  mitigating   circumstances,   that   public   interest   went   to
    proportionality and the Upper Tribunal was invited  to  find  that  the
    appellant had not  demonstrated  'very  compelling  circumstances'  and
    dismiss the appeal.

99. In addition to these submissions, in her  oral  submissions,  Ms  Cunha
    argued that thousands of internally displaced persons had  returned  to
    Kirkuk and the Iraqi government did  have  provision  for  subsistence.
    She did not accept the evidence of the appellant and LE that his sister
    had stopped speaking to the appellant, inviting the Tribunal  to  place
    no weight on LE's statement, given that he  was  not  available  to  be
    cross-examined.  Nor was there an updated witness  statement  from  the
    appellant himself.   Ms  Cunha  argued  that  the  appellant's  account
    should be found to lack credibility and that his mental health was  not
    such as to meet the very high threshold in AM (Zimbabwe).  There was no
    up-to-date psychiatric evidence after January 2020.

100. Ms Cunha accepted that it would not in practice be possible  to  return
    the appellant to Iraq at present, because like  many  other  countries,
    Iraq was unwilling to accept flights from  the  United  Kingdom.   That
    factual situation was not relevant to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  ex  nunc
    assessment of the risk if he were to be returned.  The respondent hoped
    to resume flights to Iraq in April 2021.

101. Ms Cunha asked me to remake the decision in this appeal  by  dismissing
    it.

Analysis

102. There is no dispute that this appellant is a Sunni  Kurd  from  Kirkuk,
    with a family connection to Tikrit, the birthplace of  Saddam  Hussein.
    His national, religious and ethnic orientation are not in dispute:   he
    is an Iraqi citizen, a Sunni Muslim from a majority Shi'a area,  and  a
    Kurd.  Nor is it disputed that the appellant cannot produce  either  an
    Iraqi passport or a CSID at present, although he may have had a CSID in
    Iraq before he left there,  16  years  ago.   I  accept  Mr  Draycott's
    submission that  given  how  hotly  contested  Kirkuk  was  during  the
    conflict, with no family member still living in Kirkuk, it is  unlikely
    that the document has survived the conflict.

103. The credibility of the appellant's core account of  family  connections
    with the Ba'ath Party was rejected by Judge Landes and does not fall to
    be relitigated in  these  proceedings,  absent  significant  new:   see
    Devaseelan.  The new evidence which needs  to  be  considered  in  this
    decision, concerns the appellant's mental and physical health  and  his
    persistent history of suicide attempts.   Mr  Draycott  relied  on  the
    appellant's ill health and vulnerability, and the lack  of  any  family
    support for him in Iraq, given the rupture with his sister and brother-
    in-law, which I accept as credible.

104. The appellant is a man who has never  been  employed,  either  in  Iraq
    (because he left soon after leaving school) or in the  United  Kingdom.
    He has been in the United Kingdom since 2005,  has  served  two  prison
    sentences (for one of which his  conviction  was  later  quashed),  was
    convicted of drugs offences,  and  has  been  severely  depressed  with
    psychotic symptoms, and suicidal for a number of years now, that having
    been made worse in prison and in detention.

105. I consider that the evidence now before me  amply  justifies  departing
    from Judge Landes' conclusions that the  appellant  could  be  returned
    safely, applying KMO and others, and that his mental health issues were
    not established at a level sufficient to engage Article  3  ECHR.    On
    each issue, the respondent's case turns  on  her  insistence  that  the
    evidence of a breach between the appellant and his sister's  family  in
    Tikrit, for the last two years, has been fabricated by him and by LE to
    support this claim.

106. I have found that LE is a witness on whose  evidence  I  place  weight,
    for the reasons given above.  That being  so,  I  also  find  that  the
    appellant has no family support in Iraq to enable  him  to  re-document
    himself with a CSID or an INID,  to  exercise  an  internal  relocation
    option to Tikrit when he is returned  to  Baghdad,  or  to  obtain  the
    support he needs to prevent him carrying out his suicidal intentions.

Getting a new CSID or INID

107. The appellant's case is that  he  cannot  remember  enough  details  to
    obtain a CSID at the Iraqi Embassy  in  London.   Given  the  cognitive
    decline reflected in both expert reports, and LE's account, that  level
    of memory loss  is  credible  and  I  accept,  to  the  lower  standard
    applicable for  international  protection  claims,  that  he  does  not
    remember the information.  In Iraq, applying SMO, he would not be  able
    to replace the CSID in Baghdad within a  reasonable  time,  and  if  he
    returns on a laissez passer, that  would  be  taken  from  him  at  the
    airport.  He would have to travel to Kirkuk to attend in person at  the
    INID machine there and provide biometric data, but  he  would  have  no
    document on which to do so.

108. I am satisfied, to the appropriate lower standard, that  the  appellant
    would be returned without a CSID, INID, or family  links,  to  Baghdad,
    and that he could obtain an INID only by attending and giving biometric
    details at an INID machine in Kirkuk, which  is  a  Formerly  Contested
    Area.

109. I have considered the guidance given in SMO (Iraq).  The appellant  has
    two of the identified factors at paragraph 5 of the guidance: he  is  a
    member of an ethnic and a religious group which are in the minority, or
    not in de facto control, of the area from which he comes (Kirkuk),  and
    he is an individual with a disability, by reason of his  mental  health
    issues.  He does not possess an Iraqi passport or a laissez passer.   I
    note that at [12] of the Guidance, the Upper Tribunal held that:

         "12.    A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the absence of
             a CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is  not,
             in any  event,  a  recognised  identity  document.   There  is
             insufficient evidence to show that returnees are issued with a
             'certification letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any
             such document would be  recognised  internally  as  acceptable
             proof of identity."


110. At [13], the Tribunal  stated  that  replacement  CSIDs  are  available
    through Iraqi  Consular  facilities:  however,  the  appellant  has  no
    documents available here to assist him and I have accepted his  account
    that he cannot remember the volume and page reference of the  entry  in
    the Iraqi Family Book.  He cannot get that information from his sister,
    because of the rupture in their relationship in  2018/2019.    Applying
    [14]-[15], Mr Draycott's submission that the appellant  would  have  to
    attend the CSA office in Kirkuk is correct.

111. At [18]-[19], the country guidance in SMO (Iraq)  deals  with  internal
    relocation within the formerly contested areas or to Baghdad:

         "18.     Relocation within the Formerly Contested Areas.  With  the
         exception of the small area identified in section  A,  the  general
         conditions within  the  Formerly  Contested  Areas  do  not  engage
         Article 15 QD(b) or (c) or Article 3 ECHR and relocation within the
         Formerly Contested Areas may obviate a  risk  which  exists  in  an
         individual's home  area.   Where  relocation  within  the  Formerly
         Contested Areas is under contemplation,  however,  the  ethnic  and
         political composition of the home area and the place of  relocation
         will be particularly relevant.  In particular,  an  individual  who
         lived in a former ISIL stronghold for  some  time  may  fall  under
         suspicion in a place of relocation.  Tribal and ethnic  differences
         may preclude such relocation, given the  significant  presence  and
         control of largely Shia militia in these areas.  Even where  it  is
         safe for an individual to relocate within  the  Formerly  Contested
         Areas, however, it is unlikely to be either feasible or  reasonable
         without a prior connection to, and a support structure within,  the
         area in question.


         19.   Relocation  to  Baghdad.   Baghdad  is  generally  safe  for
         ordinary civilians but whether it is safe for a particular returnee
         is a question of fact in the individual case.   There  are  no  on-
         entry  sponsorship  requirements  for   Baghdad   but   there   are
         sponsorship requirements for residency.  A documented individual of
         working age is likely to be able  to  satisfy  those  requirements.
         Relocation to Baghdad is likely to be reasonable for Arab Shia  and
         Sunni single, able-bodied men and married couples  of  working  age
         without  children  and  without  specific  vulnerabilities.   Other
         individuals are likely to require external support,  ie  a  support
         network of members of his or her family, extended family or  tribe,
         who are willing and able to provide genuine support.  Whether  such
         a support network is available is to be considered  with  reference
         to the collectivist nature of Iraqi society, as considered  in  AAH
         (Iraq)."


112. Without family support, this appellant would  not  be  safe  in  either
    Kirkuk, his home area, on Tikrit, his internal relocation option, or in
    Baghdad.  Since  the  risk  arises  in  part  from  his  ethnicity  and
    religious orientation, it is a Refugee Convention risk and the question
    of humanitarian protection is not reached.

Suicide risk

113. I consider also whether there is an Article 3 ECHR risk  by  reason  of
    the appellant's long-standing depression with psychotic  features,  and
    his suicidal ideation.  There is evidence  before  me,  which  was  not
    before Judge  Landes,  as  to  the  appellant's  long-term  depression,
    described both in the experts' reports and in  LE's  written  evidence,
    and also of a significant number of serious attempts  to  end  his  own
    life, and an  ongoing  intention  to  kill  himself,  consistently  and
    repeatedly expressed to prison officers, doctors, and LE's  family.

114. LE's evidence has been consistent both in his statements, and  in  what
    he said to Professor Katona.  LE's account, and that of  the  appellant
    himself, was that the appellant's sister cut off  all  connection  with
    him when she discovered that he had been to prison on  drugs  offences.
    I have had regard to the evidence adduced about the approach  to  drugs
    offences in Iraq and under Shari'a law, which supports LE's account  of
    the seriousness with which Muslims regard intoxication  with  drug.   I
    accept LE's evidence and that of the appellant  of  the  break  in  his
    relations with his sister.   I do not approach  this  decision  on  the
    basis that the appellant can access family  support  once  returned  to
    Iraq.

115. I am satisfied that the appellant has a  serious  mental  illness,  and
    there is nothing before the Tribunal now to suggest that  his  suicidal
    ideation, which both Professor Katona and Dr Ananthanarayanan  accepted
    in November 2019, has resolved.   Both experts considered him to be  an
    active suicide risk with a high risk of completed suicide either during
    the process of return, or following return to Iraq.  The appellant  has
    made several recorded suicide attempts over a number of  years  and  on
    LE's account, continues to try  to  accumulate  materials  for  another
    overdose, and has tried at least once to hang himself from  a  tree  in
    the nearby park.  The reference by LE to 'finding nooses' in the  house
    is particularly chilling.

116. The appellant is an extremely vulnerable man: the  support  of  LE  and
    his family has been crucial since he came out of detention in 2017.  LE
    has been constantly on suicide watch and telephones him several times a
    day.  When he cannot look after the appellant, he arranges for  him  to
    stay with someone else, so that he is not alone.  The very  high  level
    of support which LE and his family provide is the reason that there has
    as yet been no completed suicide attempt.

117. The respondent's case is that this level of care  could  be  replicated
    by the appellant's sister and her family in Iraq.  I  find  as  a  fact
    that the appellant's sister would not support him on return and that he
    would return as a vulnerable man  with  a  serious  intention  to  kill
    himself, on which he has almost succeeded, several times, even with the
    support  he  has  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The   evidence   of   the
    psychiatrists, and of LE, is that he would  carry  out  that  intention
    very soon after his return.

118. Since I find that the ongoing connection with  the  appellant's  sister
    is not established, then he will be unable to  access  whatever  mental
    health provision there may be in Iraq, and will lack any family support
    to enable him to reintegrate in Iraq, which he left nearly 17 years ago
    now. I have  regard  to  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC  17
    and I find that on the facts of this appeal, the appellant  is  one  of
    those who, in Paposhvili terms, is exposed on return  to  Iraq  to  the
    likelihood of 'a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or  her
    state of health resulting in intense  suffering  or  to  a  significant
    reduction in life expectancy'.   The human rights  appeal  succeeds  on
    Article 3 ECHR grounds.

DECISION

119. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appellant's appeal.




Signed      Judith AJC Gleeson                     Date: 4 February 2021
            Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

