
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02513/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th July 2019                    |On 5th August 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     o K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Javed, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of O K against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pears, promulgated on the 26th April 2019, to dismiss his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse his protection
    claim.  I  extend  the  anonymity  direction  made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant had made two previous applications for asylum. These were
    based on his claimed fear of persecution on return to Iran by reason of
    his political opinion.  The instant proceedings were concerned  with  a
    fresh claim for asylum based on his claimed conversion  from  Islam  to
    Christianity since his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  reasons
    given by the judge for not finding that the  appellant  had  failed  to
    substantiate that claim, and thus dismissing his appeal, were short.  I
    shall therefore quote them in full, beginning at paragraph 39:-

         "39. The assessment of faith is a difficult task  as  belief  is  a
             subjective state.  It is not for acquaintances or  friends  to
             cross-examine an Appellant or reveal concerns.  Their  primary
             position will undoubtedly be to give support.  As  a  judge  I
             have a different task to assess the evidence  that  is  before
             me.

         40.  I find that there  is  no  evidence  of  the  Appellant  being
             interested  in  any  religion  including  Christianity  before
             January 2016 despite any contrary claim.  I find that there is
             no evidence of the Appellant being interested in  Christianity
             prior to the refusal of his  three  attempts  to  gain  asylum
             based on his political views.

         41.  It must have been clear to him that that particular  road  was
             closed and it became firmly closed in August 2015.  Less  than
             six months later he was attending a church and making  friends
             there.

         42.  He needed to  explain  how  he  came  to  attend  the  Iranian
             Christian church and he  relied  on  what  I  find  to  be  an
             unconvincing explanation of meeting by chance at a  convenient
             moment in a park a man who  provided  him  with  the  required
             detail.  There is no evidence from this man.

         43.  The Appellant is asked information about his faith and  whilst
             I accept he provided correct answers in some cases,  in  other
             instances his answers were  incorrect.   I  find  he  has  not
             explained his understanding of the  difference  between  Islam
             and Christianity, why he thought he was ready for baptism,  or
             the  principles  underlying  Christianity.   His  case   about
             proselytising seems to change as he realised (or  is  advised)
             that Christian belief is not enough.  I have commented on  his
             answer to the number of books in the Bible and it seems to  me
             that a person might well carry out  something  like  a  Google
             search, whereas in my view a true believer might be completely
             unaware of the number of books as that seems to me  to  be  at
             the irrelevant to belief.

         44.  He was unable to explain his decision to go for baptism but  I
             am afraid the obvious answer is that the fact of baptism is  a
             clear marker in the course of an attempt to fabricate a  claim
             based on Christian belief.

         45.  I have considered the refusal letter and it seems to  me  that
             many of points raised by the Respondent have validity.

         46.   I  conclude  without  hesitation  that  the  Appellant  lacks
             credibility.  I find that he is not true convert.  I find that
             he is not true believer."

 3. The Grounds of Appeal are that the judge (a) failed to give  sufficient
    reasons for why he did not  find  the  authors  of  various  supporting
    letters to be credible witnesses, (b) failed to  take  account  of  the
    breadth and depth of the  Appellant's  involvement  in  various  church
    activities,  including  his   baptism   and   attendance   at   various
    conferences, and (c) insofar as the judge gave reasons for not  finding
    the Appellant credible, they  were  based  on  nothing  more  than  the
    coincidence of the Appellant's conversion to Christianity following the
    failure of his two earlier asylum claims that had  been  based  on  his
    political opinion.

 4.  During  the  course  of  discussion  with  Miss  Javed,  who  so  ably
    represented the Appellant before me, modified the first ground from one
    that was based on the judge's claimed failure to give any  reasons  for
    rejecting the opinion of the authors of  supporting  letters  that  the
    Appellant was a genuine convert, to one based upon insufficient reasons
    for doing so. She otherwise relied upon the written grounds as pleaded.



 5. Starting with the first ground (as modified) it is right  to  say  that
    the only reasons given by  the  judge  for  not  attaching  substantial
    weight to the supporting letters are those contained  at  paragraph  39
    (above).  In effect, the judge found that whilst  the  opinion  of  the
    authors of those letters was genuine and honestly held, their view  had
    not  been  subjected  to  rigorous  cross-examination  concerning   the
    possibility that the Appellant may have  had  an  ulterior  motive  for
    conversion. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Walker accepted  that  that
    was  an  inadequate  reason  for  the  judge's  conclusion  given   the
    considerable detail provided by the witnesses as the  basis  for  their
    opinion, which was in  turn  based  upon  extensive  contact  with  the
    Appellant at church, at conferences, and in discussion about  religious
    affairs over a lengthy period.  Indeed, Mr Walker went  so  far  as  to
    suggest that the Respondent may well have taken a different view of the
    appeal had there been a Presenting Officer at the hearing before  Judge
    Pears. Thus, whilst he did not concede the appeal in  full,  Mr  Walker
    did accept that there was an error of law in the judge's reasoning.  He
    also conceded that the second ground was made out, in  that  the  judge
    appeared not to have had any apparent regard to the  extensive  contact
    that the witnesses had had  with  the  Appellant  in  determining  what
    weight to attach to their opinion of him.

 6. Mr Walker neither conceded nor opposed  the  third  ground  of  appeal,
    namely, that the judge ought not to have  found  that  the  Appellant's
    lacked credibility merely  because  it  appeared  immediately  to  have
    followed the failure of his first two asylum claims.  In  my  judgment,
    the timing of the Appellant's conversion was  a  matter  to  which  the
    judge was entitled to have regard  in  an  overall  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's motivation for conversion, but  it  was  not  of  itself  a
    sufficient  basis  for  reaching  an  adverse  conclusion.  After  all,
    coincidences can and do occur.

 7. I have therefore decided that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge cannot stand and must be set aside.

 8. By way of postscript I would like to add that I make  no  criticism  of
    the judge for being concise.  Far too often reasoning is  difficult  to
    follow due to its length However, I conclude that the reasoning on this
    occasion not merely brief, but also inadequate.

 9. I have given anxious consideration to whether it would  be  appropriate
    for me to remake the decision in the Upper  Tribunal.   However,  given
    that I have decided to set aside the entirety of Judge Pears' decision,
    it seems to me inevitable that this case must now be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh. In the meantime, the Respondent
    may wish to review the original decision given the observations made by
    Mr Walker as mentioned at paragraph 5 (above).

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to dismiss this appeal is
    set aside.

11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by
    any judge other than Judge Pears.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy   Upper   Tribunal   Judge   Kelly                  26   July    2019

