
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02795/2017
                                                               PA/09564/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2019                          |On 04 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                            B A and e a (Turkey)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:   Mr Raza Halim, Counsel instructed by Ahmed Rahman
Carr,
                  solicitors
For the respondent:   Ms Julie Isherwood, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity order

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.  I continue that order
pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008:
unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall identify the original
appellants, whether directly or indirectly. This order applies, amongst
others, to all parties.

Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellants appeal with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing their appeal against the  respondent's  decision
   to refuse them international protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds.  The first appellant has her husband and son as her
   dependant; the second appellant is her adult daughter.

2. The appellants are Turkish citizens,  who  are  ethnic  Kurds  and  Alevi
   Muslims by religion.  The husband came to the United  Kingdom  first,  in
   December 2008, as a Turkish ECAA business man.  For clarity,  unless  the
   context otherwise requires,  in  this  decision  I  refer  to  the  first
   appellant as 'the principal appellant', the second appellant  (her  adult
   daughter) as 'the daughter' and the principal appellant's husband as 'the
   husband'.

Immigration history

3. The husband arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  December  2008  and  was
   present lawfully until 5 June 2010 pursuant to the Turkish ECAA  and  the
   Immigration Rules HC 510.  He had leave as a Turkish business person.

4. The principal appellant and the two children joined the husband  in  2009
   and received leave in line with him, expiring also on 5 June 2010.   None
   of these parties has been lawfully in the United Kingdom since that date.



5. The respondent refused further ECAA leave, pursuant to paragraph 4 of  HC
   510, because she was not satisfied that the husband was a partner in  the
   business, or that it had an alcohol  licence  as  claimed.   The  husband
   appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, which dismissed the appeal for  want
   of jurisdiction.  The Judge noted that the appellant and  his  dependants
   had been badly advised by his previous representatives and that OISC  had
   upheld a complaint against them.  That First-tier Tribunal  decision  was
   not challenged: instead,  the  husband  sought  judicial  review  of  the
   respondent's refusal, out of time, but time  was  not  extended  and  the
   judicial review application was not admitted.

6. Following the failure of  his  ECAA  application,  the  husband  made  an
   asylum claim.  That claim was struck out on 22  September  2016  and  the
   husband thereafter became a dependant in the principal appellant's asylum
   claim, along with the couple's son, who is still a minor. By  this  time,
   the daughter was an adult and made her own asylum claim.

Basis of asylum claim

7. On 9 February 2016, the appellant and the daughter each  claimed  asylum.
   The respondent refused both claims  in  August  2016.   Both  claims  are
   before me, and both were made almost 7 years after  the  parties  entered
   the United Kingdom.  The husband had been here for a year before that, so
   for him it was a delay of 8 years.

8. In her asylum application the principal appellant claimed  to  have  been
   accused in 1994 of being involved with the PKK, and to have been detained
   twice, first in June 2005 for two days, at Sultan Beylin,  following  the
   opening ceremony for HADEP, which  was  on  the  same  day  as  what  she
   described as the 'Semdinli incident', and again at the beginning of 2008,
   when she attended the anniversary of the death of Hrant Dink,  in  Taksim
   Istanbul, and was detained for three days.  On  both  occasions  she  was
   accused of PKK involvement and ill-treated. The daughter also claimed  to
   have been detained, twice in 1994 and  in  1995,  because  her  name  was
   similar  to  that  of  a  cousin  who  was  involved  with  a   political
   organisation.  Neither the appellant  nor  the  daughter  had  ever  been
   formally arrested or charged.  Both  feared  return  to  Turkey  as  they
   feared that they would be identified again with the PKK, detained and ill-
   treated. Following an  asylum  interview,  the  respondent  refused  both
   claims.

9. The respondent accepted that the appellants were both Alevi  Muslims  and
   Kurds, but not that they, or the husband, were followers of HDP,  DTP  or
   BDP (pro-Kurdish political parties).  The  respondent  did  not  consider
   that the appellants had established a real risk or reasonable  degree  of
   likelihood of persecution or serious harm to her on return to Turkey.

10. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

Procedural history

11. In June 2017, First-tier Judge Chana heard  the  appeals  and  dismissed
   them in a decision sent to the parties in October 2017.  In  March  2018,
   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith set  aside  that  decision  and  remitted  the
   appeals to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.  First-tier  Judge
   Courtney heard the appeals again on  1  March  2019  and  dismissed  them
   again.

12. Judge Courtney's decision records the oral evidence given by  the  first
   appellant in Turkish, and the second appellant in English.  I will return
   to the evidence given to the First-tier Tribunal  when  I  summarise  the
   evidence before me in these appeals.   The  appellants  appealed  to  the
   Upper Tribunal.

13. By a decision dated 24 July 2019, I set aside  the  decision  of  First-
   tier Judge Courtney and gave directions for the future  conduct  of  this
   appeal, including provision for a joint bundle of evidence (limited to  a
   total of 100 pages for  each  party)  and  for  the  filing  of  skeleton
   arguments by each party.  No interpreter was requested as the  appellants
   did not intend to file further witness statements nor did the  respondent
   intend to cross-examine them.

14. That is the basis on which  these  appeals  come  before  me  again  for
   remaking in the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

15. The first and second appellants provided  witness  statements  and  gave
   evidence to the First-tier Tribunal.  The agreed bundle does not  contain
   the witness statements:  I conclude that the appellants are content  with
   the summary of their evidence given in the decision  of  Judge  Courtney.
   The appellants' evidence, as there set out, I treat as their evidence  to
   the Upper Tribunal.

Appellants' evidence

16.  The  principal  appellant  was  born  in  July  1971  in  Kahramanmara?
   Province, Turkey.  Her last residence in Turkey was in Istanbul,  in  the
   Sultan Beyli District.

17. After she moved from Kahramanmara? Province to Istanbul,  the  principal
   appellant became involved with pro-Kurdish political organisations: first
   HEP, then DEP, and from 1994, HADEP.  She would have been  23  years  old
   then. She distributed leaflets and magazines for them, at least  for  two
   or three years. The principal appellant said in her  oral  evidence  that
   she had difficulty giving coherent evidence: she  became  forgetful  when
   she was asked a  question  and  was  unable  to  give  a  chronologically
   accurate  account  of  her   involvement   with   the   various   Kurdish
   organisations with which she worked in Turkey over the years.  When HADEP
   was closed down by the Turkish authorities in March 2003,  the  principal
   appellant joined DEHAP, and when it dissolved, the DTP.   In  2009,  when
   the DTP was banned, she worked with the BDP and in April  2014,  BDP  and
   HDP merged.

18. On any view, the appellant has shown commitment to  the  political  wing
   of the pro-Kurdish cause. It has always been her case  that  she  had  no
   connection with the banned PKK, the  militant  wing  of  the  pro-Kurdish
   cause, but that  the  authorities  thought  that  she  did  have  such  a
   connection.

19. In June 2005, when she was 34 years old,  the  principal  appellant  was
   arrested dyrung a  party  celebrating  the  formation  of  the  DTP,  and
   detained in Sultan Beyli police station.  The arrest was triggered when a
   bookstore in ?emdinli was bombed: people at the party heard the news  and
   begun shouting pro-Kurdish slogans.  Police broke up the  event  and  the
   principal appellant, among others,  was  taken  to  police  headquarters,
   fingerprinted, photographed, and questioned about her presumed links with
   the PKK.  During this detention, the appellant was beaten with sticks and
   truncheons, kicked, punched, and subjected  to  falaka  (beating  on  the
   soles of the feet).  She received a head wound, but it was  not  treated.
   The principal appellant denied all the  allegations  and  was  eventually
   released without charge.

20. The principal appellant continued working first with the DTP, and  later
   with the BDP.  On January 19 2007, Mr Hrant Dink, the editor in chief  of
   the bilingual Turkish-Armenian newspaper, Agos, was assassinated.  Before
   he was killed, Mr Dink had been prosecuted three  times  for  denigrating
   Turkishness and received numerous death threats from  Turkish  nationals.
   In January 2008, the appellant attended a gathering in Taksim,  Istanbul,
   with others protesting the assassination of Mr  Dink.   The  police  used
   tear gas and water cannon on the protesters.  The appellant was  arrested
   and taken again to police headquarters, fingerprinted  and  photographed.
   She was beaten and tortured, including being stripped naked, blindfolded,
   raped and burned with red hot metal and with cigarettes.   The  appellant
   continued to deny any connection with the PKK.  On  the  third  day,  the
   police interrogating the principal appellant told  her  that  they  would
   stop if she agreed to become an informer.  They then grabbed her  by  the
   hair, and forced her head into a toilet bowl.

21. The principal appellant could take no more.  She  agreed  to  become  an
   informer and was  released,  with  monthly  reporting  conditions,  after
   signing a  document  she  was  not  permitted  to  read.   The  principal
   appellant reported as directed, giving general information about the  BDP
   as to meetings and rallies.  The  Turkish  police  pressed  her  to  name
   people in the political organisation, the DTP, who were intending to join
   the militant organisation, the PKK, but the appellant refused.   After  a
   few months, the police told her she need report only every two  to  three
   months.

22. In June 2008, the principal appellant applied for  and  received  a  new
   Turkish identity card.  She had no difficulty getting that document.  The
   principal appellant's friends and family were becoming suspicious of her,
   so she decided to take her two children and leave Turkey to come  to  the
   United Kingdom and join her husband. On  6  August  2009,  the  principal
   appellant and her two children left Turkey: her daughter, born  in  1997,
   was only 12 years old, and her son was only 3 years old.   The  appellant
   used her own passport to leave Turkey and encountered no difficulties.

23. Since  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the  principal  appellant  has
   continued to attend protests organised by the  Kurdish  Community  Centre
   and the Kurdish People's Democratic  Assembly.   The  appellant  told  Dr
   Smith that she was in contact with  her  brothers  in  Turkey,  who  were
   living in Istanbul and 'getting by'.

24. The daughter said in her asylum interview that she  had  never  been  to
   any demonstrations in Turkey, and her evidence as  to  what  her  parents
   did, and what happened to her mother, was vague.  When  she  was  17,  in
   2014, she joined HDP in the United Kingdom.

Medical Foundation report

25. Dr Allison Smith MBChB MRCGP of the  Medical  Foundation  (Freedom  from
   Torture) examined the principal appellant  in  on  29  November  2016,  6
   December 2016 and 13 December 2016 over a total period of  6  hours.   Dr
   Smith's report  dated  21  March  2017  deals  both  with  the  principal
   appellant's  psychiatric  difficulties  and  her  physical   health   and
   appearance, including scarring.   The principal appellant told  Dr  Smith
   that she did not want her son  or  daughter  to  be  aware  of  what  had
   happened to her in Turkey, and reserved her discussion of  that  for  her
   weekly counselling sessions.

26. Her report recorded 12 body scars, which she considered  with  reference
   to the Istanbul Protocol.  There was a linear scar  on  the  top  of  the
   principal appellant's head, a circular scar on her right forearm, a large
   rectangular scar on her left forearm, three short  linear  scars  on  her
   left forearm and a linear scar, about 11 cm long,  with  a  'train  track
   appearance' running from the top of the right thigh to the abdomen.   The
   first two scars were considered highly consistent  with  the  appellant's
   account of being hit on the head with a rifle  butt  and  burned  with  a
   cigarette; the rectangular scar and the long linear scar were  diagnostic
   of burning with a red hot piece of metal, that is to say, that they could
   not have been caused any other way; the three short linear scars  on  her
   legs were consistent with being beaten.  Evidence of soreness around  the
   labia minor was not considered to be suggestive of  rape,  but  Dr  Smith
   said that 'it would be surprising to find any [rape-related]  abnormality
   on examination'.

27. Dr Smith's professional opinion as to the principal  appellant's  mental
   health was that she had post-traumatic stress  disorder.   The  principal
   appellant had already begun  having counselling: she had poor memory  and
   poor concentration, and presented as mostly sad  and  distressed,  except
   when she spoke about her children.  She was sad that she and her  husband
   could not provide for them the sort of life that they would  have  liked.
   The appellant had no thoughts of self-harm or suicide;  her  feeling  for
   and love of her children was a protective factor.   Her  general  medical
   practitioner had prescribed Mirtazapine 30 mg nightly, a  sedating  anti-
   depressant which had improved the appellant's sleep pattern.    Dr  Smith
   considered that the dose might need to be increased.

28. Dr Smith summarised her conclusions at [81]-[85] of the report,  finding
   that 8 of  the  appellant's  12  body  lesions  supported  the  principal
   appellant's account of being raped and ill treated in 2005  and  2007  as
   alleged,  three  being  highly  consistent  and  two  diagnostic  of  the
   attributions provided.  In her opinion, the principal appellant had signs
   and symptoms  diagnostic  both  of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and
   depression,  with  reference  to  ICD-10   paragraphs   F43.1   and   F32
   respectively.

29. Dr Smith considered whether the principal appellant  was  likely  to  be
   falsifying her symptoms, with reference to the Istanbul Protocol at  sub-
   paragraph 105(f), but concluded that the appellant's history, examination
   and timeline were 'clinically congruent with no evidence of embellishment
   or exaggeration'.  Dr Smith was satisfied that  the  appellant's  account
   was genuine and her signs and symptoms supportive of her account.

Dr Derya Bahir

30. Dr Derya Bahir is a post-doctoral  researcher  at  Queen  Mary  College,
   University of  London,  having  completed  her  undergraduate  degree  at
   Istanbul  University  and  her  Masters  Degree  on  human   rights   and
   democratisation at the University of Nottingham.    She  is  a  qualified
   lawyer affiliated to  the  Istanbul  Bar  Association,  and  works  as  a
   consultant for a law firm  in  Istanbul.  Dr  Bahir's  report,  which  is
   carefully sourced  to  relevant  research  and  international  documents,
   summarised the appellant's  account,  and  recent  political  history  in
   Turkey.

31. At [46] and following, the report  deals  with  the  position  of  Alevi
   Muslims in Turkey.  Dr Bayir notes that Alevis  are  considered  heretics
   under  mainstream  Islamic  theology  and  have   suffered   "oppression,
   massacres,  pogroms,  lynching,  psychical  attacks,  forced  conversion,
   discrimination, harassment, insults, exclusion, prejudice,  hate  speech'
   and other crimes throughout Turkish history,  at  the  institutional  and
   social level.  In modern  Turkey,  the  government  has  a  programme  of
   Sunnification and Alevis are subject to an 'existential  threat'".   They
   continue to experience social stigma, discrimination and violence.

32. The AKP Islamist Turkish government  had  reformed  the  former  secular
   education system in Turkey.  Religious education courses were  compulsory
   and exemption subject to  administrative  difficulty  in  practice,  with
   children who are allowed to opt out facing increased harassment and  ill-
   treatment. At [48] the report dealt with the Islamisation of the formerly
   rigidly secular Turkish education system:

         "48. [The AKP Government's  social  engineering  and  Sunnification
         programmes] are felt most of all in the area of  education.   Under
         the  Islamism  AKP  government  vision  of  bringing  up  a  'pious
         generation', the old secular education system has  gone  through  a
         serious transformation.  Many  schools  have  been  converted  into
         religious schools (?mam Hatip Okullari) where girls  and  boys  are
         segregated  and  mainly  taught  Sunni  Islamic  religion  and  its
         practices.  More courses  based  on  Islamic  education  have  been
         inserted into the school curriculum;  the  government  permits  the
         Islamic headscarf at schools; it has opened mosques in schools; and
         only  Islamic  religious  symbols  and  practices  are  allowed  at
         schools.  Under the auspices of the Ministry of  Internal  Affairs,
         many Islamic religious cult organisations are allowed into  schools
         to conduct extra-curricular activities such as teaching the  Qur'an
         during the summer holidays and taking children  to  Friday  prayer.
         Recently, the Ministry of National Education signed a protocol with
         the  Islamism  Hizmet  Foundation,  an   Islamic   religious   cult
         organisation, to provide  'moral  values'  classes  in  all  public
         schools during school hours."

33. Dr Bahir considered that  if  the  daughter  and  the  son  returned  to
   Turkey, as Alevis they were very  likely  to  be  adversely  affected  at
   school and University, and might be subjected to discriminatory practices
   and treatment.  At [51]-[52], the report explained  that  Islamic  clergy
   (imams) have been appointed to University dormitories across the  country
   to provide 'moral guidance' to University students, under  the  direction
   of the Diyanet (the Directorate of Religious Affairs).

34. Many Alevi and secular families had  emigrated  to  European  countries,
   concerned about the state of  education  in  Turkey.    The  report  also
   identified a climate of impunity for hate speech and hate crimes  against
   Alevis, and that their places of worship were not  officially  recognised
   by the Turkish state.  Dr Bahir considered that the daughter and the  son
   would find it difficult to  adapt  to  social  considerations  with  such
   complex  sensitivities,  having  grown  up  in  the   relaxed   political
   atmosphere of the United Kingdom where they were used to speaking  openly
   in Kurdish,  and  expressing  Kurdish  identity,  culture  and  political
   opinions.

35. There would also  be  difficulties  with  employment:  academic  studies
   indicated that those with Kurdish names were less likely to be called for
   an interview and less likely to be in employment.   Once  employed,  they
   might not pass the probationary period, and might be harassed at work and
   subjected to  various  kinds  of  discriminatory  treatment.   There  was
   evidence of ethnicity related discrimination  against  Kurds,  especially
   female Kurds, in the labour market in Turkey.

36. The principal appellant was likely to be adversely affected  because  of
   her ethno-religious identity and previous arrests  for  involvement  with
   pro-Kurdish parties and organisations. Even being a relative  of  an  HDP
   member or activist could prevent individuals being employed in the public
   sector, even if they had no such connections themselves.



Ms Sally-Ann Deacon's report

37. The appellants commissioned a report dated  29  February  2019  from  Ms
   Sally-Ann Deacon ISW, BA Hons CQSW,  an  Independent  Social  Worker.  Ms
   Deacon was tasked with providing a section 55 best  interests  report  on
   the son, who was still a minor, concerning the impact on him  of  removal
   to Turkey.  The son was then 13 years old and had  lived  in  the  United
   Kingdom since he came here with the principal appellant and his sister in
   2009, when he was 3 years old.  He had not travelled outside  the  United
   Kingdom since then and had not returned to Turkey.

38. Ms Deacon interviewed the appellant, the husband, the daughter, and  the
   son, and also Mrs Williams, the Head of Year 8 at Edmonton County School,
   where the son is studying.  She had access  to  Dr  Smith's  medico-legal
   report, and  to  achievement  certificates,  an  attendance  letter  from
   November 2016 and school progress reports for the  son  for  2012,  2013,
   2014, 2015 and 2016.

39. Ms Deacon described the son as 'delightful,  articulate  and  courteous'
   and happy to engage in discussions. She acknowledged  that  he  had  been
   raised by Turkish nationals and was likely to share some common  cultural
   characteristics with his Kurdish Alevi Muslim parents, but  that  he  had
   also been exposed to significant United Kingdom influences.  His  parents
   had not restricted his experience of  the  external  environment  in  the
   United Kingdom.  Both he and his elder sister, the second appellant, told
   Ms Deacon that they had been raised to think independently and would find
   it very difficult to adapt to the more restrictive approach in Turkey.

40. The children, and particularly the son  whose  circumstances  Ms  Deacon
   was required to consider, felt themselves to be British  and  would  miss
   their friends at school and University, and in the  community.   The  son
   was 'very close' to his aunts, uncles and cousins in the United  Kingdom.
   He did not know his family in Turkey and would not recognise them  if  he
   met them again.  Ms Deacon did not agree with the Home Office  assessment
   that modern means of communication  were  sufficient  to  maintain  these
   relationships.  Ms  Deacon  thought  it  unlikely  that  their   parents'
   presence, after the family had relocated to Turkey, would  suffice  fully
   to compensate for the loss of those friendships.

41. Ms Deacon confirmed from her discussions  with  the  children  that  the
   appellant had been able to keep the detail  of  her  rape  and  abuse  in
   detention from them, due to her  wish  to  protect  them,  but  they  had
   realised that she was emotionally fragile and vulnerable.

42. The son was about to begin his GCSE studies  and  select  his  subjects.
   GCSE work would begin in September 2019 and he was considered  to  be  an
   excellent student who would do well: his teacher thought that for him  to
   move school and country would be 'catastrophic for his  education'.   The
   son wanted to work hard and study philosophy  and  English  at  Cambridge
   University.

43. Ms Deacon considered that the Tribunal should prefer the expert  medical
   evidence concerning the principal appellant's past experiences in  Turkey
   to the respondent's rejection of that account.  With respect, that is not
   her area of expertise.  Ms Deacon said she  had  been  'led  to  believe'
   various things about the Turkish educational system, and that  the  son's
   first language was now English, which  meant that he would need to attend
   a fee paying school as Turkish schools taught only in Turkish,  in  which
   the son could neither read nor write, though he could speak  it  to  some
   extent.  The observations about the Turkish educational  system  are  not
   sourced.  The report goes on  to  make  highly  speculative  observations
   about the likelihood of the husband getting  a  job  in  Turkey,  or  the
   principal appellant being able to work, given her ill health.

44. Ms  Deacon  concluded  that  the  son's  best  interests  would  not  be
   protected or promoted should he return to Turkey and  that  it  would  be
   unduly harsh or disproportionate to expect him to go there.

Respondent's CPINs on Turkey

45. The appellants rely on the September 2018 CPIN on Kurds  in  Turkey.  At
   [4], the CPIN sets out the complex history of the  pro-Kurdish  political
   parties.  At [7] it deals with the perceived association between the pro-
   Kurdish political parties and the terrorist organisation, the  PKK.    In
   particular, at 7.1.4, the CPIN records that Freedom House stated in  2018
   that

         'After a ceasefire with the militant Kurdistan Workers Party  (PKK)
         collapsed in 2015, the government accused the HDP of being a  proxy
         for the group.'

   and at 7.1.5, that Human Rights Watch in its 2018 World Report,  covering
   events in 2017, stated that

         "In parallel with the  resumption  of  armed  clashes  between  the
         military and the armed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK)  interest  he
         southeast,  the  government  pursued   a   crackdown   on   elected
         parliamentarians and municipalities from pro-Kurdish parties."

46. The rest of the CPIN emphasised the  increased  political  crackdown  in
   Turkey since the coup attempt in July 2016, with almost half  of  the  59
   HDP members of parliament being detained or arrested at least  once.   Al
   Jazeera had reported in February 2017  that  in  an  application  to  the
   European Court of Human Rights, HDP stated that  since  the  failed  coup
   attempt, 5471 people had been taken into custody and 1482 arrested within
   the scope of operations targeting the HDP and its supporters.   In  March
   2017, Human Rights Watch reached a similar conclusion.

47. At [10.8] the report confirmed that there  was  a  risk  of  torture  in
   police custody, including allegations by HDP that police tortured  dozens
   of civilians in Hakkari Province in August 2017.   An  investigation  had
   been opened, but had not reported. At [10.9] the CPIN speaks of  impunity
   for perpetrators, following an emergency decree in December 2017. Amnesty
   International, the US State Department,  and  the  Turkish  human  rights
   association ?nsan Haklari Dernegi all recorded impunity as an  issue  and
   opposition from the Turkish authorities to any publication of data on its
   investigations into torture.

48. On 7 August 2019, the respondent received a Response to  an  Information
   Request entitled Turkey: social security, benefits and healthcare.   That
   document does not add very much to the CPIN.

Upper Tribunal hearing

49. For the  respondent,  Ms  Isherwood  relied  on  her  skeleton  argument
   settled by Ms Alice Holmes, on 14 November 2019, just before the hearing.
    Ms Holmes' skeleton argument asserted that the  appellants'  credibility
   was in issue, but since the respondent has  opted  not  to  cross-examine
   either of them, that is a difficult position to sustain and  I  spend  no
   further time on the negative credibility arguments.

50. As regards sur place activity,  Ms  Holmes  argued  that  little  weight
   should be placed on photographs of the principal appellant attending pro-
   Kurdish demonstrations, all of which  post-date the asylum claim,  or  on
   her membership card for the Kurdish People's Democratic Assembly  in  the
   United Kingdom, which  records her as a service  user  and  member  since
   2010.

51. With regard to Dr Smith's medico-legal  report,  the  skeleton  argument
   contended that the scarring and trauma affecting the appellant might  not
   have been inflicted as described, despite the findings of Dr  Smith  that
   they were consistent with her account.  The family would be returned as a
   unit, and have family members who could help them to resettle in  Turkey.
   The mental health issues relating to the  principal  appellant  were  not
   sufficient to reach the Article 3 ECHR standard.

52. At [15] in her skeleton argument, Ms Holmes contended that:

         "15.     Even if it is taken at its highest, it is  submitted  that
         the appellants cannot  succeed  in  their  asylum  claim.   At  its
         highest, the claim is that they would be at risk on return  because
         the Turkish authorities are  aware  that  they  are  involved  with
         Kurdish political parties and that in 2008, the first appellant was
         ill treated by the authorities and forced to  become  an  informer.
         However, it is submitted that that  assumption  doesn't  take  into
         account the length of time between that interest and  the  present.
         Also, even if it were  accepted  that,  as  Deriya  Bayir's  report
         claims at  [18], the Turkish authorities have a network of spies in
         the UK,  then they might well be aware that neither appellant is  a
         member of the HDP or any other  political  party,  and  that  their
         activities are those of no more than low level supporters, who have
         also claimed asylum and will wish to bolster that claim.  As  such,
         they are unlikely to be of any interest to the authorities who  may
         well consider that they have more pressing concerns to attend to."

53. As regards  Article  8  ECHR  private  and  family  life,  the  skeleton
   argument contended  that  there  were  no  'very  significant  obstacles'
   engaging paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and that, in relation to the  best
   interests of the couple's minor son, little weight could be placed on  Ms
   Deacon's Independent Social Worker report.  All the family members  would
   be removed together.  The daughter and the son would necessarily be  able
   to speak Kurdish, as their mother had no other language (the reference in
   the skeleton argument to speaking Turkish is  clearly  erroneous  as  the
   principal appellant is a Kurdish speaker). There was nothing  in  section
   117B of the 2002 Act to assist these appellants, who were not financially
   independent, and in the case of  the  principal  appellant,  not  English
   speaking.  The skeleton argument does not address subsection 117B(6).

54. In oral argument, Ms Isherwood observed that  IK  Turkey  supported  the
   respondent's contention that the previous arrests, which had not resulted
   in any charge, would not now come up on the Turkish computer system.  The
   principal appellant was not 'wanted' and there was no risk on  return  on
   that basis.  Ms Isherwood referred me  to  footnote  117  in  the  expert
   report of Dr Smith regarding the situation in Germany and France.   There
   were jobs and education for  Kurds  in  Turkey,  although  they  remained
   excluded from civil service and public  posts.   There  was  a  mandatory
   religious aspect to the state education in Turkey.

55.  For the appellants, Mr  Halim  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  and
   acknowledged that the principal appellant's  sur  place  activities  were
   post-decision.  He argued that no negative inference should be drawn from
   that: the principal appellant had simply gathered the evidence  once  her
   solicitors advised her to do so.  The respondent had not  suggested  that
   the person in the 75 photographs of pro-Kurdish  demonstrations  was  not
   the principal appellant.  The material in  question  was  in  the  public
   domain and the principal appellant could be clearly seen holding  banners
   which alleged that the Turkish state was killing Kurds, and so  on.   The
   Turkish state had deep penetration into  and  sophisticated  surveillance
   within the Turkish diaspora in the United Kingdom.

56. The daughter  was  now  an  adult  and  studying  at  University.   Both
   children had been in the United Kingdom for more than 10 years  and  were
   qualifying  children  within  the  meaning  of  section   117D   of   the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

57. The risk the appellants feared was from  state  actors.   The  principal
   appellant had given a credible account of past persecution and of a  real
   future risk of ill treatment if she were to be returned  to  Turkey.   Mr
   Halim relied on the report of Dr Bayir, which  he described  as  'focused
   and rigorously referenced' and which  concluded  that  it  was  plausible
   that the appellant would be arrested by the Turkish authorities on return
   by reason of her attendance at and involvement with  dissident  political
   organisations, and that if she were to be arrested she was at  real  risk
   of police brutality, torture, charges and imprisonment; and that  it  was
   'very likely that the  appellant's  membership  of  activities  with  the
   Kurdish Community Centre might also put her at further risk on her return
   to Turkey as the  Turkish  Intelligence  Services  (MIT)  maintain  close
   surveillance over activities of political dissidents  abroad',  including
   in the United Kingdom, as Deputy Prime Minister Bekir Bozdag had admitted
   openly. The surveillance by MIT included  surveillance  of  social  media
   posts.

58. The Turkish border police had  a  computerised  system,  POL-NET,  which
   contained details of previous arrests, convictions, arrest  warrants  and
   court cases.  If, as seemed reasonably likely, the principal  appellant's
   name came up on that database, the principal appellant  and  perhaps  the
   daughter would be transferred to the Istanbul Anti-Terror  Branch,  which
   was known to use torture.  The appellants' claim should succeed  on  that
   basis.

59. Regarding Article 8 ECHR, the appellants contended that they would  face
   very significant obstacles  if  removed  to  Turkey,  by  reason  of  the
   endemic, institutionalised prejudice against those of  Kurdish  ethnicity
   and those of the  Alevi  Muslim  faith.   The  appellant  relied  on  the
   evidence in Dr Bahir's report and on the appellant's committed  activism.
    Mr Halim contended that this was the paradigm case for paragraph  276ADE
   so far as Article 8 ECHR was concerned and the appeals of both appellants
   and the principal appellant's dependants should be allowed.

Analysis

60. Since the respondent has opted not to cross-examine  the  appellants,  I
   treat their evidence as credible, to the  lower  standard  applicable  in
   international protection appeals.

61. I have considered what weight I can give to the  expert  evidence.    As
   regards Dr Smith's medico-legal report, and Dr  Bakir's  country  report,
   both are carefully prepared, Dr Smith's  report  with  reference  to  the
   Istanbul Protocol standard and Dr Bakir's report  with  proper  sourcing,
   and an awareness of her Ikarian Reefer duties.  I place  weight  on  both
   reports.  Dr Smith found that the  marks  on  the  appellant's  body  are
   corroborative of the appellant's account of being ill-treated in  Turkey.



62. In contrast, I am unable to place much weight on  Ms  Deacon's  opinion:
   her report lacks rigour and may well be at least in part cut  and  pasted
   from another report (there is a mysterious reference on page  10  to  the
   son having 'relatives remaining  in  Pakistani').   Ms  Deacon's  opinion
   lacks much in the way of specifics and is speculative about  matters  not
   within her remit. She accepts  that  the  son's  best  interests  lie  in
   remaining with his immediate family, his parents  and  his  sister.   The
   most that can really be drawn from this report  is  that  the  son  is  a
   happy, healthy, hardworking young person, who now feels primarily British
   and speaks English at school, and who has a friendship group developed in
   the United Kingdom while he has been here, mostly  at  a  time  when  his
   parents had no leave to remain, though that is no fault of his and cannot
   count against him.

63. There is nothing exceptional in what Ms  Deacon  describes  and  if  the
   principal appellant's appeal would otherwise fail, I  am  satisfied  that
   her son's section 55 best interests are in returning to Turkey  with  the
   rest of his family.  There is nothing in the  son's  circumstances  which
   could reach the level of undue harshness or exceptional circumstances, if
   his mother's appeal failed.

64.  I return, therefore, to the question  of  the  risk  to  the  principal
   appellant.  Her unchallenged  account  in  her  oral  evidence  is  fully
   corroborated by Dr Smith's report.  She is a person who has  a  long-term
   connection with the  various  pro-Kurdish  parties  in  Turkey,  and  has
   continued  that  association  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Those   parties
   represent the political wing of the pro-Kurdish movement in Turkey.   The
   appellant has no connection with the PKK but has on  two  occasions  been
   suspected of being so connected and has been  interrogated  and  suffered
   physical harm by reason of those  suspicions:  persecution  derives  from
   what the actor of persecution considers a person's allegiance to be,  and
   the  fact  that  it  is  inaccurate  is  of  no  assistance   during   an
   interrogation.

65. I remind myself that under paragraph 339K of the  Immigration  Rules  HC
   395 (as amended):

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

   I am satisfied that the established treatment of the principal  appellant
   amounted to serious harm.

66. The question then is whether there are good  reasons  to  consider  that
   the persecution or serious harm  will  be  repeated.   I  note  that  the
   principal appellant was not charged on either of the occasions  when  she
   was arrested, and that she was able to  replace  her  identity  card  and
   leave Turkey openly on her own Turkish passport.  If it were not for  her
   sur place  activity,  applying  the  guidance  given  in  IK  (Returnees,
   Records, IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312, I would  not  find  that  the
   principal appellant was at risk on return, still less that there was  any
   risk by association to her daughter or her other family members.

67. There is, however, significant evidence of  sur  place  activity,  which
   the respondent does not dispute, and which represents a  continuation  of
   the principal appellant's activity in Turkey before 2009.  The  principal
   appellant cannot be expected to suppress the expression of her  political
   convictions to escape harm:  see RT (Zimbabwe) & Ors v Secretary of State
   for the Home Department  [2012]  UKSC  38.   The  second  appellant,  the
   daughter, has also joined the party and given the penetration  of  United
   Kingdom activities by the Turkish security  services,  it  is  reasonably
   likely that they will know that and that she will be at risk  on  return,
   either because of her affiliation in the United Kingdom or by reason  her
   family link to the principal appellant.

68. For all of the above reasons, these appeals succeed on  refugee  grounds
   and under Article 3 ECHR.  The humanitarian protection appeal fails.



DECISION

69. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.

   I set aside the previous decision.

   The appellants' appeals are allowed.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     31 January 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
