
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02722/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On April 27, 2017                   |On May 4, 2017                       |
|                                    |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                        MR OMED AHMED MOHAMMED MURAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Johnrose (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  He  arrived  in  this  country  on
    November 23, 2015  and  claimed  asylum.  The  respondent  refused  his
    application for asylum on March 6, 2016.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on March 18,  2016  under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. His appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Herwald
    (hereinafter called the Judge) on December 2, 2016 and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on December 14, 2016 the  Judge  refused  his  appeal.   He
    appealed that decision on December 28, 2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Adio granted permission to  appeal  finding  it  arguable  the
    Judge had erred on the issue of entry to Iraq and internal relocation.

 4. I do not make an anonymity order in this case.

    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Mrs Johnrose relied on her grounds  of  appeal  and  expanded  at  some
    length on them. In summary, she submitted the Judge had  erred  in  his
    approach to the appellant  being  able  to  obtain  documentation,  had
    speculated on the availability of accommodation and  financial  support
    and had failed to consider country evidence or his ability to settle in
    Sulimaniyah.

 6. Mr Harrison referred me to Page 12  of  the  Judge's  decision  and  in
    particular the second paragraph of paragraph [18] of that decision.

 7. In his findings the Judge  accepted  the  appellant's  return  was  not
    feasible.

 8. Mr Harrison submitted that the respondent  had  the  responsibility  to
    show return was feasible and where it wasn't the appellant must succeed
    with his appeal. Although the Judge had gone on to  consider  ways  the
    appellant could obtain documents  there  was  nothing  in  the  refusal
    letter that supported that approach. Mr Harrison accepted the appellant
    had no passport and he did not have a laissez passer and there  was  no
    evidence to suggest he had any family who could accommodate or  support
    him. The Judge, he submitted, had made findings that he should not have
    made because he had accepted return was not feasible. He accepted there
    was an error in law.

 9.  I  asked  Mr  Harrison  what   should   happen   in   light   of   his
    submission/concession and he indicated  that  in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence to the contrary the appeal would have to be allowed because he
    would face a real risk of serious harm contrary to  article  15(c)  and
    article 3 ECHR.

    FINDINGS

10. In light  of  Mr  Harrison's  concession  I  find  that  returning  the
    appellant would lead to the appellant requiring humanitarian protection
    in light of the findings in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  544
    and any return, in the current situation, would breach article 3 ECHR.

    DECISION

11. There was an error in law.

12. I set aside the original decision and remake it as follows:

      a) I allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

      b) I allow the appeal under article 3 ECHR.



Signed                              Date     April 27, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made as no fee was paid.


Signed                              Date     April 27, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
