
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02000/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Promulgated                          |
|On the papers                        |On 28 April 2020                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 1 August 2019 the Upper Tribunal found a Judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal had erred in law in a manner material to the  decision  to
        dismiss the appeal. The decision was set aside  although  it  is  a
        preserved finding that the appellant has converted to  Christianity
        in the United Kingdom and that such conversion is genuine.
     2. The appeal was adjourned pending  publication  of  the  forthcoming
        country guidance case relating to Christians  which  has  now  been
        published as PS (Christianity - Risk Iran)  CG  [2020]  UKUT  00046
        which the appellant's representatives states confirms the appellant
        will face a real risk on return to Iran unless he hides  his  faith
        through fear of risk of persecution, which is contrary  to  the  HJ
        (Iran) principle.
     3. Directions were issued on 26 March 2020  seeking  the  respondent's
        view of the merits of the appeal in light of the findings in PS.
     4. In a letter of the same date Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,
        Mrs Pettersen, advised the Upper Tribunal:


         Re: Secretary of State's response to Directions.
         Mr [AA] Iran (Islamic Republic of) 27 August 1978


         1.  Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson issued directions in  relation  to
                    this appeal on 26th March 2020 in which  he  sought  the
                    position of the respondent in the light of the  CG  case
                    relating to Christians which has now been  published  as
                    PS (Christianity - Risk Iran) CG [2020] UKUT  00046   to
                    this appeal.
         2.  Given the preserved finding of the First  Tier  Tribunal  that
                    the appellant is a genuine convert to  Christianity  the
                    respondent accepts that in the light of the new  Country
                    Guidance the appellant would face a risk on return.
         3.  The respondent has no objection to the decision  being  remade
                    to allow the appeal  on  Protection  grounds  without  a
                    further hearing.


     5. In accordance with the Upper  Tribunal  powers  to  dispose  of  an
        appeal without a hearing, where  appropriate,  the  Upper  Tribunal
        allows the appellants appeal on the basis he will face a real  risk
        on return to Iran as a result of his conversion  to  the  Christian
        faith unless the acts discreetly, which  he  would  only  do  as  a
        result of a fear of persecution if he expressed his  faith  openly,
        which is contrary to the HJ (Iran) principle.


Decision

     6. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.

Anonymity.


     7. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure    (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson                               Dated the 26
March 2020



