
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02999/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 September 2017                  |On  21 February 2018                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                    [d k]
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mozham, of Counsel, instructed Liyon Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre (hereafter "the FtTJ") promulgated on 9 March 2017  dismissing
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of  a  protection  claim,  the
    protection claim having been refused by the Respondent for reasons  set
    out in a decision letter dated 13 November 2015.

2.    The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on [ ] 1967.  He  is  of
    Singhalese ethnicity. He has been living in the  United  Kingdom  since
    his entry as a visitor on 19 May 2006. He claimed  asylum  on  10  July
    2015 on the basis that he was arrested by the Sri Lankan authorities on
    14 April 2006 as he was suspected of assisting  the  LTTE  and  claimed
    that he would be subjected to ill-treatment on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.



3.    Prior to the hearing of the appeal before the  FtTJ,  the  appeal  was
    listed before Judge Graves on 5 September 2016. The Appellant was  then
    represented by Counsel (Mr Jafar) and his attendance note contained  in
    the body of an email gave details of how the  Appellant  had  disclosed
    details of his detention and ill-treatment during a conversation  prior
    to the commencement of the hearing. Accordingly,  Counsel  applied  for
    and was granted an adjournment to obtain expert medical evidence and to
    permit the Respondent  to  serve  a  document  verification  report  in
    relation to  an  arrest  warrant  produced  by  the  Appellant  from  a
    magistrates' court in Sri Lanka.

4.    The matter then came before the FtTJ. A medico-legal report  dated  25
    January  2017  had  been  obtained  from  Mr  Mason  who  examined  the
    Appellant's  scarring.  The  Respondent  had  also  filed  a   document
    verification report relating to the arrest warrant stating that it  was
    not genuine.

5.    The FtTJ heard evidence from the Appellant. A summary of his claim  is
    set out at [12] to [27]. The FtTJ then summarised the  findings  of  Mr
    Mason at [29] to [31] and noted his  conclusion  that:  "It  is  in  my
    opinion not possible that these scars could result from  injuries  that
    were self-inflicted or were  inflicted  on  [the  appellant]  with  his
    consent (self-inflicted injuries by proxy) although  it  is  recognised
    that these possibilities cannot be entirely eliminated on the basis  of
    the scars characteristics alone."

6.    The FtTJ disbelieved the Appellant's account in its entirety  and  her
    findings are comprehensively set out at [35] to [76].  The  FtTJ  noted
    various inconsistencies in the evidence and identified elements of  the
    account that she considered were inherently unlikely. The FtTJ did  not
    accept that the Appellant travelled to Sri Lanka in 2006  and  rejected
    his evidence that he was assisted by an agent through  the  airport  in
    Sri Lanka in view of the fact that he had a valid UK visa.

7.    In reaching her conclusions the FtTJ took into account inter alia  the
    report of Mr Mason at [34] and  at  [46],  and  [47]  referred  to  the
    guidance given in JL (medical reports-credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT
    00145 (IAC) and KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014]  UKUT
    00230 (IAC). At [48] to [51] the FtTJ analysed the Appellant's  account
    of ill-treatment. At [48] the FtTJ stated thus:

         "I find it significant that the appellant has never claimed to have
         been tortured by an iron metal rod either in his witness  statement
         or in his asylum interview and hence  the  only  evidence  that  he
         suffered such torture is what is set out at  paragraph  5.2  of  Mr
         Mason's report. It is unclear what statement of  the  appellant  Mr
         Mason was sent because the only witness statement I have  from  the
         appellant makes no mention of any  torture  and  in  particular  no
         mention of any iron rod."

8.    And at [49]:

         "Although the appellant allegedly told Mr Mason that  he  was  hung
         with chains by his wrists and beaten and was also held on the floor
         and beaten and burned with a hot metal rod and suffered other forms
         of torture including having  his  head  placed  in  a  plastic  bag
         containing chilli powder, I  give  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
         appellant never made any such allegation in  his  asylum  interview
         and simply stated that he was locked up in a small room  [Q62  AIR]
         and was not given food during the first day at all nor  even  water
         and that he was taken the following day  to  another  room  with  a
         table and questioned (Q63 AIR)."

9.    The FtTJ took into  account  the  Appellant's  conduct  following  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom and concluded that his  going  to  ground
    and not contacting the Home Office for some  nine  years  was  not  the
    behaviour of someone genuinely in fear of persecution.

10.   At [52]  the  FtTJ  referred  to  the  conclusions  of  Mr  Mason  and
    considered that his reasons for finding that the scars could  not  have
    been self-inflicted were "cursory" and did not comply with the dicta in
    KV. The FtTJ noted the regularity of the scars on the Appellant's  back
    which she found were not "indicative of random strokes such as would be
    administered by an official torturing a suspect from whom he was trying
    to obtain information."

11.   At [53] to [54] the FtTJ gave weight to the fact  that  there  was  no
    supporting evidence from the Appellant's wife and thus she  disbelieved
    his claim that his wife had been reporting every month  to  the  police
    since May 2006, and further noted that there was  no  letter  from  the
    attorney from whom she obtained the  arrest  warrant  and  other  court
    documents. The FtTJ was critical of the evidence from another  attorney
    in Sri Lanka who claimed that he personally  visited  the  magistrates'
    court to verify the documents  and  considered  that  they  called  for
    "little or no weight" as no  investigating  officer  and  report  would
    refer to the LTTE diaspora in 2006 [57].

12.   The FtTJ next considered the  document  verification  report  and  the
    arrest warrant at [58] to [69]. The FtTJ referred to the  view  of  the
    Sri Lankan attorney that Ralon (the document verification organisation)
    was a third party and thus had no authority  to  obtain  details  of  a
    pending case from the authorities without the permission of the  court.
    The FtTJ further noted the contents of the document verification report
    which stated inter alia that a redacted copy of the arrest warrant  was
    posted to the registrar of the issuing magistrates' court who  in  turn
    confirmed that the arrest warrant was not genuine.

13.   The FtTJ noted that she had "no means of knowing whether Raylon  (sic)
    Colombo is a third party" or whether or not  it  was  the  name  of  an
    official at the British High Commission (BHC) Colombo, but  noted  that
    the verification came from this organisation. The FtTJ found  that  the
    attorney had assumed  the  document  verification  organisation  was  a
    private organisation/third party that could not  obtain  details  of  a
    pending case. The FtTJ further noted that the attorney did not  examine
    the documents for himself  and  his  testimony  was  based  on  hearsay
    evidence from the registrar who informed him that the documents matched
    with the court's records [62].

14.   The FtTJ went further still and considered but, did  not  accept,  the
    criticisms made by the Appellant of the document  verification  process
    and she noted that a redacted copy of the arrest warrant  was  sent  to
    the BHC. The FtTJ stated that she had considered the documents "in  the
    round" and noted the  Appellant's  delay  in  making  enquiries  as  to
    whether or not there was an arrest warrant. The FtTJ did  not  find  it
    credible that his wife would have no knowledge of the warrant issued in
    2006 if she had  been  regularly  reporting  to  the  police  at  [66].
    Ultimately, the FtTJ concluded that the Appellant had falsely  obtained
    an arrest warrant and investigating report to bolster a false claim.

15.   The FtTJ noted that no friends who had  supported  the  Appellant  for
    nine years in the United Kingdom were forthcoming to support his  claim
    and  concluded  that  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum  undermined  his
    credibility. Having rejected the Appellant's claim the FtTJ applied and
    found in accordance with extant Country Guidance that the Appellant was
    not at risk of persecution or serious harm in the event of a return  to
    Sri Lanka, and that, he  could  return  safely  to  his  wife  and  two
    children there.

16.    Accordingly, the FtTJ dismissed the appeal.

17.   The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  citing  five  grounds.  In
    summary it was argued that the FtTJ erred in law by making findings  on
    her own assumptions, put herself in  the  position  of  an  expert  and
    failed to apply anxious scrutiny and provide adequate reasons.  It  was
    further argued that the FtTJ erred in her consideration of  the  letter
    from the attorney and applied a higher standard of proof.

18.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Osbourne on 24 July 2017.

19.   The Respondent gave notice opposing the appeal  for  the  reasons  set
    out in a rule 24 response dated 18 August 2017.

20.   Mr Mohzam relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He  did  not  directly
    address each of the grounds but his oral submissions were  broadly  and
    generally based upon them. Mr  Mohzam  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  made
    various assumptions  at  [35]  and  her  reasons  were  inadequate.  He
    submitted that the FtTJ's adverse findings were made without  reference
    to the medical evidence and she failed to consider the request  for  an
    adjournment and the reason(s) for it. Mr Mozham further contended  that
    at [38] to [40], the FtTJ failed to evaluate the medical  evidence  and
    at [34] failed to give reasons for rejecting or accepting the evidence.
    He submitted that there was insufficient  evidence  to  substantiate  a
    finding that the arrest warrant was false, and that, the FtTJ failed to
    consider matters in the round.

21.   Mr Tufan in his submissions referred to the judgement  in  Gheisari  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1854  at
    paragraph 20. He submitted that at [34] the  FtTJ  had  considered  the
    medical evidence in accordance  with  the  guidance  in  JL  which  she
    expressly referred to at [46]. Mr Tufan submitted that the FtTJ was not
    obliged to accept the conclusions of Mr Mason. He  submitted  that  the
    FtTJ considered the arrest warrant in the  round  and  that  there  was
    nothing irrational in the FtTJ's approach to the evidence.

22.   In  reply,  Mr  Mohzam  referred  to  Gheisari  at  paragraph  21.  He
    submitted that the FtTJ's assumptions were tainted by the fact that she
    did not provide reasons. Mr Mohzam maintained that  from  [35]  onwards
    the FtTJ had not properly dealt with the evidence.

Consideration and Conclusions

23.   I have considered the submissions made by the representatives  at  the
    hearing. I consider that the central submissions made on behalf of  the
    Appellant do not demonstrate that a material error of law was committed
    by the FtTJ. On the contrary, I find that  the  FtTJ's  decision  is  a
    comprehensive well-reasoned decision based on the evidence  from  which
    various adverse conclusions were drawn that cannot  be  categorised  as
    perverse or irrational and were findings that  were  entirely  open  to
    her.

24.   The grounds of  appeal  are  not  entirely  easy  to  follow  as  many
    paragraphs that make up the grounds allude to  assertions  rather  than
    errors of law, but insofar as I have understood them I address each  in
    turn below.

25.   Ground 1 contends that the FtTJ's adverse findings at  [35]  and  [38]
    were  based  on  assumptions  and  that  she  failed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's claim as a whole applying the need  for  anxious  scrutiny.
    This ground is without merit. The FtTJ directed  herself  appropriately
    and clearly set out the Appellant's case and made findings on  elements
    core to that claim. The FtTJ's findings at [35] and [38] were  open  to
    her and are adequately reasoned. I consider that this ground amounts to
    no more than a mere assertion of a failing on the part of the FtTJ  and
    fails to identify an arguable error of law.

26.   Ground 2 traverses  several  paragraphs  and  relates  to  the  FtTJ's
    treatment of the medical evidence. Paragraph 5 of the  grounds  accepts
    that the Appellant made no  reference  to  torture  during  the  asylum
    interview and avers that this  matter  only  came  to  light  during  a
    conversation between Counsel  (Mr  Jafar)  and  the  Appellant  at  the
    hearing on 5 September 2016. Mr Jafar's email setting out those  events
    is attached to the grounds to this tribunal, which  Mr  Mohzam  submits
    was not considered, but he could not confirm whether this evidence  was
    placed before the FtTJ. There is nothing to indicate that it was.

27.   The FtTJ was plainly aware of the history of the proceedings  and  the
    reasons for the adjournment which she summarised  at  [10].  While  the
    FtTJ did not expressly refer to the conversation between the  Appellant
    and Mr Jafar she cannot be criticised for failing to take that evidence
    into account when it was not placed before her.  I  further  note  that
    while Mr Mohzam submitted that the FtTJ failed to take into account the
    reasons for the adjournment, it has not been explained how that led  to
    any procedural impropriety on the part of the FtTJ and the  grounds  do
    not suggest that unfairness arose in consequence.

28.   There is no dispute that the FtTJ correctly referred to  the  evidence
    relating to torture at [48] and she was entitled to  observe  that  the
    "only evidence that he suffered such torture is  what  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 5.2 of Mr Mason's report". While the  FtTJ  was  entitled  to
    make  that  observation,  she  does  not  appear  to  have  placed  any
    particular emphasis on it, but rather the emphasis was  placed  on  the
    Appellant's failure to mention any torture  in  his  witness  statement
    and, in particular, that he was tortured by an  iron  rod.  That  is  a
    matter of fact that is not disputed and I consider that  the  FtTJ  was
    entitled to attach weight to that omission.

29.   I therefore consider that it has not been demonstrated that  the  FtTJ
    considered that the first mention by the Appellant  of  being  tortured
    was made to Mr Mason and the grounds in fact make no complaint that she
    did so.

30.    The  grounds  essentially  complain  that  the   FtTJ   reached   her
    conclusions in isolation of the medical evidence and that her rejection
    of that evidence was "cursory". While not cited to me I  consider  that
    there is no basis upon which I can conclude that  the  FtTJ  failed  to
    treat the medical evidence in accordance with  the  guidance  given  in
    Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    367. The FtTJ refers to the salient conclusions of Mr Mason at [29]  to
    [31] and at [34] stated that she had considered the medical  report  in
    assessing credibility in the context of all the evidence which she then
    cited. The FtTJ then referred herself to the tribunal's decision in  JL
    and KV and she considered the guidance therein  alongside  the  medical
    evidence.

31.   While Mr Mason believed that the Appellant's scars were diagnostic  of
    the scars that would arise from burns in the manner  described  by  the
    Appellant, and could not have possibly been  self-inflicted,  the  FtTJ
    was entitled to conclude that this conclusion was cursory and  did  not
    comply with the reasoning in KV. While it would have  been  helpful  if
    the FtTJ had set out her reasons more fully in this regard her approach
    was not materially flawed.

32.   In KV the tribunal held:

         "6.      Whilst if best practice is followed  medico-legal  reports
         will make a critical evaluation of a claimant's account of scarring
         said to have been caused by torture, such reports cannot be equated
         with an assessment to be undertaken by decision-makers in  a  legal
         context in which the burden of proof rests on the claimant and when
         one of the purposes of questioning is to test a claimant's evidence
         so as to decide whether (to the lower standard) it is credible."

33.   That is the approach the FtTJ adopted in a nuanced decision that  took
    a balanced approach to the evidence. The FtTJ  rightly  noted  and  was
    entitled to take into account that Mr Mason  could  not  eliminate  the
    possibility of self-infliction by proxy. I agree with Mr Tufan that the
    medical report was thus not determinate of the claim and that the  FtTJ
    was entitled in the circumstances to draw upon  her  own  observations,
    which have not been shown to be irrational at [52].   I find that there
    is no merit in this ground either.

34.   Ground 3 attacks the FtTJ's consideration of the  arrest  warrant  and
    supporting court documents.

35.    First  the  grounds  assert  that  the  FtTJ  did  not  consider  the
    Respondent's failure to produce evidence of her communication with  the
    BHC in Sri Lanka and between the BHC and the registrar of  the  issuing
    magistrates' court. This contention is also without merit. The  absence
    of such evidence was  raised  by  the  Appellant's  representatives  in
    submissions and the FtTJ expressly dealt with it at [63]  to  [64]  and
    factored this into her assessment.

36.   Second, the grounds aver to  a  mistake  of  fact  in  that  the  FtTJ
    wrongly stated at [56] that  it  was  the  Appellant's  solicitors  who
    instructed the attorney in Sri Lanka to attend the  magistrates'  court
    when this was not the case. It is thus argued that the FtTJ  failed  to
    consider the Appellant's case with anxious scrutiny. While there is  an
    unfortunate error in this regard, I am not satisfied that the error  is
    material. While  the  FtTJ  gave  weight  to  this  issue  it  was  not
    determinative of the Appellant's credibility and the FtTJ gave  several
    other independent reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account.  I  am
    thus not satisfied that had the error not been committed that the  FtTJ
    would have reached a different conclusion.

37.   The grounds further cite an unreported decision of the tribunal  in  a
    case concerning an Appellant from Sri Lanka, who relied  on  an  arrest
    warrant  and  court  documents,  to  support  a  contention  that   the
    Respondent's enquiries were not sufficient to  find  an  allegation  of
    falsity.  This  ground  is  misconceived.  First,  there  has  been  no
    compliance with the Tribunal's Practice Direction  for  the  citing  of
    unreported decisions. Second, a full copy of that decision has not been
    produced and there is no indication that it was before the FtTJ. Third,
    I note from the extracts quoted in the grounds that it appears that the
    tribunal's conclusions were fact specific and it is not  in  any  event
    binding on this tribunal or the FtTJ. I find no error in this regard.

38.   Further, while complaint is now being made that  the  Respondent  only
    sought to verify the arrest  warrant  this  complaint  was  not  raised
    before the  FtTJ.  The  FtTJ  considered  and  gave  many  reasons  for
    rejecting the supporting evidence. Those reasons are unassailable.

39.   It is further contended that the FtTJ was not entitled to conclude  as
    she did at [57], namely, that  the  investigation  officer  and  report
    would not refer to "LTTE diaspora" in 2006 as this was a  modern  term.
    It is argued in the grounds that this term was used in the  translation
    which was completed in 2016 but this conveniently ignores the fact that
    the FtTJ was entitled to assume that the translation was  accurate  and
    nor was there any evidence that this was a term used by the  translator
    to reflect the nuances in the report.

40.   There is also no merit in grounds 4 and 5. The  grounds  contend  that
    the FtTJ applied a higher standard of proof at [53] and [54] in finding
    that it was reasonable to expect there to have been some evidence  from
    the Appellant's wife and the attorney from whom she obtained the  court
    documents. The grounds in this regard are a mere assertion and  do  not
    identify or particularise how the FtTJ fell into error in this  regard.
    Mr Mohzam  merely  repeated  that  assertion.  The  paragraphs  of  the
    decision to which I have been  referred  do  not  show  that  the  FtTJ
    applied a higher standard of proof. It is clear from the  FtTJ's  self-
    direction that she was aware of the lower standard of proof and  it  is
    further clear from a holistic reading of the  decision  that  the  FtTJ
    clearly applied that standard throughout. I further  consider  that  it
    was open to the FtTJ to place weight on the absence of  evidence  given
    that such evidence could have been readily obtained by the Appellant.

41.   Ground 5 briefly  states  that  the  FtTJ  erred  "by  dismissing  the
    appellant's claim because of his delay in claiming asylum" and that she
    failed to conduct a global assessment of credibility. This ground  does
    not identify an arguable error of law. The FtTJ was  required  to  take
    into account the  delay  in  claiming  asylum  in  her  assessment  and
    correctly applied the provisions of section 8 on the evidence.

42.   I have considered the refences  the  representatives  referred  to  in
    Gheisari. At [20] and [21] LJ Pill stated:

         "20.     It is because of Sedley LJ's references  to  a  two  stage
         process that I add a few more words of my own.  Fact finding  is  a
         skilled task, conducted by those holding judicial  office  at  many
         levels and in many jurisdictions within the legal system.   In  the
         asylum  jurisdiction,  evidence  as  to  specific  events  must  be
         considered by adjudicators against the background of the in-country
         material available to them.  They often hear oral evidence, as  did
         this adjudicator, and must assess the truthfulness and  reliability
         of that evidence against that background and having regard to their
         experience and wisdom. As juries, entrusted with the  fact  finding
         role in our criminal courts, are customarily instructed:  "You will
         do that by having regard to the whole of the evidence  and  forming
         your own  judgment  about  the  witnesses  and  which  evidence  is
         reliable and which is not."


         21.      There will be cases where the events upon which a judgment
         has to be made  are,  in  the  experience  of  the  decision-maker,
         inherently likely or inherently unlikely.  That  must  be  kept  in
         mind when the assessment of credibility is made.  That  may  be  an
         important factor when making the decision.   There  will  be  cases
         where, on the particular evidence, a two stage process of reasoning
         is appropriate, an assessment of the background material and then a
         subsequent assessment of the  credibility  of  the  witness.   Fact
         finding is, however, essentially a single process.   Judgments  are
         not to be made by rote.  I would deplore a situation in  which  the
         fact finder must first decide whether the situation  is  inherently
         likely or  unlikely  and  only  then  to  address  himself  to  the
         witness's credibility.  The task of  fact  finding  should  not  be
         compartmentalised  in  that  way.   Parts  of  the  story  may   be
         inherently likely and parts inherently  unlikely.   The  degree  of
         likelihood may itself depend on witness assessment.  What would  be
         wrong would be to say, -- and I  agree  with  Sedley  LJ,  --  that
         because evidence is inherently unlikely it inevitably follows  that
         it is wrong.  An unlikely description may, upon a consideration  of
         the circumstances as a whole, including the judge's  assessment  of
         the witness and any explanations he gives, be a true one.

43.   The FtTJ did not fall foul  of  these  principles.  I  find  that  the
    grounds amount to a disagreement with the findings of the FtTJ  and  do
    not identify a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and shall stand. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                            Date: 20 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


