
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02551/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd October 2018                         |On 6 November 2018            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar of Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify MS or any of his
family members.  This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.
Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of
court proceedings.  I do so as it is a protection claim and MS is a minor.

The Respondent refused the Appellant's protection claim on 15th December
2016.  Discretionary leave to remain was granted until 30th June 2020 as
the Appellant is a minor.  The appeal against the dismissal of the
protection claim was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre ("the
judge") following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 4th April 2018.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission to appeal (17th September
2018) as:

"It is arguable that the judge erred in law: (1) in not assessing the risk
to the Appellant on return for the purposes of his asylum and humanitarian
protection claims at the date of hearing (para 49); it was irrelevant that
he would not be returned at present because he is a minor; (2) in not
properly and fully assessing the risk on return as a minor in accordance
with AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC).  Para
51 is arguably an inadequate assessment even disregarding (1)."

Permission to appeal was refused in relation to the adverse credibility
findings and tracing.

The Respondent's Position

There was no Rule 24 notice.  Ms Pal conceded that the judge should have
considered the risk to the Appellant as at the date of hearing and that
this was a material error of law in relation to the Appellant's human
rights.  She submitted that the adverse credibility finding in relation to
the asylum claim stood.  She agreed that there was a material error of law
in not considering where the Appellant was from and the risks to him being
returned to his home area.

The Appellant's Position

Ms Iengar applied to re-open the grounds that had been refused by Judge
Grubb. She submitted that there should be a de novo hearing and that the
findings at [34 to 49] of the decision of the judge should not be
preserved.

The judgment was tarred because of the assessment on credibility and flawed
as the judge had not given the Appellant benefit of the doubt, being a
minor.

The judge had not adequately considered each individual point as identified
in KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 00552 (IAC) in that each
individual fact must be assessed against the lower standard.

TN and MA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2015] UKSC 40 was inadequately considered
as [64] "the tracing process must be treated as part of the process of
deciding the asylum claim and it was therefore right to consider what
evidence might have been elicited if the duty had been properly performed".
 I point out here that this was what Underhill LJ had stated in the Court
of Appeal in AA.  These observations were considered by the Supreme Court
in TN at [69-74] where the approach in an asylum appeal where the
Respondent has failed in her tracing obligation was considered.

Discussion

At [51] of the judge's decision the judge says:

"51. In relation to any risk on return as a young man and failed asylum
seeker I am not prepared to speculate about the position regarding family
tracing and what may happen before or after 20th June 2020.  I disbelieve
that the Appellant has lost all the contact phone numbers for all his
family members and do not find it credible that even as a young person he
would be so careless as to have no means of informing his family that he
had arrived safely in the UK."

That is a finding that was open to the judge on the evidence she had.
Tracing is therefore available to enable contact with family members in
Afghanistan to be made. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that it is
appropriate to grant permission to appeal to include the question of
tracing to be re-assessed.

I am not satisfied that it is appropriate to set aside any of the findings
within [34 - 49].  That is because the findings made were available to the
judge.  The judge repeatedly referred to the fact that she was considering
credibility.  That is referred to in [34, 40, and 47].  The judge refers to
the lack of plausibility of the account at [48].  The judge repeatedly
identified that the Appellant as a minor (e.g. [38]). This was plainly in
her mind throughout the proceedings.  Of greatest importance, however, is
that at [8] the judge identified the burden and standard of proof
correctly.  Nowhere in the decision is there any indication that the judge
strayed from that, or that she applied anything other than the appropriate
level of scrutiny to each individual fact identified with the exception of
the risk on return to the Appellant's home area and the risk upon getting
there.

I do not therefore extend the grant of permission to appeal.

In relation to the substance upon which permission to appeal was granted, I
accept that [51] is an inadequate assessment of the circumstances the
Appellant would find himself in on returning to Afghanistan.  The judgment
identifies the village the Appellant is from in [11].  It is Akakhail
village.  Nowhere in the decision does it say where that is.  There is no
assessment as to what the position is in his village or the province in
which the village falls.  There is no evidence as to whether the Taliban or
Afghan authorities are in control.  In the screening interview it
identifies that Akakhail village is in Tagab, which is in the province of
Kapisa in Afghanistan.  There is no evidence within the decision of the
judge having considered whether the Appellant could safely reach there from
Kabul, or how he would get there. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the
judge materially erred.

I am satisfied that it is appropriate to remit the matter to the First-tier
Tribunal for consideration of the risks to the Appellant on return to his
home area, and whether he could reach there safely given the lack of
evidence in relation to the issues still requiring consideration, and this
matter goes beyond those contained within the Presidential Guidance for
retention in the Upper Tribunal.  The remittal is against the factual
matrix of there having been no past interest in him by the Taliban for any
reason, that he has not established he has lost all the contact phone
numbers for all his family members, and that it is not credible that even
as a young person he would be so careless as to have no means of informing
his family he had arrived safely here. It is not a de novo hearing.  [34 -
49] inclusive are preserved.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.  [34 - 49]
are preserved.  I agree with the Representatives that it is appropriate to
remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge other
than Judge Plumptre.




Signed
Date 26 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
