
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02756/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2018                    |On 19 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs L Gardner, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
                    Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan assessed as  being  born  in
    January 2002. In a decision sent on 6 June 2017 Judge Ferguson  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal against the decision  made  by
    the respondent on 3 March 2017  refusing  to  grant  him  international
    protection. Because the respondent considered that  adequate  reception
    arrangements could not be established in the appellant's case,  he  was
    granted limited leave to remain until he was 17�, expiring  on  1  July
    2019.  The basis of his asylum claim (and "upgrade" appeal) was that he
    faced a real risk of  forcible  recruitment  by  the  Taliban  who  had
    already killed his father (his father was said to have been working for
    the government).  Like the respondent, the judge did not find his claim
    credible.

2.   Following a hearing on  22  March  2018.  I  issued  an  error  of  law
    decision sent on 1 June 2018. I found first of all that the appellant's
    grounds ((3) and (4), which challenged the judge's adverse  credibility
    findings, were not made out. I stated:

         "5.  I am not persuaded that the third and fourth grounds are  made
             out.   The  judge  made  allowances  for  the  fact  that  the
             appellant was a minor and that in consequence was entitled  to
             a liberal application of the benefit of the  doubt  (paragraph
             17).  The judge clearly considered his claim in the context of
             the evidence as a whole and attached significant weight to the
             reports of Mr Tim Foxley and Dr Giustozzi (who found  that  in
             the light of what  was  known  about  country  conditions  his
             account was plausible).  It was open to the judge to  conclude
             that the appellant's account was nevertheless not credible, in
             view of significant  inconsistencies  and  lack  of  detail  -
             findings which were not as such disputed  in  the  grounds  of
             appeal."

3.   However, I went on to find  that  the  appellant's  ground  (1)  (which
    challenged the viability of the  judge's  treatment  of  whether  there
    would be adequate reception arrangements for the appellant) and  ground
    (2) (which contended that the judge failed to consider the evidence  of
    the social worker and foster carer insofar as it  highlighted  that  he
    had psychological problems and was vulnerable) were made out. I  stated
    in para 6 that:

         "... The judge took as her starting  point  the  respondent's  view
         that it had not been  established  that  there  would  be  adequate
         reception arrangements for the appellant on return.  Whilst some of
         the remarks made by the judge suggested the appellant  might  still
         have family in Afghanistan, the judge  failed  to  make  any  clear
         findings on this issue and on whether, even if  the  appellant  had
         family, they would be able to protect him  on  his  return.   Given
         that the judge accepted that the appellant had PTSD and given  that
         the judge did not reject the evidence  of  his  social  worker  and
         foster carer, it was also necessary for the judge to assess risk on
         return to the appellant as a person whose vulnerability might place
         him in the same position as an unattended child."

4.   The appellant's grounds of appeal had referred to the appellant's  risk
    as a child under  the  country  guidance  case  law,  most  notably  AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16.

5.   At para 8 I then stated:

         "8.   Given  my  conclusion,  however,  that  the  judge's  adverse
             credibility findings are free of legal  error,  these  can  be
             preserved.  In such circumstances, I consider that it would be
             inappropriate to remit the  case  to  the  FtT.   It  will  be
             retained in the Upper Tribunal for a  further  hearing.   This
             hearing will be fixed for Newport, timed for  1  hour,  unless
             either party makes a  specific  application  for  a  different
             venue or time frame. In light of my above analysis it will  be
             clear that the principal task of the judge at the next hearing
             will be to make findings of fact as  regards  the  appellant's
             likely family circumstances in Afghanistan and the capacity of
             any family members to assist the appellant on return.   It  is
             possible that by the date of the resumed hearing there will be
             fresh UT country guidance on conditions in Afghanistan."

6.   A resumed hearing took place in Newport on 5 October 2018. As  was  the
    case at the original hearing, the  appellant  did  not  give  evidence,
    following a medical report stating that he would have difficulties as a
    witness. I first heard evidence from the appellant's carer, Mrs  Brady.
    She said that the appellant was very stressed  by  the  ongoing  appeal
    proceedings. He was doing well in his school work  at  GCSE  level  and
    took part in sports. She said that  because  of  the  stresses  he  was
    experiencing he would not make it  on  his  own  without  her  family's
    support. He had trouble sleeping and was tired in the morning.  He  had
    gone to the point of banging his head. He suffered from  migraines.  He
    had medication for these. She had helped him  get  in  touch  with  Red
    Cross and had given him a photo of himself to give them,  but  she  was
    not present at the Red Cross interviews.  Her  understanding  was  that
    the appellant's brother and  sister  and  father  had  been  killed  in
    Afghanistan but he still had a mother alive. He also had  a  couple  of
    uncles.  So far as she knew the appellant has not had any contact  with
    his mother or other relatives.  She was not aware he had  said  in  his
    asylum interview that he had  had  contact  with  his  mother  when  in
    Greece/Turkey. He had had mental health counselling last  year,  around
    September-October for 10 weeks. In terms  of  his  life  at  home,  his
    personal hygiene was good, he helped with cooking and washing  up  etc.
    and he helped around the house. He  did  his  homework.  Asked  by  Mrs
    Gardner how he would manage if left on his own, she said  she  did  not
    think he would get on with anything.

7.   I then heard submissions from the parties.

8.   Mr Howells submitted that the respondent accepted  that  the  appellant
    could demonstrate a Refugee Convention reason linked to  membership  of
    particular social group by virtue of his age  (he  cited  LQ  (  [2008]
    UKAIT 00005) , but that was not enough on its own to qualify him  as  a
    refugee.   The  adverse  credibility  findings  of  the  FtT  had  been
    preserved and hence the only remaining issue  concerned  whether  there
    would be adequate reception arrangements for the appellant  on  return.
    That was not the case at the time of the respondent's decision;  but  I
    had to  assess  this  matter  as  at  the  date  of  hearing.   In  the
    respondent's view, the appellant had failed to show that he would  lack
    family support.  Although he claimed to have lost all contact with  his
    family since phoning his mother whilst in Greece  and/or  Turkey,  that
    was not reasonably likely to be the case.  The  fact  that  his  foster
    carer was unaware that he had contacted his mother in 2016 added to the
    doubts about what was the  true  situation.   The  appellant  had  only
    recently (starting on 24 February 2017) sought help from the Red  Cross
    with family tracing even though he had been in the UK  since  2016.  On
    his own evidence, he left behind several  relatives,  a  mother  and  a
    brother and sister and some uncles.  As regards the appellant's  mental
    health, although he has been described as a vulnerable person,  he  has
    not  been  prescribed  medication  for  his  mental  health;  his  only
    medication is for migraine. He has not had any  mental  health  therapy
    since 2017. In any event there were mental health facilities that would
    be available to him in Kabul.

9.   As regards the appellant's home area, Mr Howells submitted  that  there
    was no evidence to suggest it was under the control of the Taliban  and
    it was relatively close to Kabul.

10.  Mrs Gardner submitted that the balance of the evidence  indicated  that
    the appellant had lost contact with his family in Afghanistan.  He  had
    last had contact with his  mother  when  in  Greece  and  he  had  been
    separated from his uncle en route. The appellant  had  formed  a  close
    bond with Mrs Brady and her  partner  and  her  evidence  that  to  her
    knowledge he had not had any contact with his mother or other relatives
    since he began living with them was very significant, as she  could  be
    expected to know if he had. The respondent had previously accepted that
    there were no adequate reception arrangements  for  the  appellant,  so
    that meant they must  previously  have  been  satisfied  he  would  not
    receive family support on  return.  Although  the  appellant  had  only
    sought Red Cross help relatively  recently,  he  had  been  trying  and
    engaging and providing relevant and correct information.

11.  Accordingly, submitted Mrs Gardner, I should view the appellant  as  an
    unattended child and able to benefit from the country guidance  in  AA,
    which has not been displaced by subsequent country guidance cases.

12.  In addition to being an unattended  child  the  appellant  should,  she
    submitted, be regarded as someone at added risk of exploitation due  to
    his vulnerability. The social work letter described him as a "client of
    particular vulnerability". This evidence chimed with that of Mrs  Brady
    in making clear that he is not able  to  do  things  on  his  own.   As
    regards mental health facilities in Afghanistan, the background country
    evidence at best demonstrated that such facilities  were  available  in
    Kabul,  but  the  appellant's  home  area  was  outside   Kabul.    The
    respondent's submission did  not  address  the  accessibility  of  such
    facilities to the appellant.

13.  There was also an issue in the appellant's case of whether he would  be
    able to transit  safely  from  Kabul  to  his  home  area.  There  were
    references in the background country information  that  cast  doubt  on
    that.

14.  At the end of the hearing I raised with  Mr  Howells  the  question  of
    whether the respondent had initiated family tracing  inquiries  in  the
    appellant's case.  He said he was unable to shed any light.

15.  On 9 October 2018, I issued Further Directions designed to elicit  from
    the respondent whether and when it was likely family tracing  inquiries
    would be taken in respect of the appellant pursuant to regulation 6  of
    the  Asylum  Seekers  Reception  Conditions  Regulation  2005  (Article
    19(3)of Directive  2003/9/EC)  and  to  obtain  from  the  appellant  a
    statement setting out what details he furnished to  the  Red  Cross  as
    regards his family members  in  Afghanistan  and  if  possible  with  a
    confirmatory letter regarding those details from the Red Cross  and  to
    produce evidence that he has continued to use best endeavours to obtain
    an answer from Red  Cross/the  International  Family  Training  Service
    (IFT) as  regards  his  family  members  in  Afghanistan,  particularly
    bearing in mind that he first sought the help  of  Red  Cross  over  19
    month's ago (on 24 February 2017).

16.  On 6 December 2018 the respondent sent its  response  regarding  family
    tracing in Afghanistan. The response explained that  in  February  2016
    the British Embassy in  Kabul  confirmed  that  it  did  not  have  the
    resources or the geographical capability to carry out family tracing in
    the field. The  respondent  had  granted  the  appellant  leave  as  an
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking child in March 2017 on the basis that  his
    family could not be traced at that specific time. He had  not  provided
    contact details and family tracing  was  not  initiated  as  a  result.
    However, in response to my directions, it had been able to obtain  from
    the Afghan Identity Document Checking Unit (IDCU) a report relating  to
    the appellant. This report, dated 2  December  2018,  stated  that  the
    information contained had been obtained during a site visit carried out
    by the ICDU and querying of residents of Cheen Zarai village of Hisarak
    district of Nangarhar province regarding the  family  tracing  of  [the
    appellant's full name. There then follows a text  from  someone  called
    Badi Khan giving his identity document details and contact  number  and
    stating that he is a resident of Cheen Zaye village of Hisarak district
    of Nangarhar province and is the appellant's father's uncle.  The  text
    states that "I...confirm that [the appellant] son of Almart  Khana  Son
    of Mohammad Sadiq is the resident of this village, his family is living
    in this village and the mentioned area is  under  the  control  of  the
    Taliban."   There  then  follows  a  section  headed  "Information   on
    Relatives" which lists the names of one  brother,  one,  sister  and  a
    mother. Next to the name of his father is written "Deceased".

17.  On 7 December  2018  the  appellant's  representatives  sent  a  letter
    stating that they were in receipt  of  the  Home  Office  response  and
    attachments and wished to submit further documents in the  form  of  an
    additional statement from the appellant dated 6 December  2018,  a  Red
    Cross file received 6 December 2018 and a Reuters report of 8  February
    2017 noting that the Red Cross  had  suspended  Afghanistan  operations
    after six aid workers were killed.

18.  The covering  letter  noted  that  the  appellant  had  now  given  his
    photograph to help the Red Cross inquiries and has requested Red  Cross
    to start work again on his case now they had resumed working  again  in
    Afghanistan.

19.  The appellant's representatives stated that they  had  taken  this  new
    statement from the appellant on the morning  of  6  December  2018  and
    prior to receiving the Home Office response  and  wished  therefore  to
    request a variation of directions to include:

         "Further clarification from the Home Office regarding the  document
         they have provided. There is information missing or not clear  from
         the verification report.

         The credentials and background of Badi Khan. It is not  clear  from
         the information who is Badir Khan, which organisation he works  for
         and how he was able to confirm this information and to whom he  has
         spoken. There is not date of when this  information  was  obtained,
         only the date of the report (2/12/2018).

         Which  person  from  IDCU  visited  the  village  (along  with  his
         credentials), the date of this visit to the  village,  who  he  has
         spoken to in the village, which information he obtained.

         Is the village Cheen Zarai or Cheen Zahyed. [the appellant] said he
         lived in Sunzai.

         The verification report also states that "[the appellant] ...is the
         resident of  this  village."  We  would  be  grateful  for  further
         information from the  Home  Office  regarding  the  methodology  of
         gaining this information as [the appellant] is not resident of  the
         village at this time as  he  is  in  the  UK.  There  is  no  clear
         indication of the timelines.

         That on receipt of the  above  clarifications,  the  Appellant  has
         adequate time to respond and provide comments.

         Once clarifications have been received and the Appellant  has  been
         able to respond that the case is listed for another  oral  hearing.
         The information from the  Home  Office  purports  to  indicate  the
         details of [the appellant's] mother, brother and sister and the Red
         Cross have not been able to trace the Appellant's family to date."

20.  The additional witness statement from the appellant  dated  6  December
    2018 states that when he had his first two meeting with the  Red  Cross
    in 2017 he had told them he did not want them to find his family as  he
    was worried about their safety. They had given him  a  timeframe  "that
    maybe the situation would be better in the future and maybe they  would
    start looking again". He said he had given the Red Cross  his  mother's
    name, his father's name (even though he was deceased) and his brother's
    and sister's names. He also gave them a photo to help them with tracing
    his family members. They had told him they had an office in Afghanistan
    and would put his photo there so that if any of his family  went  there
    they would be able to recognise him. The last time he had seen the  Red
    Cross he had drawn a map of the village. He  had  now  seen  Red  Cross
    three or four times. Red Cross had  told  him  they  would  go  to  his
    village and he was now waiting to hear.

21.  On 10 December 2018 I replied to the parties  saying  that  I  was  not
    minded to vary my directions as the appellant's request amounted to one
    for further and better particulars and in any event,  did  not  explain
    what position the appellant takes regarding the IDCU dated  2  December
    2018. I stated that:

         "On the face  of  it  the  details  obtained  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's father ("deceased") and mother appear  to  match  those
         provided by the appellant to the Home Office. They only  difference
         concerns the name of the village (the appellant  having  stated  in
         his given particulars to the  Home  Office  that  his  village  was
         "Sunzai" whereas the IDCU refers to "Cheen Zaye"). Without  further
         explanation from the MLP as to whether it is disputed that the IDCU
         particulars are incorrect or related to another person,  I  see  no
         justification for directing the  respondent  to  take  any  further
         action.

         The only new direction I would make is that by end of December 2018
         both parties submit to the UT (FAO Dr Storey)  short  supplementary
         submissions as to what significance I should attach to the  further
         materials now before me as a result of my previous directions.

         At this stage I see no need for a further  oral  hearing  and  will
         proceed to determine the appeal on the basis of what is  before  me
         (including replies to my new direction)  as  soon  as  possible  in
         early January 2018."

22.   On  21  December  2018  the  respondent  replied  (with  copy  to  the
    appellant's representatives) stating that in  response  to  my  further
    directions of 11 December 2018:

         "The Respondent accepts that the family and location details in the
         report dated 2 December from the Afghan Ministry of Interior's IDCU
         are consistent with those given to the Respondent by the  Appellant
         during his asylum application and appeal (see in particular D9  and
         D18-21 of the respondent's appeal bundle).

         At the hearing on 5 October, I submitted that there was no evidence
         that the Taliban or other anti-Government elements were in  control
         of the Appellant's home area. Although Mr Badir Khan is  quoted  in
         the IDCU report as stating that the Appellant's home area is  under
         Taliban control, the fact that the IDCU was able to conduct a  site
         visit to Cheen Zarai village would seem to indicate that the Afghan
         Government has influence in, and access to this area."

23.  I received no response from the appellant's representatives.

24.  On 7 February 2019 I  caused  the  Tribunal's  Correspondence  team  to
    conduct a check to establish whether  or  not  any  response  had  been
    received from the appellant's representatives.

25.  On 13 February 2019 they replied  that  there  was  no  record  of  any
    further reply.

My decision

26.  The appellant is still a minor, having been accepted as being  born  in
    January 2002. He has leave to remain as an asylum-seeking unaccompanied
    minor until July 2019. The only issue in this appeal is whether  he  is
    entitled to asylum as of the date of my making the decision.

27.  As noted earlier, the  adverse  findings  made  by  the  FtT  judge  in
    relation to the appellant's claimed difficulties  in  Afghanistan  have
    been preserved. He can only succeed in his appeal is able to  establish
    that he would face a well-founded fear of persecution or  serious  harm
    on return to Afghanistan.

28.  At the date of the last hearing, the respondent's position is that  the
    appellant's home area was under government control. In the IDCU  report
    of 2 December 2018 the Afghan official states that the village is under
    Taliban control. Whilst Mr Howells makes a good point that the fact  of
    the IDCU visit  to  the  village  is  an  indication  that  the  Afghan
    government continues nevertheless to have influence in  and  access  to
    the area, I have not been helped by  the  failure  of  the  appellant's
    representatives to make any submissions  in  relation  to  this  issue.
    Nevertheless, for the purposes of this appeal I shall  proceed  on  the
    basis of the latest information in the  form  of  the  IDCU  report  to
    regard the appellant's home area as unsafe. That may be  more  generous
    to him than is warranted, inasmuch as the mere fact of Taliban  control
    does not establish that he would be at real risk of serious  harm  from
    them, but I  will  assume  so  nevertheless.  Mr  Howells  has  already
    conceded that by virtue of his status as a minor the appellant can show
    membership of a particular social group.

29.  It remains, however, that the appellant cannot succeed  in  his  appeal
    unless he can show that he would not have a viable internal  relocation
    alternative in Kabul.

30.  As regards the position of young men returning to Kabul generally,  the
    Upper Tribunal has recently issued new country guidance  covering  this
    issue, in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC) (28
    March 2018. The head note to this case reads:

         "Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban

         (i)  A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban  (i.e.
             not a senior government or security services  official,  or  a
             spy) is not at real risk of persecution from  the  Taliban  in
             Kabul.

         Internal relocation to Kabul

         (ii) Having regard to the security and  humanitarian  situation  in
             Kabul as well as the  difficulties  faced  by  the  population
             living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other
             returnees, which are not dissimilar to  the  conditions  faced
             throughout may other parts of Afghanistan); it  will  not,  in
             general be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  a  single  adult
             male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not
             have any specific connections or support network in Kabul.

         (iii)    However, the particular  circumstances  of  an  individual
             applicant must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of
             conditions in the place of relocation,  including  a  person's
             age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections  with
             Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
             language, education and  vocational  skills  when  determining
             whether a person falls within the  general  position  set  out
             above.

         (iv) A person with a support network  or  specific  connections  in
             Kabul is likely to be  in  a  more  advantageous  position  on
             return, which may counter a  particular  vulnerability  of  an
             individual on return.

         (v)   Although  Kabul  suffered  the  highest  number  of  civilian
             casualties (in the latest UNAMA figures  from  2017)  and  the
             number of security incidents is increasing, the proportion  of
             the population directly affected by the security situation  is
             tiny.  The current security situation in Kabul is not at  such
             a level as  to  render  internal  relocation  unreasonable  or
             unduly harsh.

         Previous Country Guidance

         (vi) The country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
             [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive remains unaffected by this decision.

         (vii)    The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG
             [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to the (un)reasonableness of
             internal relocation to Kabul (and other  potential  places  of
             internal relocation) for certain categories of  women  remains
             unaffected by this decision.

         (viii)    The  country  guidance  in   AA   (unattended   children)
             Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16 (IAC) also remains unaffected by
             this decision."

31.  In addition, it is pertinent to set out what the panel found  at  paras
    230-235:

         "230.    Our findings above show that it is not generally unsafe or
              unreasonable for a single healthy man to internally  relocate
              to  Kabul.   However,  we  emphasise  that   a   case-by-case
              consideration of whether internal  relocation  is  reasonable
              for a particular person is  required  by  Article  8  of  the
              Qualification Directive and  domestic  authorities  including
              Januzi and AH (Sudan).  When doing so, we consider that there
              are a number of specific factors which  may  be  relevant  to
              bear  in  mind.   These  include,  individually  as  well  as
              cumulatively (including consideration that  the  strength  of
              one factor may counteract and balance the weakness of another
              factor):

              (i)  Age,  including  the  age  at  which   a   person   left
                   Afghanistan.

              (ii)    Nature and quality of  connections  to  Kabul  and/or
                   Afghanistan.

              (iii)   Physical and mental health.

              (iv)    Language, education and vocational and skills.

         231. We consider age as a relevant factor given that  we  have  not
              seen any reason  or  evidential  basis  to  depart  from  the
              specific  guidance  given   in   AA   (unattended   children)
              Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  16,  which  was  supported  in
              evidence before us as to greater risk to or vulnerability  of
              minors.  There is no bright line rule at the age of 18 when a
              person in the United Kingdom is considered  to  be  an  adult
              (there are different views as to becoming  an  adult  and  in
              particular as to achieving manhood in Afghan society which is
              not specifically linked to age but more  to  marital  status)
              where such issues fall away overnight but are more likely  to
              gradually diminish.

         232. We also consider the age at which a person left Afghanistan to
              be relevant as  to  whether  this  included  their  formative
              years.  It is reasonable to infer that the older a person  is
              when they leave, the more likely  they  are  to  be  familiar
              with,  for  example,  employment  opportunities  and   living
              independently.

         233. Although we find that it is reasonable for a person without  a
              support network or specific connections in Kabul or elsewhere
              in Afghanistan to internally relocate to Kabul, a person will
              be in a more advantageous  position  if  they  do  have  such
              connections  depending  on  where  they  are,  the  financial
              resources of such people and  their  status/connections.   We
              have in mind that the availability of a support  network  may
              counter  a  particular  vulnerability  of  an  individual  on
              return.

         234. In our conclusions, we refer throughout to a  single  male  in
              good health as this is the  primary  group  of  people  under
              consideration in this appeal and  reflects  the  position  of
              this particular Appellant.   It  is  uncontroversial  that  a
              person who is in good health or fit and  able  is  likely  to
              have better  employment  prospects,  particularly  given  the
              availability of low or unskilled jobs involving manual labour
              in Kabul.  We were not provided with any specific evidence of
              the likely impact of poor physical or mental  health  on  the
              safety or reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul  but
              consider it reasonable to infer that this could  be  relevant
              to the issue and the specific  situation  of  the  individual
              would need to be carefully considered.

         235. Finally, it is also reasonable to  infer  that  a  person  who
              speaks a local language in  Kabul  would  be  in  a  stronger
              position than a person who does not, and that educational and
              vocational skills would also strengthen a person's ability to
              support himself in Kabul with better employment prospects".

32.  From the above I derive that Kabul can be considered a viable  internal
    relocation  alternative  for  returnees  to  Afghanistan   subject   to
    individual  assessment  of  their  circumstances.  AS  does  not   deal
    specifically with the position of returning  minors,  but  does  affirm
    that the case of AA remains country guidance. In  AA  it  was  accepted
    that unattended children would be at risk.

33.  On the facts  of  the  appellant's  case,  the  principal  question  is
    whether he would in fact be an unattended child.

34.  The  first  matter  arising  is  whether  in  fact  he  has  family  in
    Afghanistan.  I am satisfied, taking the evidence as a whole, that  the
    appellant does have a mother and two siblings and other extended family
    members in Afghanistan (in his witness statement of 31 August  2018  he
    mentioned that in Afghanistan,  in  addition  to  his  mother  and  two
    siblings, he had an uncle Naeem (not the uncle who travelled with  him)
    and a grandfather Mohammed Sadiq as well as a granduncle in Jalalabad.)



35.  I do not derive much assistance  from  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's account of having lost contact with his family. I found the
    evidence of Mrs Brady impressive, but the fact that she  did  not  know
    that the appellant had  had  contact  with  his  mother  since  leaving
    Afghanistan (whilst en route to the UK) and that she  stated  that  she
    understood that the appellant's siblings were dead, indicates  that  he
    has not necessarily provided her and her partner with full  information
    about his family or  about  past  contact  with  them.  The  Red  Cross
    correspondence confirms what the  appellant  has  said  in  his  latest
    additional witness statement, but the purport of this evidence is  that
    he originally said he did not wish them to attempt to trace his  family
    (out of stated concern for their safety),  then  consented  to  passive
    tracing, and only in the past few months asked them  to  do  what  they
    term full tracing. That is a different picture than the one he provided
    in his witness statement dated 31 August 2016  where  he  said  he  had
    asked the Red Cross to help him find his family "but they are unable to
    do so". I cannot ascertain whether he afforded them correct particulars
    because their documentation redacts the names  of  his  family  members
    sought. Given, however, that there was a period in 2017 where  the  Red
    Cross suspended any form of family tracing in Afghanistan,  it  may  be
    that the appellant did not intend to gloss over his initial  reluctance
    (as expressed to the Red Cross) to go  ahead  with  tracing  inquiries.
    Viewed overall, this body of evidence  is  most  safely  treated  as  a
    neutral factor. But irrespective of the issue of whether the  appellant
    has genuinely sought to achieve contact with his family  since  arrival
    in the UK the latest  information  regarding  the  whereabouts  of  his
    family is very significant. Whilst it  is  impossible  to  resolve  the
    precise name of their village, I consider that the close correspondence
    between the appellant's family details as given to the  respondent  and
    as listed by the IDCU report establishes to a high degree of proof that
    his mother and two siblings have now been located as specified  in  the
    IDCU report. (Further, whilst the names of the village  are  different,
    there may be close similarities depending on    pronunciation:  Sunzai;
    Cheen Zarai). I do not attach any adverse significance to the reference
    in the IDCU report to the appellant being a "resident". Later on in the
    same report it states that his family "is living in this  village"  and
    use of this different term indicates that by "resident"  the  informant
    meant only to refer to origin, not physical presence.

36.  In assessing the IDCU evidence I note that, despite  my  affording  the
    appellant's representative's ample opportunity to respond to  the  IDCU
    report (to end of December 2018), the only response they have  made  is
    that of 6 December 2018 and this did not seek to dispute  the  accuracy
    of any of the details stated in that report save  (by  implication)  in
    relation to the name of the village. I see no reason  to  seek  further
    particulars regarding the identity of the IDCU  official  concerned  or
    the precise date of the visit etc. I consider it  exceedingly  unlikely
    that there could be any persons matching the appellant's given  details
    of the names of his deceased father, his mother and  his  two  siblings
    other than his true family members.

37.  The second issue is whether the  appellant  can  be  expected  to  make
    contact with his mother and two  siblings  and  other  extended  family
    members living in this village. In light of the information provided by
    IDCU, he is clearly now able to make contact, if  he  has  not  already
    done so. Whether or not in fact he has known of  their  whereabouts  or
    had contact them since travelling through Greece and Turkey, it is  not
    necessary for me to determine. He can now  be  reasonably  expected  to
    contact his family.

38.   The  next  question  is  whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect   the
    appellant's family members to arrange for him to be  met  in  Kabul  by
    them personally or a trusted relative or person acting on their behalf.



39.  I am satisfied that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant's
    family can arrange for him  to  be  met  in  Kabul  in  this  way.  The
    appellant has at least one uncle residing in  this  village  and  other
    extended family members.

40.  I am further satisfied that even if by virtue of Taliban presence  they
    choose not to return him to his home village (or even if the  appellant
    chooses not to return), they will be able to ensure he  has  a  support
    network in Kabul.

41.  The next issue arising concerns whether the availability  of  a  family
    support network will  be  significantly  affected  by  the  appellant's
    psychological/mental health problems. In this regard I am  prepared  to
    accept that these problems are as described in the reports. However,  I
    am not satisfied that these problems will  significantly  detract  from
    the ability of his family to provide him with sufficient support. First
    of all, the evidence does not indicate  that  these  problems  will  be
    unameliorated by renewed contact with his family network.  Although his
    foster carer, Mrs Brady, describes him  in  her  witness  statement  as
    "very vulnerable" and "emotionally immature", she also described him as
    having integrated well into the local area  and  attending  school  and
    workings hard. Her account in oral evidence was  that  he  is  able  to
    function relatively well with her and her partner's family support.

42.  Also of relevance is the medico-legal report by Dr Arnsby-Wilson  dated
    22 August 2018. This report states that he was diagnosed with  PTSD  in
    March 2017, a diagnosis common in children who have been separated from
    their caregivers, but that he still met these  criteria  for  PTSD  and
    depression at the date of the report. The report  states  further  that
    his PTSD is highly likely to be associated with  multiple  events  that
    happened in Afghanistan, his long journey to the UK  alone,  and  being
    physically abused in Calais. The appellant had  stated  to  the  doctor
    that he did not currently  consider  himself  to  have  the  resources,
    maturity or insight to support himself without the foster family.

43.  There is also a letter from  Rebecca  Francis  of  the  Gloucestershire
    Action for Refugees and Asylum Seekers dated  14  September  2018.  She
    describes the appellant as a friendly, genuine and polite young  person
    who is well thought of by staff and volunteers as  GARAS  and  who  has
    many friends among asylum seekers and other young people in  the  local
    community. When feeling up to it he is clearly pleased  to  spend  time
    with his friends, playing cricket and other activities although it  was
    noticed he was  often  quiet  and  withdrawn.  "Sadly  [the  appellant]
    remains a very vulnerable young person struggling to  feel  positive...
    He is often very low in mood and anxious  and  seems  preoccupied  with
    worries and with his headaches. He is  often  tired  and  hasn't  slept
    well, for example suffering nightmares." It was known that on occasions
    he became distressed, feeling very low and  hopeless  and  for  example
    banging his head and his file was marked as  a  "client  of  particular
    vulnerability".  It was noted  that  he  had  been  referred  to  their
    Counselling Service in February 2019 and was  seen  for  some  time  by
    their lead psychotherapist.  It is stated that when the appellant is in
    a poor mental state his foster, parents are vital to care for him.

44.  These sources satisfy me that  the  appellant  is  a  vulnerable  young
    person but equally they show that he is  able  to  function  reasonably
    well with family support.   Although he has undergone therapy  in  2017
    there is nothing to show that he is considered to  still  require  such
    assistance. He is only taking medication  for  migraine.  There  is  no
    reason to consider that his own family members  in  Afghanistan  cannot
    ensure that he is assisted in establishing  a  routine  and  conducting
    educational or other activities appropriate for someone of  his  age  -
    in much the same way as his current foster carers  are  ensuring  that.
    Indeed,  since  at  least   some   of   the   factors   affecting   his
    psychological/mental health clearly relate to his stress regarding  the
    outcome of proceedings, being back with his own family  should  assuage
    them to some degree.

45.   In  the  event  that  the  appellant  should  continue  to  experience
    significant psychological/mental health problems, I am  satisfied  that
    he could access mental health facilities in Kabul. That  is  consistent
    with the background country information. Even if he chooses  to  return
    to his home area, it is relatively near to Kabul.

46.  I understand the perspective of the appellant and  his  foster  carers,
    who are to be commended for the evident love and care they  have  given
    the appellant; they clearly consider the appellant's best interests lie
    in him remaining in the UK for the foreseeable future,  beyond  1  July
    2019. However, I have to apply the law as it is and I am not  concerned
    in this appeal with the appellant's Article 8 circumstances. Indeed, as
    a matter of law I can only be concerned solely  with  the  question  of
    whether he can show he qualifies as a refugee under  the  Qualification
    Directive, whose cornerstone is  Article  1A(2)  of  the  1951  Refugee
    Convention. I am prepared, in order to  assist  the  parties,  to  also
    state my view on the question as to whether he  would  be  at  risk  if
    returned now of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.  Given  my
    above findings, the  only  answer  I  can  give  in  relation  to  both
    questions is that he will not face a real risk  of  persecution  or  of
    treatment contrary to Article 3.

47.  To conclude:

    I have already set aside the decision of the  FtT  judge  for  material
    error (although preserving the judge's findings on the appellant's past
    experiences in Afghanistan);

    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's asylum appeal.

    An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  Date: 14 February 2019

Dr H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

