
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: pa/02262/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 14th November 2017                  |             On 28th November 2017   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                                     JA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Singh, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver promulgated on  4th  May  2017.   At  the  appeal
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal the Appellant was represented  by  Mr
    Singh, a solicitor, and the Respondent was represented by Mr T  Melvin,
    the Home Office Presenting Officer.

 2. The judge in his findings noted that within the refusal letter from the
    Secretary of State which was dated 9th November 2016  it  was  accepted
    that the Appellant was a member of a particular social group of gay men
    in Bangladesh, but found on an application of the  case  of  HJ  (Iran)
    that the Appellant would not be liable  to  persecution  in  Bangladesh
    upon return.  Within his findings Judge Oliver stated at  paragraph  25
    that the Appellant's fear on return was of  his  family  and  religious
    leaders, not from state actors and that he had lived all  his  life  in
    Sylhet and had limited family in Bangladesh. The judge found  that  the
    Appellant had not shown that his family members would be able to locate
    him upon return to Dhaka.  He stated that a single  incident  in  which
    two gay activists were killed had not demonstrated a general pattern of
    persecution and that 'gaybashing' was  not  entirely  absent  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. Within the Grounds of Appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  judge  made  a
    material error of law in that within his statement  the  Appellant  had
    actually said at paragraph 16 that the police  in  Bangladesh  did  use
    anti LGBT laws to arrest, torture and extort money  from  LGBT  persons
    under threat and they would be subject to prosecution unless they  gave
    in to their demands. It is said that the  appellant  in  his  statement
    referenced how the Bangladeshi Penal  Code  makes  it  an  offence  for
    persons to commit unnatural acts and argues that if the police were  to
    learn of his sexuality then he would be subject to the  same  treatment
    from Bangladeshi LGBT laws, so they could be used  to  arrest,  torture
    and extort money from him by the police.

 4. It is further argued in the grounds of appeal that the judge has failed
    to give reasons for believing the Appellant would  be  able  to  return
    safely in Dhaka and that the judge  has  failed  properly  to  actually
    consider the full basis of the Appellant's claim and the fact  that  he
    claims not only the fear from family members, but he  said  within  his
    statement that he also feared the police. Mr Singh argues that  in  the
    statement   the   appellant   also    mentioned    fearing    religious
    fundamentalists and the public at large.

 5. Within the Respondent's Rule  24  reply  dated  2nd  October  2017  the
    Respondent does not oppose the Appellant's application  for  permission
    to appeal and invites the Tribunal to undertake a  continuance  hearing
    to determine whether the Appellant would be at risk from  state  actors
    due to his sexuality.

 6. When one looks at the judgment  of  Judge  Oliver  in  respect  of  his
    findings at paragraph 22, the first paragraph of his findings,  he  has
    just put "X" and at paragraph 23 he has just put "deal with killings of
    Xulhaz Mannan and his friend in April 2016".  However the  judge  makes
    no findings in respect of what seemingly is a reference to  the  cross-
    examination for the use of "X", or the killings of  Xulhaz  Mannan  and
    his friend in April 2016 within those paragraphs.  It  seems  that  the
    judge made a note for himself of items he wanted to  deal  with  within
    his findings, but has actually then forgotten to do so.

 7. The judge then at paragraph 24 dealt with the  relevant  UN  guidelines
    which state that:

         "While discrimination is a common element in the experience of many
         LGBT individuals, it will rise to the  level  of  prosecution  only
         where the measures of discrimination, individually or cumulatively,
         lead to consequences of the substantially  prejudicial  nature  and
         this assessment is to be made by reference  to  reliable,  relevant
         and up-to-date country of origin information, formulated within the
         context of leading authority, HJ (Iran) v SSHD."

 8. He then dealt with the Respondent's policy document dated December 2016
    and that LGBT people formed a particular social group in Bangladesh and
    said the question was whether or not a  person  will  live  freely  and
    openly as an LGBT person, or whether  they  conceal  aspects  of  their
    orientation, and if so, the question that had to be asked was  to  why,
    whether it was because of family  or  cultural  pressures  or  fear  of
    persecution.  He noted that sex acts  between  males  are  illegal  and
    punishable severely under Section 377 but  said  there  were  only  two
    arrests and no cases of punishment.  He noted the police had  used  the
    laws of pretext to harass and intimidate LGBT people.

 9. The judge at paragraph 25 simply stated the Appellant's fear on  return
    is family and religious leaders, not from  state  actors.   However  in
    that regard the judge as properly conceded by the Secretary  of  State,
    the judge has not dealt with the full reasons why  the  Appellant  said
    that he was at risk.  In his statement the appellant did state that  he
    feared the police, who are clearly state  actors.  The  judge  has  not
    adequately considered that aspect of the appeal and therefore  has  not
    made sufficient findings on a relevant issue regarding  the  risk  upon
    return to the Appellant.

10. Further, although the judge says that he fears risk  upon  return  from
    family and religious leaders again the judge in making his findings has
    not actually made any findings  in  respect  of  the  claimed  fear  of
    religious leaders. Nor has the judge made  findings  in  terms  of  the
    arguments made by the Appellant within his statement regarding the risk
    from the public themselves or from religious extremists.

11.  In that regard I do accept that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oliver's
    decision does contain material errors of law  and  the  fact  that  the
    judge has not fully dealt with all of  the  issue  that  were  properly
    placed before him, in terms of the risk upon return to this  individual
    Appellant.

12. In terms then of the disposal of  the  appeal  I  find  that  in  fact,
    although it is accepted by the Secretary of State the  Appellant  is  a
    gay man and will be returning as a gay man  to  Bangladesh,  the  risks
    have to be looked at in respect of him as an individual and how he will
    conduct his life following HJ (Iran) and whether or not he will conduct
    himself openly and  whether  that  is  as  a  result  of  any  fear  of
    persecution rather than any cultural  or  other  reason.   That  is  an
    individual based assessment, as also is the individual based assessment
    as to whether or not he individually  will  face  risk  from  religious
    leaders or  from  state  actors  in  terms  of  the  police,  religious
    extremists or from the public at large.

13. I therefore do find that there is a considerable amount of fact-finding
    which actually needs to be made and therefore in the  circumstances  it
    is appropriate, given that amount of fact-finding,  that  the  case  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing rather than  the
    case being considered by myself in the Upper Tribunal.  .

14. Mr Melvin seeks the maintenance of the finding that the Appellant would
    not be at risk from his family upon return which Mr Singh did not  seek
    to argue against that particular finding been preserved.  His  argument
    is that the judge has not conducted a holistic  assessment  about  risk
    upon return based on all quarters.

15. I do preserve Judge Oliver's  finding  within  paragraph  25  that  the
    Appellant had not shown that his family members would have the reach to
    locate him upon return to Dhaka and that he would not be at  risk  from
    his family members, but I do not preserve any other findings  in  Judge
    Oliver's judgment.  Further, I do consider that  a  number  of  factors
    have not been considered by Judge Oliver despite them being put in  the
    statement. Therefore, I do consider that it  is  a  case  where  it  is
    appropriate for the case to be reheard before a different  judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver so that the risk upon return  can
    be looked at in the round, holistically,  taking  account  of  all  the
    relevant factors.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver does contain  material
    errors of law and is set aside save for the preserved findings that the
    Appellant is not at risk from his family members were he to be returned
    to Dhaka.

    I direct the case be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing before any Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Oliver.



Anonymity

    I do make an anonymity direction in this case, such anonymity direction
    having been previously made by Judge Oliver.  In such circumstances the
    Appellant is entitled to anonymity and no report or transcript of these
    proceedings may identify the Appellant or any members  of  his  family.
    This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 27th November 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty





