
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02012/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 December 2019                  |On 9 January 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     KD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Philps, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

I make an order for anonymity pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting disclosure of any  matter  that  may
lead to the identification of the  appellant  and  other  parties  to  these
proceedings.  Any breach may lead to contempt proceedings.

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Egypt born  in  2001,  appeals  with
    permission the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Khan,  who  for
    reasons given in his decision which was  promulgated  on  20  September
    2019, dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds  against  the
    Secretary of  State's  decision  refusing  the  appellant's  protection
    claim, which was based on a dispute with neighbours that had led to his
    flight to the United Kingdom, where he arrived  on  29  July  2017  and
    claimed asylum some three weeks later, having travelled through  Italy,
    France, Germany and Belgium.  The Secretary of State rejected the claim
    as not credible.


 2. In summary, the appellant's account was based on an altercation with  a
    person called Hassan (and his family) following a dispute  arising  out
    of a complaint that the appellant had flooded the  family  land.   This
    resulted in violence between the appellant and Hassan,  and  subsequent
    firing of guns by others at the appellant's house.  Inconsistencies  in
    the account led the Secretary of State not to accept  it  is  credible,
    alleging also that the appellant's father had  been  contacted  by  the
    Family Tracing Team and had agreed to meet the appellant at the airport
    on return.  A further limb to the claim relates  to  Hassan's  family's
    association with the Muslim Brotherhood and their connections with  the
    police.  Essentially, the Secretary of State did not accept  that  this
    claim was consistent with the country information.


 3. After a survey of the relevant provisions of the Immigration  Rules  in
    relation  to  Article  8  as  to  the  appellant's  private  life   and
    exceptional circumstances, it was considered by the Secretary of  State
    that the appellant's return would not be in breach of that provision.


 4. Judge Khan refused  to  adjourn  the  hearing  on  application  by  the
    appellant's counsel to obtain  a  medical  report  on  the  appellant's
    psychological condition on the basis that the case had  been  adjourned
    on a number of occasions previously and that it was in the interests of
    justice and fairness for the case to proceed.  It  was  requested  that
    the appellant be considered as a vulnerable witness, to which there was
    no objection, and the judge then heard evidence from the appellant, his
    support worker, Mr Lewis, and submissions from the parties.


 5. The judge gave  reasons  for  not  accepting  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's  account  and  on  this  basis  dismissed  the  appeal   on
    protection grounds.  In respect of Article 8, the  judge  reviewed  the
    relevant legislation and the authority  in  AM  (Section  117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and concluded the appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules nor did he qualify under  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


 6. Permission to appeal has been granted on all grounds, comprising  seven
    in total.  I invited Ms Philps to make  her  submissions  on  what  she
    considered to be the strongest of those grounds, and I am  grateful  to
    her for her submissions on grounds 1, 5 and 6.  I am also  grateful  to
    Ms Bassi for her response.


 7. Ground 1 argues that the judge procedurally erred in  not  allowing  an
    adjournment in order to obtain a medico-legal report.  Ground 5  argues
    that the judge incorrectly summarised the appellant's support  worker's
    evidence in relation to his mental health and in  doing  so  failed  to
    approach the decision with anxious scrutiny.  It is also contended  the
    judge went on to make a finding about the appellant's mental health  on
    return to Egypt, taking  into  account  irrelevant  considerations  and
    failing to have regard to the material evidence.  Ground 6 argues  that
    the judge failed to make a finding as to whether there was a real  risk
    that the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would lead to  his
    self-harm in circumstances  which  engaged  the  responsibility  of  UK
    authorities and amount to a breach of his Article 3 rights.


 8. Starting with ground 1,  it  is  not  known  why  the  case  was  first
    adjourned.  It appears that there was a refusal to adjourn the case  at
    a subsequent hearing on 13 August 2019 when Ms Philps  represented  the
    appellant.   By that stage new  representatives  had  been  instructed.
    That adjournment application had been in order to obtain a medico-legal
    report, which would take some six months.  As it happened  the  hearing
    did not go ahead because there was an issue with the availability of an
    interpreter.  When the matter came  back  before  the  Tribunal  (Judge
    Khan) on 5 September 2019 the appellant had changed his representatives
    and furthermore had instructed an expert  medical  witness,  Dr  Pitesh
    Sinha, a GP with experience in scarring as well as mental  health.   It
    was submitted  on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  a  report  would  be
    available within five weeks, or possibly sooner.


 9. The judge also had before him a witness  statement  by  Mr  Lewis,  the
    appellant's support worker.  It is to be remembered that the  appellant
    only turned 18 in January 2019.  Mr Lewis's statement explains that  he
    has qualifications in health and social care, a field in which  he  had
    worked for six years.  He had been assigned to the appellant as his key
    worker.  His statement on which he was cross-examined  at  the  hearing
    refers to the appellant's mental health difficulties and the steps that
    Mr Lewis had taken in that regard.  He also  refers  to  the  appellant
    having been self-harming and photographs he had been shown of injuries.
     He expresses a view or opinion in his statement as to the  extent  and
    nature of the appellant's difficulties.


10. The judge was aware at the hearing that the appeal had  been  adjourned
    previously because of the time it would take for medical evidence to be
    obtained.  That difficulty had been resolved by  the  time  the  matter
    came before Judge Khan in the sense that a  report  could  be  obtained
    much sooner.  Furthermore, the judge had  been  invited  to  treat  the
    appellant as vulnerable and he had  before  him  evidence  of  concerns
    regarding the appellant's mental health.  The reasons that he gave  for
    refusing to adjourn the hearing including the observation that  it  was
    in the interests of justice and fairness for the case to be heard.  The
    judge did not give any reasons for those observations.


11. Turning to ground 6 which Ms Philps submitted could be  taken  together
    with ground 5, the evidence before the judge indicated the  possibility
    of suicide ideation however the judge's decision is silent  so  far  as
    Article 3 is concerned on this aspect.  There is no  reference  to  the
    authorities that Ms Philps  stated  had  been  put  before  the  judge,
    specifically J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 as informed by Y and Z v SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 362.


12. In relation to ground  5  which  argues  a  failure  by  the  judge  to
    correctly record the evidence by the social worker, counsel's note  now
    produced before me does point  to  this  possibility,  with  particular
    reference to the judge's observations in paragraph 65 of the  decision,
    which specific to the point is in these terms:


         "I find that Article 8 of the ECHR is not  engaged  in  this  case.
         The appellant has some mental issues, which may be as a  result  of
         his separation from his family and way of life in  Egypt.   On  his
         return to Egypt his family would be able to  help  and  assist  his
         [sic] to a cure.  The  appellant's  family  and  private  life  can
         continue in Egypt."


    The evidence by the  appellant  and  that  of  Mr  Lewis  points  to  a
    different factual scenario.


13. Taking these three grounds together, I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    materially erred in  not  adjourning  the  hearing  in  order  for  the
    promised medical report to be obtained and failed to  address  all  the
    issues  before  him.   The  evidence  pointed  to  an  appellant   with
    potentially  serious  mental  health   difficulties   and   there   was
    justification for an adjournment in  order  for  this  to  be  properly
    explored.  Even if a refusal to adjourn was justified at the outset  of
    the hearing, I consider it was incumbent upon the judge to  re-consider
    the matter in the  light  of  the  invitation  for  him  to  treat  the
    appellant as a vulnerable witness and after cross examination  of   the
    social worker.


14. Ms Bassi although arguing that the judge had not erred,  accepted  that
    in the light of the indication of my decision on these three grounds at
    the conclusion of submissions, the decision would need to be set  aside
    and the appeal  re-heard  without  the  need  for  submissions  on  the
    remaining grounds.  I think that is a sensible course.  Accordingly,  I
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the light  of  the
    above errors.


15. As to its re-making, having regard to the nature of  those  errors  and
    the substantial fact-finding  that  would  be  required,  the  case  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for its re-consideration de novo by
    a differently constituted tribunal.



Signed                                  Date 23 December 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

