
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02624/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision on Papers (P)               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 15 April 2021                    |On 27 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     AYA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  GR
    Williams, promulgated on 23 November 2020.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe on 28 December 2020.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, however out of an  abundance  of
    caution such a direction  is  now  made  owing  to  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's protection claim.



Background

 3. The appellant's claim was initially based solely upon his membership of
    a Particular Social Group and his fear of  persecution  in  Iran  as  a
    perceived adulterer. The Secretary of State refused  that  claim  in  a
    decision  dated  27  February  2020  primarily  owing  to  a  want   of
    credibility.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. At the hearing, the appellant continued to rely on his original  claim.
    The First-tier Tribunal judge also heard evidence  that  the  appellant
    had taken part in protests against the Iranian government, had  written
    blog posts  to  that  effect  and  photographs  of  his  attendance  at
    demonstrations  were  on   his   Facebook   page.   His   claims   were
    comprehensively  rejected,  with  the   judge   concluding   that   the
    appellant's  internet  presence  is  "easily  removed"  and  that   his
    activities would not bring him to the attention of the authorities.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal are two-fold. Firstly, it was argued  that  there
    was a failure by the judge to resolve a dispute  between  the  parties,
    concerning  the  appellant's  motivation  for  involving   himself   in
    political  activities.  Secondly,  it  was  said  that  the  judge  had
    materially misdirected themselves  in  relation  the  Country  Guidance
    cases in  relation  to  the  likely  outcome  of  the  appellant  being
    questioned on return to Iran.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on both grounds, with  Judge  O'Keeffe
    making the following remarks:

         "Although the Judge made reference to the timing of the appellant's
         sur place activities, there is no finding made as to whether  those
         activities were opportunistic or genuine. It is arguable  therefore
         that the Judge has erred in concluding  that  the  appellant  could
         shut down his internet  presence  without  considering  whether  he
         would shut down that presence. Although the Judge has  referred  to
         the "hair trigger" approach from the  Iranian  authorities,  it  is
         arguable that  the  Tribunal  has  erred  by  failing  to  consider
         adequately the risk to the appellant at the pinch point of return."



Procedure

 7. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul drafted directions dated 5  January  2021,
    which were served on  the  parties.  Those  directions  stated  that  a
    provisional view had been  taken  that  the  matter  could  be  decided
    without a hearing and invited written submissions regarding whether the
    First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law  and  whether  that  decision
    should be set aside. The parties were further invited to submit reasons
    if it was considered  that  a  hearing  was  necessary.  Judge  Rintoul
    expressed his preliminary view that the judge made an error of  law  in
    the following terms:

         "the judge did err in his approach as to the risk to the  appellant
         at the point of return in that there was a failure to consider what
         questions he would be  asked  as  noted  in  the  relevant  country
         guidance, were he to be asked what he had done (and  he  could  not
         lie), then this would be relevant to the assessment of risk."

 8. The respondent provided a Rule 24 response dated 8 January 2021.  There
    is no response on the file from the appellant  to  the  above-mentioned
    directions.  No submissions were received by either party to the effect
    that a hearing was necessary in relation to the error of law issue.

Decision on error of law

 9. Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  states
    that the Upper Tribunal may make any decision with or without a hearing
    but must have regard to any view expressed by  a  party  when  deciding
    whether to do.

10. I have considered the judgment in JCWI v The  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin) and conclude that the appellant  will
    not be disadvantaged by the error of law issue being decided without  a
    hearing in this instance for the  following  reasons.  The  appellant's
    representatives  raised   no   objections   to   the   proposed   paper
    consideration.  The respondent conceded the  grounds  of  appeal  as  a
    whole, a concession which I  have  accepted  below.  In  addition,  the
    matter is to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before a different judge.

11. The respondent's Rule 24 response states that the respondent  does  not
    oppose the appellant's appeal "in line with the issues  highlighted  in
    the grant of permission.  The  focus  of  the  challenge  concerns  the
    appellant's Facebook account and the attitude  of  the  authorities  on
    return." The respondent noted that the appellant had not challenged the
    judge's adverse credibility findings and invited the Upper Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral continuance hearing on a limited
    basis.

12. The respondent is correct to concede that the First-tier Tribunal  made
    no findings as to the appellant's motivation in  relation  to  his  sur
    place political activity, whether he could reasonably  be  expected  to
    delete his online presence or to supress his political activities  upon
    return to Iran.  These issues are central to  the  appellant's  current
    protection claim. In these circumstances, the decision cannot stand.

13. The respondent accepts that a  further  oral  hearing  is  required  to
    determine the issues raised in the grounds of appeal. While mindful  of
    the respondent's  view  as  well  as  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statements of 10 February 2010,  it  is  the  case
    that the appellant has yet to have an  adequate  consideration  of  his
    asylum appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and  it  would  be  unfair  to
    deprive him of such consideration.

14. The findings of Judge GR Williams in relation to the  sur  place  issue
    [86-99] of the decision and reasons are set aside  in  their  entirety.
    There  was  no  challenge  to  the  judge's  findings   regarding   the
    PSG/adultery claim [60-85] or Article 8 findings  [100]  and  therefore
    those findings are preserved.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Manchester Piccadilly, with a time estimate of  3  hours,  by  any  judge
except First-tier Tribunal Judge GR Williams.


Signed:  Date 15 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

