
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/02405/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 November 2019                            |On 14 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN

                                   Between

                                    T T N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr. A M Shahjahan, legal representative, Morgan
Hall Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Ms. J. Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Farrelly ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 15  August  2019
    by which the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent
    to refuse to grant him international protection was dismissed.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan granted permission on all grounds.



Anonymity

 3. The judge issued an  anonymity  direction  and  neither  representative
    requested that it be set aside. I am mindful that  the  starting  point
    for consideration of anonymity directions in this chamber of the  Upper
    Tribunal, as in all courts and Tribunals, is open justice.  However,  I
    note paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is
    the present practice of both the First-tier Tribunal and this  Tribunal
    that an anonymity direction is made in all appeals  raising  asylum  or
    other  international  protection  claims.  I  therefore   confirm   the
    anonymity direction in the following terms:

         Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of
         these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly
         or indirectly identify the appellant. This  direction  applies  to,
         amongst others, the appellant and the respondent.  Any  failure  to
         comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of  court
         proceedings. I do so in order to avoid the  likelihood  of  serious
         harm arising to the appellant from the contents of  the  protection
         claim becoming known to the public.


Background

 4. The appellant is a national of Vietnam and is aged 30. He entered  this
    country as a student  in  2011  and  subsequently  overstayed  from  10
    February 2012. He acknowledges  that  he  only  attended  half  of  his
    academic course before discontinuing his studies. He  asserts  that  in
    January 2015 he founded, along with a friend, the Viet  Tan  Democratic
    Party in London and that he became its chairman. The appellant  claimed
    asylum on 5 July 2018 and the respondent  refused  the  application  by
    means of a decision dated 22 February 2019. The  respondent  identified
    the core of the appellant's claim at [15] of the decision letter:

         'You have claimed that on return  to  Vietnam  you  fear  that  the
         Police will arrest and torture you [AIR 41]. Alternatively, you are
         worried that the Police and the Communists  will  investigate  your
         time in the UK when you were the Chairman of the Viet Tan branch in
         the UK [SCR 4.1].'


 5. The respondent rejected the  appellant's  assertion  that  he  was  the
    founder and Chairman of the Viet Tan  Democratic  Party,  at  [30]  and
    [34]:

         'You have stated that  you  are  a  founder  and  Chairman  of  the
         Democratic Viet Tan Party  and  as  Chairman  and  founder,  it  is
         reasonable to expect that you would have detailed knowledge of  the
         reasons for founding the  Viet  Tan  Democratic  Party,  its  aims,
         political affiliations and its political activities in the UK.  You
         claim to be the Chairman and co-founder of the Viet Tan  Democratic
         Party, a splinter group of the Viet Tan Party, founded  in  January
         2015; but have also claimed that the Viet Tan Democratic Party  was
         a group that you and your friends created [AIR 43,  44,  48,  100].
         Alternatively, you have claimed that you were involved in  the  Dan
         Chu Viet Tan Party, which you joined in 2015 while in the  UK,  and
         you were elected as Chairman of the group [SCR 5.5]  and  that  Dan
         Chu Viet Tan is the Democratic Viet Tan Party [AIR 104].  You  have
         presented  an  incoherent  and  internally  inconsistent  narrative
         concerning the party that you allegedly founded or joined, and this
         damages your credibility and this aspect of your claim.


         ...


         You were  asked  what  the  reason  was  for  founding/joining  the
         Democratic Viet Tan Party and you replied that it was to fight  for
         Human Rights (HR) in Vietnam [AIR 65]. During a line of questioning
         you were asked to explain how you fought for HR and  to  expand  on
         what HR you were fighting for [AIR 72-77].  Your  responses  during
         this line of questioning  were  vague  and  somewhat  evasive,  and
         lacking any depth of detail,  detail  it  would  be  reasonable  to
         expect, given that you were the Chairman of the Party [Air (sic) 74-
         77]. For example when asked which Human Rights  you  were  fighting
         for you replied variously 'HR in Vietnam also for activist  people'
         [AIR 74], 'Human Rights, rights  for  human  being'  [AIR  76]  and
         'Freedom rights, the right for people in Vietnam as a  human'  [AIR
         76]. Consequently, your credibility and this aspect of  your  claim
         is undermined.'


 6. The respondent provided further reasons for  doubting  the  appellant's
    stated history at [35] - [37]:

         'You have claimed that you started supporting the  Viet  Tan  Party
         since you arrived in the UK [AIR 105] and you were asked  a  series
         of questions concerning your support, and your  knowledge,  of  the
         Viet Tan Party [AIR 105-123]; it is also noted  that  you  admitted
         that you found out more about the Viet Tan Party as  part  of  your
         research on claiming asylum [AIR 141]. For someone claiming to have
         supported the Viet Tan Party for over 7 years,  your  answers  were
         inconsistent with externally available information when  describing
         the Viet Tan Logo as there is no red flag [AIR  109]  and  external
         information also indicates that the Viet  Tan  is  located  in  the
         United States of America. Your answers to questions concerning  the
         aims and objectives of the Viet Tan Party  were  also  limited  and
         lacking  any  depth  of  knowledge,  and  also  inconsistent   with
         externally available information. Your level of knowledge  is  thus
         considered to be inconsistent with the length of time you claim  to
         have supported the Viet Tan Party.


         You were asked if the Viet Tan Democratic Party and  the  Viet  Tan
         Party were one and you  replied  'they  are  the  same'  [AIR  34],
         however this answer is internally inconsistent given your  explicit
         acknowledgement that you consider the Viet Tan and Democratic  Viet
         Tan parties to be distinct [AIR 46], and your  responses  to  other
         questions in your asylum interview [AIR 45]. Your answer in AIR  34
         is also externally inconsistent  with  available  information  that
         states that the Viet Tan Party was founded  in  September  1982  by
         Hoang Co Minh, nearly 23 years before you  claim  to  have  founded
         your Democratic Viet Tan Party; and these inconsistencies undermine
         your credibility and this aspect of your claim.


         You were also asked if the Viet Tan Party was aware of your party's
         existence or had endorsed you publicly or in  any  publications  or
         articles and you replied 'yes', 'Yeah' and 'I think yes'  [AIR  58,
         59, 61]. When asked for more detail on where the Viet Tan Party had
         endorsed your party your reply  was  evasive  [AIR  62],  and  when
         pressed further, you admitted that 'on paperwork they haven't  done
         anything to accept us' [AIR 64]. Your narrative  relating  to  your
         Democratic Viet Tan Party and the Viet  Tan  Party,  including  any
         affiliation between the two,  is  internally  consistent  and  your
         admission that there is no affiliation between the to (sic),  after
         saying that there was, undermines your credibility and this  aspect
         of your claim.'


Hearing Before the FtT

 7. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Taylor House  on  2  August
    2019 and the appellant gave oral evidence. In refusing the  appeal  the
    Judge made a number of adverse credibility findings including, at  [29]
    - [31]:

         'He was asked why he was claiming protection. He said  he  belonged
         to the Vietnam Democratic party. He said that the police had  taken
         his family home. He said that he was the chairman of  the  Democrat
         Viet Tan Party. However, the party  did  not  have  a  website.  He
         suggested there was  an  established  organisation,  Viet  Tan  who
         agreed to his organisation working with them  and  taking  part  in
         their demonstrations. He said there was  no  paperwork  to  confirm
         this. He said that  his  organisation  used  Facebook  to  keep  in
         contact and to exchange views. No details were provided. He  states
         they  were  opposed  to  the  communist  government.  He  said  the
         leadership of his party consisted of himself  and  his  friend  and
         they had an assistant. He said all their members were voluntary. He
         was then asked about the Viet Tan Party.


         His bundle contains what is described as an introductory leaflet to
         what he claims is the organisation he founded. The leaflet does not
         say anything about the party or its aims beyond that they  struggle
         for a better life for Vietnamese. There  is  then  another  leaflet
         signed by a female. That leaflet contains slightly more details and
         refers to the party having a head office and provides  a  telephone
         number. In considering this documentation I have had regard to what
         was said in Tanveer Ahmed.


         There are then some photographs outside the Vietnamese Embassy  but
         nothing to suggest the appellant's party were involved.  There  are
         various photographs apparently taken in  London  of  the  appellant
         showing him talking to individuals. They are of  minimal  probative
         value. There also are letters of protest and a petition  apparently
         submitted to the Vietnam authorities. There is no  confirmation  as
         to the provenance of any this documentation  (sic).  For  instance,
         there is no response to the correspondence said to have  been  sent
         back to the Vietnamese officials.  It is my  conclusion  that  this
         evidence is self-serving and adds little to the claim.'


 8. In dismissing the appeal, the Judge observed that the newspaper article
    relied upon by the appellant as  evidence  of  the  family  home  being
    targeted in Vietnam detailed that the home was destroyed because it was
    built illegally on agricultural land. The  Judge  determined  that  the
    newspaper report was accurate, and this  was  the  true  position.  The
    Judge reasoned at [35] that there was no sign of  any  violence  taking
    place in the photographs relied upon and that the picture of the person
    lying on the ground, stated to be the appellant's mother, presented  as
    staged.

Grounds of Appeal

 9. The  appellant  relies  upon  four  grounds  of  appeal,  two  of  them
    confusingly  referred  to  as  ground  3.  For  the   purpose   of   my
    consideration I refer to them as  ground  3(1)  and  ground  3(2).  The
    grounds are identified as:

         i) the Judge erred in failing to adjourn the hearing;


        ii) the Judge applied a higher than permitted evidential  burden  of
            proof;


       iii)  the Judge applied a higher requirement for political  activism;
            and


        iv)  the Judge has not given the appellant the full benefit  of  the
            principles arising in HJ (Iran) v. Secretary of  State  for  the
            Home Department [2010] UKSC 31; [2011] 1 AC 596.


10. By way of a decision dated 2 October 2019 UTJ Sheridan observed, at [2]
    - [3]:

         'Given the procedural history  and  failure  of  the  appellant  to
         comply with directions, as set out at paragraphs  7  -  10  of  the
         decision, it is understandable that  the  judge  refused  (and  was
         suspicious of) the adjournment request.


         However, given that the evidence the appellant claimed he would  be
         able to  obtain,  if  give  a  four-week  adjournment,  might  have
         addressed  the  reasons  given  for  not  accepting  the  claim  at
         paragraphs 34 and 35, I consider it arguable, having regard to  the
         decision in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
         (IAC), that the appellant was deprived  of  a  fair  hearing  as  a
         consequence of the adjournment being refused.'


11. Though UTJ Sheridan concentrated his reasoning on ground 1,  permission
    to appeal was granted in all grounds.

12. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.


Decision on Error of Law

13. The appellant asserts by means of ground 1:

         'The learned IJ erred in law in failing to adjourn the hearing  and
         deciding to proceed with the hearing. The  Appellant  requested  an
         adjournment by way of a letter dated 29 July  2019  which  was  not
         dealt with prior to hearing and then the Appellant's representative
         requested an adjournment in person  on  the  same  basis  that  the
         Appellant's family had been arrested and tortured land seized (sic)
         based on his activities. He had just established contact  with  his
         family needed time (sic) to gather the full evidence (sic) as there
         was visual audio (sic)  and  independent  organizations  and  media
         channels involved. There was no reply to  the  written  adjournment
         request  therefore  the  Appellant  was  obliged  to  attend   with
         tentative (sic) early pictures but no video or other evidence. Only
         one article from the government  social  media  sources  confirming
         land seizure but covering  it  up  as  illegal  land  seizure.  The
         learned IJ erred in law in not adjourning and merely confining  the
         hearing to the evidence of the photographs  and  not  allowing  any
         time for the videos of the manners (sic) in the  land  confiscation
         which shows harassment and torture. However, the learned IJ then at
         paragraph 35  states  that  the  province  (sic)  produced  is  not
         established ...  there  is  no  sign  of  real  violence...  It  is
         submitted the failure to adjourn and thus depriving  the  Appellant
         the real opportunity to present his case  and  evidence  fully  the
         learned IJ has erred in law. This error in law  is  compounded  and
         very material as the learned IJ from his  brief  determination  has
         used  these  (sic)  lack  of  evidence  against   the   appellant's
         credibility.  The  learned  IJ  has  erred  in  his  approach   and
         findings.'


14.  Rule  4(3)(h)  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chambers) Rules 2014  empowers  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to adjourn a hearing.  Rule  2  of  the  Rules  sets  out  the
    overriding objectives under the Rules that the Tribunal 'must  seek  to
    give effect' when exercising any power under the Rules. It follows that
    they are the issues to be considered on an adjournment  application  as
    well. The overriding objective is that the cases are dealt with  fairly
    and justly and this includes dealing with the appeal in ways which  are
    proportionate to the importance of the case, the  complexities  of  the
    issues, the anticipated costs and the resources of the parties  and  of
    the Tribunal. The question for this Tribunal is not whether the  First-
    tier Tribunal acted reasonably, but whether it  acted  fairly:  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

15. The decision is illuminative as to the issues considered by the  Judge,
    which are wider than those acknowledged in the appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal. I observe [6] - [11] of the decision and reasons:

         'Mr A M Shahjahan requested an  adjournment.  This  was  to  gather
         unspecified evidence. He referred me to a letter of  29  July  2019
         applying for an adjournment. It states that the appellant's  family
         in Vietnam have been arrested and their land seized because of  the
         appellant's political activities. It was  said  the  appellant  has
         only just been able to establish contact with his  family  and  has
         received documentation from them. There is also reference to  media
         evidence which is to be translated. Mr Shahjahan produced a  series
         are (sic) photographs said to  be  of  the  appellant's  family  in
         Vietnam.  He  said  that  they  were  suffering  because   of   the
         appellant's actions. He suggested  a  four-week  adjournment  would
         suffice. The presenting officer adopted a neutral stance.


         I pointed out to the  appellant's  representative  that  no  appeal
         bundle had been lodged on behalf of his client. He then produced  a
         bundle  consisting  of  69  pages.  The  presenting  officer,  most
         agreeably, was willing to consider the bundle produced at this late
         state.


         In considering the application I have regard to the  chronology  to
         the appeal. The respondent's decision  was  taken  on  22  February
         2019. The appeal was received on 13  March  2019.  Directions  were
         issued the following day, with the substantive hearing  listed  for
         11 April 2019. The appellant was to provide an  indexed  bundle  of
         all documents relied upon as well as a witness statement. There was
         then an adjournment request dated 26 March 2019 and dealt  with  on
         the 28 March 2019. This was accompanied by a letter dated 12  March
         2019, requesting an adjournment  for  six  weeks.  The  appellant's
         representatives  indicated  they  wanted  a   transcript   of   the
         substantive interview to compare it was the audio recording. It was
         alleged there were major mistakes in the written  record  but  what
         they were is not specified. There is then a reference to an  expert
         preparing a report as to the risk on return.


         A case management review took place on 28 March 2019. The appellant
         was to serve an appeal bundle along  with  any  amendments  to  the
         proposed asylum interview  transcript  within  seven  days  of  the
         substantive hearing. The appellant was  also  to  provide  a  typed
         statement and a skeleton argument as well as any  medical  evidence
         relied upon.


         None of the above has been complied with. I could not see  evidence
         to indicate the  appeal  was  being  pursued  with  due  diligence.
         Nothing was provided to confirm an expert had  been  instructed  or
         when any report would be  available.  No  appeal  bundle  had  been
         lodged until Mr  Shahjahan  was  asked  at  hearing.  What  further
         evidence was being sought remained vague. The  letter  of  29  July
         2019 refers to the photographs received but  it  was  not  apparent
         what  further  investigation  was  required  beyond  the  appellant
         explaining them. There is in fact an English version  of  the  news
         article referred to.


         I am conscious that the ultimate consideration is  fairness.  Given
         that we now had  a  bundle  and  the  presenting  officer  was  not
         objecting to its late production I concluded we were in a  position
         to proceed. I explained that the  appellant  at  hearing  could  go
         through the photographs and explain the relevance of them.'


16. The Judge noted that there was a lack of precision as to  the  evidence
    being sought. This is now said to be visual and audio evidence as  well
    as evidence from  independent  organisations  and  media  channels.  It
    remains unexplained before this Tribunal, as well as before the  First-
    tier Tribunal,  as  to  how  such  evidence  will  establish  that  the
    demolition of the family home was political in nature and aimed against
    the appellant, particularly in circumstances  where  the  corroborative
    evidence presented at the original hearing detailed that the demolition
    was as a consequence of the family home having been built illegally  on
    agricultural land. The Judge was lawfully entitled when  assessing  the
    issue of fairness to note the failure of the appellant  and  his  legal
    representatives  to  abide  by  directions  previously  issued  by  the
    Tribunal. Reasonable weight  was  given  to  the  appellant's  previous
    successful request for an adjournment that was predicated upon a desire
    to  secure  further  evidence  in  circumstances  where  there  was   a
    consequent failure to actually take such steps. The evidence for  which
    the previous adjournment was sought was  never  secured  prior  to  the
    hearing  before  the  Judge.  I  observe  that  in  Vasconcelos  (risk-
    rehabilitation) [2013] UKUT 00378 (IAC) the then  President,  Blake  J,
    held that the failure to comply with directions is a matter that can be
    lawfully  considered  when  assessing  the  fairness  of  adjourning  a
    hearing.

17. I am mindful that the precise requirements of fairness will  depend  on
    the context of an appeal, including the interests involved, the  nature
    of the application and decision, and the nature of the body making  the
    decision. What will be fair in some  circumstances  may  be  unfair  in
    others.

18. In this matter I am aware that the appellant asserted  that  there  had
    been recent developments in his home area and that he only had  partial
    information as to the nature of those events.  I  further  observe  the
    appellant's  contention  that  his  family  was  deliberately  targeted
    because of his political activity in this country. However,  the  Judge
    was reasonably entitled to note that the media  report  that  had  been
    filed by the appellant with the  Tribunal  contradicted  his  assertion
    that this had been a targeted campaign by the authorities  against  his
    family. Further, the Tribunal was lawfully permitted to  weigh  in  the
    assessment the fact that a previous hearing had been adjourned  because
    the appellant's  representatives  had  asserted  that  they  wished  to
    require important evidence specific to the appeal but then  had  failed
    to do so. Unfortunately, even after the passage of time that has flowed
    as this appeal proceeded from the First-tier Tribunal to this Tribunal,
    the  appellant's  representatives  have  been  unable  to  provide  the
    evidence they indicated they wished to secure. I was informed, somewhat
    vaguely, by Mr Shahjahan that  he  now  had  video  evidence,  but  was
    further informed that no transcript had been prepared and  he  was  not
    entirely sure as to its contents. He  further  indicated  that  he  was
    hoping to receive an expert report  and  also  documents  from  unnamed
    human rights organisations, but he was unable to  provide  any  further
    detail as to the contents of these documents. Though several  apologies
    were received from Mr.  Shahjahan  as  to  such  failure,  the  present
    position is that the evidence upon which the adjournment was sought  is
    not presently available some five months after the Judge proceeded with
    the appeal. The Tribunal in its assessment of fairness  has  been  left
    very much in a situation faced by  the  Judge  as  to  assertions  that
    certain evidence would be helpful in the progression of the appeal  but
    that the true nature of such evidence continues to be  presented  in  a
    vague and  unhelpful  manner.  In  the  circumstances,  with  no  'Rule
    15(2)(a)' application being made under the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce new  evidence  and  Mr  Shahjahan  being
    unclear as to the nature of the evidence the appellant has now  secured
    or hopes to secure in the near future, I find that the Judge's  reasons
    for refusing the adjournment were cogent and  in  accordance  with  the
    obligations upon the Tribunal. In such circumstances there has been  no
    breach of natural justice and this ground of appeal must fail.

19. The appellant's second  ground  asserts  that  the  Judge  irrationally
    superimposed a higher evidential requirement: see [31] and [32]:

         'There are then some photographs outside the Vietnamese Embassy but
         nothing to suggest the appellant's party were involved.  There  are
         various photographs apparently taken in  London  of  the  appellant
         showing him talking to individuals. They are of  minimal  probative
         value. There also are letters of protest and a petition  apparently
         submitted to the Vietnamese authorities. There is  no  confirmation
         as to the provenance of any this documentation. For instance, there
         is no response to the correspondence said to have been sent to  the
         Vietnamese officials. It is my conclusion  that  this  evidence  is
         self-serving and adds little to the claim.


         There is an extract from the respondent's own guidance on  Vietnam.
         6.3.1 refers to prosecutions taking place  against  protestors  and
         human rights defenders.  There  are  then  various  articles  about
         freedom of expression in Vietnam. However, the appellant  does  not
         claim to have been active in any way in Vietnam.'


20. Particular criticism is made as to the Judge's findings that  there  is
    'no evidence' that 'this is the document that  he  actually  posted  to
    this other destination.' A concern arising in this matter  is  that  Mr
    Shahjahan was unable to identify this quote from  within  the  decision
    and it is upon this purported quote that  ground  2  relies.  There  is
    grave concern as to the lack  of  care  that  has  been  taken  in  the
    drafting of this ground, and also the manner in which this  ground  has
    been advanced, because it is misleading. It was not the position of the
    Judge that he  disbelieved  that  documents  had  been  posted  by  the
    appellant, as asserted by the appellant.  Rather,  the  Judge  observed
    that even if they had been sent to the Vietnamese authorities  in  this
    country, they had elicited  no  response,  which  suggested  that  they
    aroused no interest in the Vietnamese authorities. He simply  concluded
    that the  evidence  provided  was  self-serving  and  possessed  little
    weight. At its heart this ground is simply exhibiting a  dislike  of  a
    decision made by the Judge and  reasserts  the  appellant's  case.  The
    Judge considered the photographs, letters of protest and petition  with
    care and gave cogent reasons for finding that  there  was  no  evidence
    that they  had  aroused  persecutory  measures  within  the  Vietnamese
    authorities. The Judge's reasoning has to be considered  in  the  round
    and this requires consideration of [34]:

         'I considered all the information  provided.  I  do  not  find  the
         appellant has established he is at any real risk if returned to his
         home country. I agree with the respondent that his account  of  his
         political involvement is very superficial. The documentation he has
         produced is amateurish and could easily have been produced  to  try
         and manufacture a claim.  It  is  up  to  him  to  demonstrate  the
         documents can be relied upon  and  that  it  supports  his  claimed
         risk.'


21. Having holistically examined the evidence with care the  Judge  applied
    the correct standard and burden of proof and there  is  meritorious  no
    basis  for  the  appellant's  assertion  that  the  Judge  irrationally
    superimposed a higher evidential requirement. There are  no  merits  to
    this ground.

22. Ground 3(1) claims that the  Judge  applied  a  higher  requirement  of
    political activism upon  the  appellant  than  lawfully  permitted.  In
    essence, it is claimed that the Judge erred  in  finding  that  only  a
    person of profile or a committed opponent or someone  with  significant
    profile would be at  risk  in  Vietnam.  It  is  again  appropriate  to
    consider  the  Judge's  actual  reasoning.  He   concluded   that   the
    appellant's political activity was very superficial, see [33] - [35]:

         'There is nothing to indicate his activity here would come  to  the
         adverse attention of the  Vietnamese  authorities.  He  produced  a
         letter which he claims he  sent  to  the  authorities  in  protest.
         However, no response  has  been  produced.  Beyond  his  say-so  in
         relation to the photographs produced there is  nothing  to  connect
         his family with his activities here. The  photographs  produced  do
         not establish the people shown are his family. Even if  they  were,
         the newspaper article indicates the  authorities  were  demolishing
         the house because it had been built illegally. The  photographs  do
         not show any violence on the part of the officials.


         I considered all the  information  provided.  I  do  not  find  the
         appellant has established he is at any real risk if returned to his
         home country. I agree with the respondent that his account  of  his
         political involvement is very superficial. The documentation he has
         produced is amateurish and could easily have been produced  to  try
         and manufacture a claim.  It  is  up  to  him  to  demonstrate  the
         documents can be relied upon and that it supports his claimed risk.


         I see nothing to suggest that his family  have  been  subjected  to
         adverse treatment  because  of  him.  The  province  (sic)  of  the
         photographs produced is not established. They may relate to  family
         members and the destruction of their home. However,  the  newspaper
         article refers to property being demolished because  it  was  built
         illegally on agricultural land. On the face  of  it,  this  appears
         credible. There is no sign of any real violence taking place in the
         photographs and the picture of the person he says his mother  lying
         on the ground appears staged (sic).'


23. The appellant asserts that bloggers are subject to arbitrary detainment
    and ill-treatment. He further asserts that there is  no  threshold  for
    the level of blogging that will lead to such ill-treatment.  His  case,
    therefore, is that any Vietnamese national who blogs critically against
    the authorities is at risk  of  being  subjected  to  persecutory  ill-
    treatment. Unfortunately, when considering this ground, I observe  that
    references are made to a number of purported COIS  reports  within  the
    grounds of appeal. Unfortunately, the titles of  the  reports  are  not
    mentioned and despite efforts by this Tribunal to find the COIS reports
    by reference to the detailed paragraphs, that has proven impossible. At
    the hearing Mr Shahjahan was unable to identify the reports beyond  the
    quotes detailed in the grounds, which can  only  be  considered  to  be
    unhelpful. Mr. Shahjahan accepted that the COIS reports relied upon are
    of such age as to have been in all likelihood  replaced  and  confirmed
    that  I  could  consider  the  up-to-date  situation.  I  informed  Mr.
    Shahjahan that  I  would  consider  the  respondent's  CPIN,  'Vietnam:
    Opposition to the State' (version 3.0) September  2018  at  [9.2.1]  to
    [9.2.6]  and  [9.3.3]  to  [9.3.6].  I  also  confirmed   that   whilst
    considering the document as a whole,  I  would  consider  [2.4.20]  and
    [2.4.21] with the former paragraph identifying:

         'Decision  makers  must  establish  that  persons  claiming  to  be
         journalists  or  bloggers  are  able  to  demonstrate  that   their
         activities  have  brought,  or  will  bring  them  to  the  adverse
         attention of the Vietnamese authorities, bearing in mind  that  the
         state heavily monitors media and internet activity. Decision makers
         should give consideration to all  relevant  factors,  including  in
         particular:


           . the subject matter;


           . language and tone of the material;


           . the method of communication;


           . the reach and frequency of the publication;


           . the publicity attracted; and


           . any past adverse interest by the authorities.'


24. The Judge gave cogent and lawful reasons for  not  accepting  that  the
    appellant was  being  truthful  as  to  the  extent  of  his  political
    activity. Any blogging conducted by the appellant is  opportunistic  in
    nature  and  is  not  derived  from  the  sincerity  of  his  political
    convictions. Even if the Judge erred  and  should  have  given  greater
    consideration to the appellant's blogging, which I do not  find  to  be
    the case, the appellant does not have  a  credible  claim  of  being  a
    politically activist. He can therefore simply stop  posting  on  social
    media, which he currently and unsuccessfully undertakes in an effort to
    bring himself to the adverse attention of the  Vietnamese  authorities.
    Neither my attention, nor that of  the  Judge,  has  been  directed  to
    background evidence establishing to the  required  standard  that  even
    those persons plainly making opportunistic  efforts  through  political
    blogging in an effort to remain abroad  are  at  risk  if  returned  to
    Vietnam. The objective evidence identifies a  sophisticated  effort  by
    the authorities to address real  political  dissent  expressed  through
    blogging and such  efforts  can  readily  ascertain  the  opportunistic
    nature of the appellant's purported political actions.

25. Ground  3(2)  asserts,  inter  alia,  that  the  Judge  ought  to  have
    considered the position where  the  appellant  continued  his  blogging
    activities  upon  return  to  Vietnam  even  if,  which  the  appellant
    disputes, they are low-level activities in nature. The Judge found that
    the appellant's true political engagement is very superficial and so is
    opportunistic  in  nature.  For  the  reasons  addressed   above,   the
    appellant's political activity is simply  a  means  of  preventing  his
    return to Vietnam and there is  no  credible  evidence  that  he  would
    continue to so act on his return. In such circumstances he  secures  no
    benefit from the guidance of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran).  There  is
    no merit in this ground and in all of  the  circumstances  this  appeal
    must fail.


Notice of Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.  The decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is upheld and the appeal is dismissed.


27. The anonymity direction is confirmed.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 November 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 November 2019

