
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02028/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2019                 |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                     IA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity directions were previously made by the First-tier Tribunal,  which
are maintained. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Anderson, Counsel, instructed by Justice &
Rights Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal ('FtT') promulgated on 15 May 2019, by which he
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
    dated 19 February 2019 of his protection and human rights  claim,  made
    on 2 July 2018.

 2. The appellant claimed to have a well-founded fear of persecution  based
    on his past ill-treatment and risk on return to his country of  origin,
    Ethiopia, for the following reasons:

      a) he was shot in November 2015 by  the  Ethiopian  authorities  while
         attending a demonstration in support of  the  rights  of  those  of
         Oromo ethnicity in Ethiopia;

      b) he was detained and tortured by  the  Ethiopian  authorities,  only
         being released through family members bribing his captors;

      c) he continued to support the Oromo Liberation Front ('OLF')  in  the
         UK,  whom  he  had  supported   prior   to   attending   the   2015
         demonstration, along with an  associated  youth  organisation,  the
         'Qeerro' youth movement.

 3. The main points taken against the  appellant  by  the  respondent  were
    that:

      a) while he was Oromo ethnic origin and could  explain  the  aims  and
         people involved within the OLF, he had not accurately described the
         OLF badge;

      b) he had provided details in a witness statement of 31 January  2019,
         after his screening and substantive asylum interviews, that he  had
         not provided in the earlier asylum interviews, including:

          i) his attendance at OLF meetings,

         ii) being beaten and subjected to  electronic  shocks  and  having
             suffered a broken leg;

        iii) being questioned about his father's  and  brother's  political
             activities while in detention;

      c) he had been vague about his involvement with the 'Qeerro' movement;



      d) he had not provided any evidence  of  medical  treatment  while  in
         Italy for a gunshot wound;

      e) he had not claimed or progressed asylum claims in  third  countries
         through which he travelled before reaching the UK:

          i) Italy, where he had received medical treatment;

         ii) Germany, where he said that he had made an  asylum  claim  but
             was told that he could only do so with  legal  representation,
             which he could not afford to pay for and had lost  the  papers
             relating to that claim; and

        iii) France;

      f) the situation in Ethiopia had significantly improved,  following  a
         ceasefire agreed by OLF members and  the  Ethiopian  government  in
         July 2018. The  generally  improving  situation  had  already  been
         confirmed in earlier objective evidence of November 2017.

The FtT's decision

 4. On a preliminary point, the FtT declined to adjourn the hearing on  the
    appellant's application, as he wished to obtain a medical report  about
    his gunshot wound (which has since been obtained). For the purposes  of
    this application the FtT noted at [16]  that  he  "failed  to  see  the
    relevance of a report". Further, the FtT did not accept that the author
    would be able to comment beyond the fact of a gunshot wound; there  was
    no explanation for why the report had  not  been  sought  earlier;  the
    appellant had not obtained medical evidence on the wider allegations of
    torture, such as electrocution and being made to  walk  on  glass;  and
    even if the appellant had suffered adverse treatment, the situation  in
    the Ethiopia had improved since his departure.

 5. The FtT did not accept the appellant's credibility, noting at [58], the
    appellant's  inability  to  describe  the  OLF  badge;  the  additional
    information provided in his witness statement; his lack  of  initiative
    in contacting the OLF in the UK or the attendance of  anyone  from  the
    OLF in the UK at the FtT hearing, to corroborate correspondence said to
    confirm his affiliation to the OLF and risk on return to Ethiopia;  his
    lack of medical evidence about the gunshot wound; and  his  explanation
    for why he had not progressed the asylum  claim  in  Germany.  The  FtT
    considered country background evidence from a  variety  of  sources  at
    [61] to [65] and concluded at [66] that  even  if  he  were  an  active
    supporter of the OLF, who had been shot, detained,  and  tortured,  the
    appellant would not face a risk of persecution on return. This was as a
    result of the improvement in the treatment of  political  opponents  by
    the Ethiopian government.

 6. For the above reasons, the FtT rejected the appellant's appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. While not numbered as we have done so below, the grounds appear  to  be
    fourfold:

      a) ground (1) - the FtT had not given the appellant the opportunity of
         a fair hearing, in refusing to adjourn the case for production of a
         medical report, which had since been obtained ([5] of the grounds);

      b)  ground  (2)  -  the  FtT  improperly  considered  the  appellant's
         nervousness and use  of  the  Amharic  language  in  his  screening
         interview, in assessing the appellant's credibility ([7]);

      c) ground (3) -  the  FtT  failed  to  properly  consider  documentary
         evidence from the OLF office  in  the  UK  which  attested  to  the
         appellant's  affiliation,  merely  because  no  one  from  the  OLF
         attended the FtT hearing to corroborate that correspondence ([7]);

      d) ground (4) - the FtT failed to consider the authorities of MB  (OLF
         and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030 and HA (OLF  members
         and sympathisers - risk) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00136;  as  well  as
         failing to interpret properly the respondent's own  Country  Policy
         and Guidance Note ('CPIN') - Ethiopia: Oromos including the  'Oromo
         Protests' (November 2017) in assessing the continuing risk to those
         with a previous adverse profile, and where, as in  the  appellant's
         case, he had engaged in recent 'sur place' activities while in  the
         UK.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge SPJ Buchanan granted permission on 20  August
    2019.  He observed that there was an arguable error of law in the FtT's
    conclusions about the lack of risk to the appellant on  return,  if  he
    had been a supporter of the OLF and the  subject  of  previous  adverse
    attention, considering country guidance.  The grant of  permission  was
    not limited in its scope.

The hearing before us

Submissions

 9. Mr Anderson relied upon the grounds of appeal.  In addition, he  sought
    to argue that the FtT had erred  in  drawing  adverse  inferences  from
    additional details in the post-interview witness statement, in contrast
    to what had been provided in the screening and substantive  interviews.
    However, he confirmed that this had not been previously  pursued  as  a
    ground of appeal. The thrust  of  the  appeal,  being  the  appellant's
    strongest point,  as  accepted  by  Ms  Everett,  was  that  the  FtT's
    credibility findings were made,  in  part,  based  on  the  absence  of
    medical evidence, which the FtT had determined to  be  irrelevant  when
    refusing to adjourn the hearing.

10. Ms Everett maintained that even if the FtT's reference to  the  absence
    of medical evidence, when assessing credibility, could  be  criticised,
    that was merely one part of the credibility assessment that was carried
    out and the FtT's reasoning in relation to the remainder of credibility
    concerns was sufficient and adequately detailed, at [58.1]  to  [58.10]
    of the decision.

11. Ms Everett accepted that if any errors  around  the  FtT's  credibility
    findings were made out,  then  the  FtT's  reasoning  at  [66]  of  the
    decision about the lack of risk to  the  appellant  on  his  return  to
    Ethiopia, even if he had been subject to  previous  adverse  attention,
    was  inadequate.   The  appeal  therefore  turned  entirely  upon   the
    lawfulness of the FTT's credibility findings.

The Law

Consideration of adjournment and postponement applications


12. Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  Rules  2014  ("the  Rules")  and  the
    overriding objective, requires a First-tier Tribunal to deal  with  the
    case justly and fairly.  When considering a postponement or adjournment
    application, the FtT must consider not only whether the  appellant  has
    demonstrated a good reason for postponing or  adjourning  the  hearing,
    but also whether the appellant would, as the result of  a  refusal,  be
    deprived of a fair hearing, noting the authorities of SH  (Afghanistan)
    v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 and Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00418 (IAC).


Departure from Country Guidance cases

13. Paragraph 12.4 of the Practice Directions of the Immigration and Asylum
    Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, as  amended
    on 18 December 2018  states  that  "any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,
    apparently applicable country guidance case or to show why it does  not
    apply to the case in question is likely to be regarded as  grounds  for
    appeal on a point of law."  As was stated in NM and Others (Lone  women
    - Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00076,  at  [140],  Country  Guidance
    cases

         "should be applied except where they do not apply to the particular
         facts which an Adjudicator or the Tribunal faces and  can  properly
         be held inapplicable for legally adequate  reasons;  there  may  be
         evidence that circumstances have changed in a  material  way  which
         requires a different decision,  again  on  the  basis  that  proper
         reasons for that view are  given;  there  may  be  significant  new
         evidence which shows that the views  originally  expressed  require
         consideration for revision or refinement, even without any material
         change in circumstances. It may be that the passage of time  itself
         or substantial new evidence itself warrants a re-examination of the
         position, even though  the  outcome  may  be  unchanged.  It  is  a
         misunderstanding of their nature, therefore, to see these cases  as
         equivalent to starred cases. The system does not have the  rigidity
         of the legally binding precedent but has instead the flexibility to
         accommodate individual cases, changes, fresh evidence and the other
         circumstances which we have set out."

Error of law discussion

14. Dealing with the issue of the adjournment request, we find that the FtT
    acted unfairly  in  failing  to  adjourn  the  hearing  to  enable  the
    appellant to produce the medical evidence.  On the  one  hand,  we  had
    sympathy with the FtT when faced with a lack of explanation for why the
    medical evidence had not been produced earlier, as recorded at [14]  of
    the decision.

15. On the other hand, at [18], the FtT went on to say that  the  appellant
    has to show that he is at risk on return, and the FtT did not see how a
    report that could only conclude whether the  appellant  had  been  shot
    would have evidential value in determining who had shot him;  or  could
    assist the FtT in assessing the continuing risk to the  appellant.   In
    other words, one of the FtT's  reasons  for  refusing  the  adjournment
    request was because the  medical  evidence  would  be  of  no  relevant
    evidential value.  Indeed, the FtT specifically articulated this as  an
    overarching concern to the appellant's representative at [16].

16. However, when assessing the appellant's credibility, the FtT  took  the
    opposite approach.  The FtT drew adverse inferences from the absence of
    medical evidence about the appellant's gunshot wound at [58.6].   While
    we accept that it was only one factor which led  the  FtT  to  conclude
    that the appellant was not credible,  it  was  sufficiently  weighty  a
    factor to be referred to specifically and to be introduced  as  one  of
    the "main" factors why the appellant was not credible.  It is difficult
    to disentangle this from the remainder of the credibility findings.  We
    cannot say with any confidence that but for this finding, the  decision
    on credibility would have been the same.  It follows  that  in  drawing
    adverse inferences from the failure to provide medical  evidence,  that
    the FtT earlier regarded to be irrelevant, the FtT has made a  material
    error of law.

17. Dealing with the issue of the FtT's departure from the Country Guidance
    case of MB; and whether the  FtT's  reasoning  had  been  appropriately
    reasoned, with substantial new evidence, or a  cogent  explanation,  Ms
    Everett was correct to accept that the FtT's reasoning  was  brief  and
    inadequately reasoned, to the extent that it amounted to  an  error  of
    law.  There was no analysis of the substantial  new  evidence  said  to
    justify a departure  from  MB.   In  addition,  the  reasoning  in  the
    decision was potentially contradictory.  At [65], the FtT  referred  to
    inter-community  violence,  concluding  that  there  was  'no  location
    evidence that supports the appellant's contention that he is  at  risk'
    on return.   However, at [66], the  FtT  concluded  that  the  location
    evidence 'is that he would not face a risk of persecution'  on  return.
    Those two conclusions are potentially inconsistent,  one  suggesting  a
    lack of evidence, the other suggesting positive evidence  contradicting
    the appellant's assertions, but the main error is in the lack of detail
    in the FtT's analysis to justify departure from MB, let alone  consider
    the  plausibility  of  the  appellant's  account  of  previous  adverse
    interest in the context of objective evidence.

18. Taking the FtT's error in failing to adjourn the hearing, which in turn
    impacted on the assessment of the  appellant's  credibility,  with  the
    flaws in the FtT's assessment  of  the  objective  evidence  about  the
    situation in Ethiopia, the  appellant  had  been  deprived  of  a  fair
    hearing - see Nwaigwe (supra). Even if the medical evidence could,  and
    should, have been obtained  earlier,  the  two  linked  issues  of  the
    refusal to adjourn and the inadequate analysis  of  objective  evidence
    give rise to a material error of law.

Decision on error of law

19. In our view, the FtT's decision contained errors of law and we must set
    it aside, without any preserved findings of fact.



Disposal

20. With reference to paragraph 7.2  of  the  Practice  Direction  and  the
    necessary fact-finding, this is a case that has involved unfairness and
    will require a completely new hearing with extensive fact-finding.   In
    all the circumstances,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  matter  must  be
    remitted to the FtT for a complete rehearing, as  all  aspects  of  the
    appellant's appeal need to be reconsidered afresh.

21. The remittal shall involve a complete rehearing of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and  we  set
it aside.

We remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

1. This appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
rehearing with no preserved findings of fact.

2. The remitted appeal shall not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Shore.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  18 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
