
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02648/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2016                  |On 30 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                     K W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith of Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original Appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He entered  the  UK  on  or
    around 18 November 2015 and claimed asylum on 23  November  2015.   The
    respondent refused the appellant's claim on 28 February 2016.

 3. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a national of Afghanistan
    but did not accept that he would be at risk of persecution on return to
    Afghanistan as his account was  not  considered  to  be  credible.  The
    asylum  claim  was  refused.  The  respondent  also  decided  that  the
    appellant was not in need of humanitarian  protection  and  that  there
    would not be a breach of Articles 2 or 3 of the (European Convention on
    Human  Rights  ('ECHR')  if  the  appellant  were  to  be  returned  to
    Afghanistan.  The respondent also gave consideration to  Article  8  of
    the ECHR and decided that the appellant did not satisfy the Immigration
    Rules and that there were no exceptional circumstances to  warrant  the
    grant of discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 26 September  2016  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Harrington dismissed the appellant's  appeal.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant's  account  was   not
    truthful, that he was not threatened by the Taliban,  that  he  is  not
    sought by the Taliban and that he is not at real risk of  harm  in  his
    home area and that he  was  not  entitled  to  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  a   photograph
    submitted in support of the appeal was a photograph of the  appellant's
    brother and that he was in military uniform  in  the  photograph.   The
    Tribunal accepted that the appellant's brother was, at the point of the
    photograph, in the military. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  there
    was not sufficient  credible  information  to  show  that  the  country
    situation had worsened to the extent that the  Tribunal  should  depart
    from the case of AK (Afghanistan) CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) ('AK').

    The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 27 October 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge J  M  Holmes  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

    The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

    Submissions of the parties

 6. The grounds of appeal set out four discrete grounds.  Ground 1  asserts
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the risk arising  as  a
    result of the fact  that  the  appellant's  brother  had  been  in  the
    military. It is asserted that the background evidence that  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal confirms that family members of those  who  are
    perceived as supporting the government and international armed  forces,
    including those who serve in the Afghan military, are at real  risk  of
    persecution.  Reference is made to the respondent's country information
    and guidance on persons  supporting  the  government  (February  2015).
    Reference is also made to the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines, which  were
    also before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is submitted  that  the  judge
    was under a duty to engage with this background evidence and was  under
    a duty to give reasons as to why the appellant would not be at risk.

 7. Ground 2 asserts that Wardak is a dangerous province and that the judge
    failed to adequately consider whether the appellant  could  safely  and
    reasonably return to Wardak in light of the effective  Taliban  control
    in the province.  Reference is made to AK at paragraph 244  and  it  is
    asserted that by analogy the same concerns arise  as  set  out  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in relation to Ghazni.  Reference is also made to a  BBC
    News article entitled "Afghanistan  conflict:  life  inside  a  Taliban
    stronghold", which also was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  is
    asserted that according to the AK case it is unsafe for  the  appellant
    to return to his home district.  It is submitted that the judge  failed
    to assess whether or not it was reasonable for the appellant to  return
    to Wardak.

 8. Ground 3 asserts that the judge failed to consider internal relocation.
     It is asserted that the judge has failed to consider, on the basis  of
    the appellant's risk arising from his brother's military activities, if
    it would be safe for the appellant to relocate It is asserted that  the
    Taliban have the ability to trace and locate individuals in  Kabul  and
    have done so consistently as confirmed in the background evidence,  for
    example, the Canada Refugee Board, entitled "Afghanistan:  Whether  the
    Taliban has the capacity to pursue individuals after they  relocate  to
    another region; their capacity to track individuals over the long term;
    Taliban capacity to carry out targeted killings (2012 - January 2016)".
     The second limb of this ground of appeal is that the judge  failed  to
    consider  the  reasonableness  in  terms  of  the  appellant's  support
    networks,  taking  into  account  Afghanistan's  low  humanitarian  and
    developmental indicators and the wider economic  constraints  affecting
    large segments of the population.  It is asserted that it was incumbent
    upon the judge to consider the reasonableness of relocation in light of
    the specific circumstances of the appellant in  accordance  with  cases
    such as Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5 and SSHD v. AH (Sudan) & Ors [2007]
    UKHL 49.

 9. Ground 4 asserts that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons.   In
    essence this ground of appeal relates to the  first  three  grounds  of
    appeal.

10. In oral submissions Ms Smith asserted that the failure to consider  the
    perceived  political  opinion  or  imputed  political  opinion  of  the
    appellant was a material error of law.  She submitted  that  the  judge
    ought to have engaged with what the position would be for the appellant
    as a result of his brother's military  connections.   She  referred  to
    paragraph 38 of the First-tier Tribunal  decision  and  submitted  that
    there was a clear failing to consider all parts of  the  asylum  claim.
    She referred to paragraph 26 of the decision where the judge found that
    the appellant's brother was in the military but asserted that there was
    no further detail, consideration or analysis of what effect that  might
    have on the  appellant's  risk  on  return.   She  submitted  that  the
    background evidence is very clear that if a family  member  is  in  the
    military then a person associated with them or a family member  may  be
    at risk from the Taliban.  In respect of ground 2 she submitted that in
    the case of AK it is clear that  where  a  district  is  under  Taliban
    control that makes it unreasonable for a person  to  go  back  to  that
    area.  She submitted that Wardak is a Taliban stronghold  and  referred
    to paragraph 244 of the AK decision.  She also referred to page 37, 45,
    and footnote 278 of the UNHCR Guidelines and submitted that it is clear
    that there is a very strong Taliban presence in  Wardak.   It  was  not
    clear from  the  decision  that  the  judge  considered  the  objective
    evidence.  In relation to the third ground of appeal she submitted that
    the judge failed to engage and consider if the  appellant's  uncle  was
    willing to support him and that it was  absolutely  necessary  for  the
    judge to have taken into consideration whether  or  not  the  appellant
    would be able to avail himself of family support and whether  he  would
    be able to access shelter. The need to consider the UNHCR Guidelines as
    to what is reasonable must be based on the individual circumstances  of
    the appellant - reference to UNHCR, page 8.  Further, the judge  failed
    to consider the reach of the Taliban and their  ability  to  trace  the
    appellant.  She referred to page 18 of  the  grounds  of  appeal  where
    reference is made to the Canada Refugee Report, to the CIG and asserted
    that consideration ought to have been  given  to  the  profile  of  the
    appellant's brother,  the  nature  of  the  conflicts,  the  fact  that
    Afghanistan is a tribal nation.

11. Ms Smith confirmed that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings on credibility.  In relation to ground  4  and  the
    duty to give reasons she submitted that this supported the other  three
    grounds of appeal.

12. Mr Wilding submitted that there was no error of law.  He asserted  that
    the grounds of appeal and the submissions made by Ms Smith bear  little
    resemblance to the case that was put before the First-tier  Tribunal  -
    the case put today is very  different  to  the  case  advanced  at  the
    hearing.  He referred to paragraph 20 of the decision where  the  judge
    sets out the submissions of  the  appellant.   He  submitted  that  the
    submissions made before the First-tier Tribunal do not  identify  that,
    notwithstanding the appellant's claim that he was spying, there  was  a
    residual implied political opinion claim.  He referred to the  skeleton
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal submitting that  there  was  no
    mention of the appellant being at risk because of his brother being  in
    the Afghan Army,  the  case  was  put  forward  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's own activities.  He referred  to  the  appellant's  witness
    statement, at paragraphs 32 and 33, where the appellant said  that  his
    fear was as a result of his activities and that he  was  known  to  the
    Taliban.  There was no mention of a fear arising because of the imputed
    political opinion as a result of his relationship with his brother.  He
    submitted that to argue now that there was something else that possibly
    would put the appellant at risk could not give rise to an error of  law
    in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

13. Mr Wilding submitted that in  any  event  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal only give rise to a possible risk.  He referred to  paragraph  5
    of the grounds of appeal and the UNHCR Guidelines, which put  the  case
    as no higher than there may be a risk.  He submitted that in  light  of
    the complete rejection of the appellant's claim that the  Taliban  were
    interested in him it is difficult to see how the appellant could be  at
    risk on return.  No evidence had been submitted as to how the appellant
    would be identified as related to his brother.  He submitted  that  the
    judge had discredited the letter from the Taliban and that  the  letter
    (if accepted) simply does not identify the appellant as being either in
    trouble or at risk because of his brother's activities.   He  submitted
    that because the judge had rejected everything that the  appellant  had
    claimed in relation to his activities the Tribunal was not required  to
    consider any risk arising  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's  brother
    because that was not raised at all in the case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

14. In relation to ground 2 Mr Wilding assumed that 15(c) is relied  on  as
    there is a reference  to  the  case  of  AK.   There  was  a  wholesale
    rejection of the claim that the appellant would be at risk  in  in  his
    home province.  There had been no risk identified  other  than  a  risk
    arising as a result of his own activities. He submitted that  the  best
    the appellant can do is point to a different part of Afghanistan in the
    AK country guidance case and that, even if by analogy Ghazni and Wardak
    were similar, this was  only  another  may  be  at  risk  and  was  not
    conclusive that the appellant would be at risk. He submitted that in AK
    there is no suggestion that in all areas of Taliban control  it  is  so
    dangerous as to make it unreasonable for an appellant to be returned to
    that area.  He submitted that the appellant clearly had never  had  any
    problems at home because the judge had rejected the appellant's tale of
    what happened to him in Afghanistan. It was inappropriate to argue that
    the judge should have considered this issue when it was not put to her.
     It was difficult to see how the Tribunal could determine on the  facts
    of this case that there was a risk where such a round rejection of  the
    entirety of the appellant's claimed persecution has been  made  by  the
    judge.  He submitted that the appellant had not identified any risk  of
    indiscriminate violence in that province which is such  that  civilians
    per se are at risk.

15. In relation to ground 3 he submitted that there can  be  no  assumption
    that the appellant's family will not help him.  It is  not  in  dispute
    that the appellant has an uncle in Kabul and a family who in  his  case
    assisted him.  There is no evidence to  suggest  that  they  would  not
    continue to offer him  assistance.   He  referred  to  the  appellant's
    submission that the tentacles of the Taliban are  so  great  that  they
    would be able to reach him wherever he is.  However, he submitted  that
    as the judge has found that he is not at risk  from  the  Taliban  this
    argument does not stand up.  He submitted that the judge did  not  need
    to answer a question that was not asked,  i.e.  having  considered  the
    appellant's story lacked any credibility at all  the  judge  considered
    that he would be safe to return to his home area and did not  therefore
    need to consider relocation.  He submitted that the  language  used  in
    the UNHCR report makes it clear that there is not in every case a risk.
    He  also  asserted  that  the  judge's  finding  in  relation  to   the
    appellant's brother was that at a historic period in time  his  brother
    was in the military.  There  was  nothing  else  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant would be identified and also targeted.

16. In reply Ms Smith submitted that there was not a round rejection of the
    totality of the appellant's evidence.  She referred to paragraph 23  of
    the decision and said there was not a complete rejection of the  letter
    and that it was not correct to say that the letter only refers  to  the
    appellant.  She submitted that it was always part  of  the  appellant's
    account that his brother was in the  military  and  that  this  was  an
    obvious point that the judge should  have  considered.   She  submitted
    that it is only necessary for the appellant to show a possibility of  a
    risk.  Where there is a part of the asylum  claim  that  has  not  been
    considered, then that is an error. She asserted that  the  respondent's
    submissions suggest that the appellant cannot succeed merely because he
    has not been found to be credible.  She referred to page 8 of the UNHCR
    Guidelines and submitted that following the finding  that  the  brother
    had links to the military this was enough for the judge to be  required
    to consider if a risk arose.

    Discussion

17. There is no appeal against the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that
    the appellant did not give a truthful account and was not at risk  from
    the Taliban as a result of his alleged spying activities.

    Ground 1

18. The judge accepted that photographs submitted by the  appellant  showed
    'the Appellant's brother...both in  military  uniform  and  in  clearly
    military settings'. The judge accepted  that  the  appellant's  brother
    'was at the point of the photographs in  the  military'.  I  accept  Mr
    Wilding's submission that the case that was put before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not include any reference to a risk arising as a result of
    any perceived or imputed political opinion through  association  -  the
    appellant's brother having served in the military. At paragraphs 5  and
    6 of his witness statement the appellant states, 'I lived there with my
    parents, 2 sisters and my brother Jan Agha who was away all the time as
    it was not safe for him in Wardak due to his  military  duty.'...  'The
    Taliban were also aware that my brother was working for the Government.
    I have a maternal uncle in Kabul who my brother went to visit every now
    and then however he spent most of his  time  with  the  army  at  their
    post.' With regard to the alleged threat made to the appellant, by  way
    of a letter sent to his home, in his witness statement at paragraph  28
    he states 'I am unable to comment as to why my brother's name  has  not
    been mentioned in this threat letter  however  I  believe  that  it  is
    because the Taliban were aware that my brother was not living  with  us
    at home or perhaps they  believed  that  I  did  not  have  a  brother.
    Furthermore the threat was directed to me and  not  my  brother  so  it
    would make no sense to have my brother's name mentioned too.' There  is
    no suggestion, even on the appellant's own case, that he considers that
    when he was in Afghanistan the Taliban had any interest in him  arising
    out of his brother's military service.

19. Nevertheless as the First-tier Tribunal had made  a  finding  that  the
    appellant's brother was, at  some  stage,  a  member  of  the  military
    consideration as to whether or not this, in itself, presented a risk on
    return was required. I reiterate that this was not put to the judge and
    I do not consider it a 'Robinson' obvious point on the  facts  of  this
    case but, given the need for anxious scrutiny of asylum claims, I am of
    the view that failing to consider this issue amounted to  an  error  of
    law. However, I do not consider that this error  was  material  on  the
    basis of the appellant's asserted case and the  judge's  findings.  The
    judge made findings, which have not been disputed, that the appellant's
    account lacked credibility. As a result there  is  nothing  to  suggest
    that the appellant was targeted by the Taliban at all.  The  appellant,
    on his own case, did not  assert  that  he  was  targeted  because  his
    brother served in the military and even suggested  that  'perhaps  they
    believed that I did not have a brother.' Whilst the objective  evidence
    demonstrates that family members of individuals at risk may be targeted
    by the Taliban this must be considered on an individual basis. In  this
    case it is evident from the findings of the judge  that  the  appellant
    lived in Afghanistan without being targeted even though his brother was
    in the Afghan military. Additionally his brother died some considerable
    period of time ago (at least 18  months  ago)  further  minimising  any
    future risk. On the facts of  this  case  the  error  of  law  was  not
    material as, on  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant was not targeted as a family member of a  person  serving  in
    the military and given his brother  died  some  time  ago  it  is  most
    unlikely that the appellant is now at risk.

    Ground 2

20. It is submitted that Wardak is a dangerous province and that the  judge
    failed to assess whether  or  not  the  appellant  can  be  safely  and
    reasonably returned to Wardak in light of  effective  Taliban  control.
    Reference is made to AK and it is asserted that in  that  case  it  was
    held 'that individuals could  not  be  returned  to  certain  dangerous
    districts in Afghanistan, in that case Ghazni, which are under  Taliban
    control'

21. It is not clear whether the appellant advances  this  argument  on  the
    basis of Article  15(c)  EU  Qualification  Directive  2004/83/EC  (the
    Qualification Directive. However it is assumed that this is the case as
    reference was made to the case of AK both in the grounds  and  also  in
    oral submissions.  The First-tier Tribunal also noted that the basis of
    the argument was unclear recording at paragraph  40:

         'It is not entirely clear from the Appellant's submissions  whether
         the Appellant  advances  a  free-standing  Humanitarian  Protection
         claim  under  15(c)  in  light  of  the  general  circumstances  in
         Afghanistan.

22.  Whether or not the case is advanced on an Article 15(c) basis  or  not
    the First-tier Tribunal  did  consider  this  argument.  The  Tribunal,
    regarding the claim, set out:

         '40 ...In particular, no particular arguments were advanced  and  I
         was not taken to any of the objective information in particular and
         Mrs Agyekum did not address me on  how  the  objective  information
         before me showed a different position  to  the  considered  in  the
         country guidance case of AK'

         41 Consequently, whilst  there  are  references  in  the  objective
         information to a  worsening  situation,  there  is  not  sufficient
         credible information before me to show that the  country  situation
         has worsened to the extent that I  should  depart  from  AK.  As  a
         result I conclude that the  Appellant  is  not  entitled  to  15(c)
         Humanitarian Protection.'

23.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  note  (at  paragraph  20)  the  appellant's
    submission at (f) that 'He has already been targeted in his home area -
    the objective information shows that the Taliban are active  in  Wardak
    and at (h) 'There has been a clear deterioration in  the  situation  in
    Kabul since AK was decided in 2012, there is  a  new  country  guidance
    case on the way.'

24. At paragraph 14 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal records that  a
    bundle  was  submitted  containing,  inter  alia,  'Various   objective
    information'.

25. The appellant's skeleton argument before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    paragraphs 39-41 made the following submissions  with  regard  to  this
    issue:

         '39. The most recent country guidance case on  Afghanistan  is  AK.
         The Tribunal while noting that there had been  a  deterioration  in
         the general security conditions prevailing in  country,  held  that
         there was an insufficient degree of violence in  Afghanistan  as  a
         whole to overcome the Article 15(C) threshold.

         40 ...It is submitted that in light of the developments since 2012,
         the conclusions on Article 15(C) should be revisited.

         41. Reference is  also  made  to  the  various  references  to  the
         deteriorating situation in Afghanistan in recent times  within  the
         objective material in A's bundle and attachments to  this  skeleton
         argument.'

26. There is no  evidence  that  any  specific  aspects  of  the  objective
    evidence were referred to by the appellant at the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. At the hearing before me and  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal reference was made to page 37, 45, and footnote 278 of the UNHCR
    Guidelines, AK at paragraph  244,  and  a  BBC  News  article  entitled
    "Afghanistan conflict: life inside a Taliban stronghold". I  understood
    these to be examples rather than the  only  objective  evidence  relied
    upon. The thrust of the appellant's submission is that the situation in
    Afghanistan has worsened since 2012 when AK was decided, and (this  was
    not an argument advanced before the First-tier Tribunal) that, as there
    is a very strong Taliban presence in Wardak, paragraph 244  of  AK  (by
    analogy with Ghazni,  a  number  of  districts  in  that  province  are
    Taliban strongholds) is relied on on the basis that it was held  in  AK
    that 'individuals could not be returned to certain dangerous  districts
    in Afghanistan...  which  are  under  Taliban  control'.  Although  not
    specifically an argument advanced before the First-tier Tribunal I have
    considered  this  argument.  Paragraph  244  falls  under  the  heading
    'Internal relocation' and is concerned with  the  reasonableness/unduly
    harsh test in the context of Article 15(c) in relation to relocation as
    explained in detail in paragraphs 227 - 242. This particular  paragraph
    cannot, even by analogy, be relevant as the appellant will be returning
    to his home area. What the Upper Tribunal found in relation to the risk
    of indiscriminate violence to ordinary citizens in Ghazni is summarised
    in the headnote:

         (ii) Despite a rise in the number of civilian deaths and casualties
         and (particularly in the 2010-2011  period)  an  expansion  of  the
         geographical scope of the armed conflict in Afghanistan the  level
         of indiscriminate violence in that country taken as a whole is  not
         at such a high level as to mean that, within the meaning of Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive, a civilian, solely  by  being
         present in the country, faces a real risk which threatens his  life
         or person.

         (iii) Nor is the level of  indiscriminate  violence,  even  in  the
         provinces worst affected by the violence (which may now be taken to
         include Ghazni but not to include Kabul), at such a level.

27. The detailed consideration was set out in the following paragraphs:

         215.  To this point the Tribunal's view as to the  absence  of  any
         Article 15(c) level of risk in Afghanistan as a whole  is  not  one
         which either party to this appeal has opposed.  Mr  Vokes  for  the
         appellant has carefully confined his  challenge  to  the  issue  of
         whether the situation in certain provinces (or parts of  provinces)
         in Afghanistan now crosses the Article 15(c) threshold.  He asks us
         to find that there are now at least several provinces in the south,
         south-east and east  of  the  country  that  engage  Article  15(c)
         generally, including in particular Ghazni, which is the appellant's
         home province.

         216.  It is right that we should  place  particular  focus  on  the
         situation at the provincial level, not just  because  that  is  the
         approach taken by UNHCR and some national courts and/or authorities
         in several European countries, but because our previous summary  of
         the background evidence has pinpointed that "much of  the  violence
         is concentrated in certain areas of the country and, in  the  words
         of the February 2012 CSIS report (to take a  very  recent  source),
         "most fighting is highly regional in  Pashtun  areas,  rather  than
         nationwide".

         217.  Nevertheless, we do not think  that  bearing  in  mind  their
         known populations the current evidence indicates that there is  any
         province where the level of  violence  reaches  the  Article  15(c)
         threshold.  Thus according  to  the  UNAMA  2011  report,  the  two
         provinces with the  highest  number  of  civilian  deaths  were  in
         Kandahar and Helmand, with  290  civilians  killed.   The  combined
         total of the south-eastern and eastern provinces  (which  Mr  Vokes
         identified as the main hub of recent increases  in  the  levels  of
         violence) accounted for 446 deaths. In Ghazni province, even taking
         into account that  it  has  seen  a  significant  rise  in  violent
         incidents, the figure of the numbers of civilians killed are  still
         relatively low (even assuming for the moment that the  majority  of
         the 446 deaths recorded by UNAMA for  the  five  south-western  and
         eastern provinces occurred in Ghazni).  A factor which  appears  to
         be particularly  important  in  relation  to  Ghazni  is  that  the
         background sources consider the proportion of targeted  attacks  to
         be very  significant.  As  already  noted,  both  the  9  September
         LANDINFO report by Dr Giustozzi and the October 2011 the report  by
         the Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit, for example, describe
         the Taliban as targeting  anyone  in  Ghazni  city   identified  as
         having a government-related position in a variety of roles - in the
         police, as government staff and even as teachers.

         218.  According to statistics we have been given, the population of
         Kandahar is 1,127,000 and that of Helmand  1,744,700.   We  do  not
         consider that, viewed in the context of the provincial  populations
         of Kandahar and Helmand, 290 civilian deaths is a figure indicative
         of an Article 15(c) threshold of violence for civilians  generally.
         Similarly, bearing in mind that the population of  Ghazni  province
         is 1,149,400, we do not think that even if all the 446 deaths  (for
         the south-eastern and eastern provinces)  recorded  by  UNAMA  were
         treated as having occurred in  that  province,  such  a  figure  is
         indicative of a level of violence giving rise to  a  real  risk  of
         Article 15(c) serious harm to civilians generally.

         ...

         221.  Mr Vokes has sought to argue that, just as we  must  look  at
         more than the metric or data relating to "civilian casualties" when
         considering Afghanistan as a whole, we must do likewise in relation
         to assessment of Article 15(c)  risk  at  a  provincial  level.  We
         agree. In this  regard  he  highlighted  various  features  of  the
         evidence relating to Ghazni and Kabul especially those relating  to
         socio-economic conditions.

         222.  In relation to Ghazni, it is clear that in  addition  to  its
         security problems it has a growing unemployment problem, but it  is
         far  from  being  the  country's  poorest  province  and  there  is
         relatively little evidence of significant levels of destitution. We
         do not consider that the socio-economic conditions in Ghazni,  even
         taken cumulatively with the known level of violence there and other
         relevant factors, suffice to establish Article 15(c) risk  in  this
         province.

28. The reliance by analogy with the position with regard to  Ghazni  would
    lead to a conclusion (had this been  advanced  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal) that  the  appellant  would  not  be  in  need  of
    protection as a result  of  '...serious  and  individual  threat  to  a
    civilian's life or person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    situations of international or internal armed conflict' (Article  15(c)
    of the Directive).

29. This leaves the issue of the worsening situation  in  Afghanistan.  The
    First-tier Tribunal judge, as set out above, did consider the objective
    evidence  finding  'whilst  there  are  references  in  the   objective
    information to a worsening situation, there is not sufficient  credible
    information before me to show that the country situation  has  worsened
    to the extent that I should depart from AK.'

30. Whilst the judge has not referred to anything specific in the objective
    evidence she  was  not  directed  to  anything  specifically.  She  did
    consider the evidence and gave a reason for her finding, albeit  brief.
    I have considered the UNHCR guidelines and the BBC report  that  I  was
    referred to, which were part of the objective evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal. At footnote 278 in the UNHCR guidance the  following  is
    stated 'In April 2015, in Maidan Wardak province the Taliban reportedly
    distributed night letters to encourage men to join them in their  fight
    against  the  government.'  This  of  course  concerns   the   forcible
    recruitment by the Taliban and the risk of being killed or punished  if
    recruitment is resisted. However no evidence was provided to show  that
    it is a real risk for the appellant and not a mere possibility.  Having
    considered the specific evidence referred to and the  general  position
    outlined in the UNHCR guidelines together with the  evidence  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal, I consider that the  finding  that  the
    country situation has not worsened to the  extent  that  AK  should  be
    departed from was one that was open to the First-tier  Tribunal.  There
    was no material error of law

31. As I have found that here was no material error of law on the first two
    grounds internal relocation is not in issue and ground  3  falls  away.
    Ground 4 concerns inadequacy of reasoning. This was  not  pursued  with
    any vigour at the hearing. As set out above in relation to the  Article
    15(c) issue the reasoning is brief but it is not so inadequate that the
    basis on which the first-tier Tribunal reached its  conclusion  is  not
    clear.

32. There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the Secretary of State stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 29 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
