

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/02060/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |         Decision and Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 8 May 2018                          |         On 11 May 2018             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     RB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:    Mr G Brown instructed by Morgan Dias Immigration
                    Consultants Ltd
For the Respondent: Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS



    1. On 12 December 2017 the Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of  the
       First-tier Tribunal following the respondent conceding errors of  law
       in the earlier decision, set out at paragraphs [4]  and  [5]  of  the
       grant of permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  matter
       returns to the Upper Tribunal for the purposes of a  Resumed  hearing
       after which the Tribunal shall substitute a decision to either  allow
       or refuse the appeal.



Background



    2. The appellant is a national of Iraq born in  Hawija  on  22  February
       1982. The appellant claims to face a real risk on return as a  result
       of her father being  a  member  of  the  Ba'ath  party  under  Saddam
       Hussain. The appellant states her home area is now controlled by Shia
       militia who will persecute her. The appellant also  claims  that  she
       married her husband without getting permission from her family  which
       would cause problems for her culturally; as it  is  claimed  the  man
       needs to seek permission  to  marry  from  the  prospective  spouse's
       parents. The appellant claims that as a result of not obtaining  such
       permission from her family she will be seen to have  dishonoured  the
       family which may lead to her death or ill-treatment.

    3. The appellant claims she cannot internally relocate within  Iraqi  as
       her family will be able to find out where she lived and claims  there
       is no guarantee that she will not be spotted and that her family will
       therefore find her.

    4. The appellant claims in her recent witness statement that her  father
       has passed away and so there will be no one to stop the family trying
       to kill her as they will see that she has dishonoured  them,  without
       asking their permission first.

    5. The appellant claims she cannot relocate to the IKR as  a  result  of
       her father's involvement in the Ba'ath party where it is  claimed  he
       treated Kurds very  badly;  being  involved  in  burning  houses  and
       displacing them which the appellant claims will make her a target.

    6. The appellant also claims if returned to the IKR she  would  find  it
       practically impossible to obtain employment, would  have  no  one  to
       care for her daughter whilst she works, even if she was even able  to
       obtain employment due to her father's previous activities.

    7. The appellant also claims she  would  find  it  difficult  to  obtain
       accommodation for her daughter. The appellant claims not  to  have  a
       CSID, a legal document which is needed to obtain  accommodation,  and
       claims people do not rent properties to single women with a child  as
       they would expect her to be living with her husband and  not  on  her
       own.

    8. The appellant claims her husband will not  be  able  to  support  her
       daughter whilst in Iraq and they will be at risk if  he  returned  to
       Iraq or the IKR.  To find accommodation she would still have to  live
       there with just her daughter.

    9. The appellant refers to the fact  that  her  daughter  is  a  British
       citizen and would not be safe in Iraq.

   10. The appellants husband in his witness statement dated 15 January 2018
       confirms that he was originally from Iraq. He was born on  1  January
       1980 and states he is now a British citizen. The  appellants  husband
       entered the United Kingdom  on  15  February  2002  claiming  he  was
       persecuted by the Ba'ath party. The appellants husband claims he  was
       granted Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  in  July  2010  and  claims  he
       obtained British citizenship in 2014.

   11. The appellants husband states he has  never  returned  to  Iraq.  His
       mother still lives in that country but he believes his life  will  be
       in danger. The appellants husband maintains contact with  his  mother
       to whom he speaks once or twice a month on  the  telephone,  who  has
       told him no one is safe in Iraq. The appellants husband  claims  that
       he has been threatened whilst in the United Kingdom with  the  police
       having been involved on two occasions. The appellants husband  claims
       to have been away from Iraq for the last 16 years and  so  would  not
       find work and will be unable to integrate into the community.

   12. The appellants husband speaks of  daily  suicide  bombings  which  he
       claims are a daily occurrence, lack of law and  order,  and  no  real
       functioning government. The appellant's husband claims that  he  will
       face a high risk of being kidnapped as a British citizen  which  will
       place both him and his daughter in danger.

   13. The appellants husband claims that he has his  own  business;  a  car
       wash franchised with Tesco Supermarkets in the United Kingdom.

   14. There was no challenge to the factual analysis set out above.




Discussion


   15. The hearing  considered  both  protection  and  human  rights  issues
       following the hearing on 12 December 2017.

   16. Preliminary discussions led to the protection appeal being  withdrawn
       by the appellant leaving only the issue of the human rights aspect to
       be considered.

   17. In this appeal, the appellant is a national of Iraq. Her husband is a
       British citizen having entered the United Kingdom from Iraq in  2002.
       The couple have a young child who is also a British citizen.

   18.  Under  the  Immigration  Rules  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the
       provisions of Appendix A EX.1, and the question of whether  it  would
       be reasonable or not to expect the child to leave the UK. It was  not
       made out it would be reasonable to  expect  a  young  female  British
       national child to live in Iraq at this point in time.

   19. It was held  in  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11  that  the  definition  of
       "insurmountable obstacles"  at  EX.2  as  meaning  "very  significant
       difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or  their  partner
       in continuing their family life together outside  the  UK  and  which
       could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship  for  the
       applicant or their partner" was consistent with Strasbourg case law.

   20. The appellant's partner and child are British  citizens  who  have  a
       right to remain in the United Kingdom. They  are  also  EU  nationals
       with the right to remain in the territory of the European Union.

   21. Whilst nationality is not the determinative aspect, in that it cannot
       be said the mere fact of being a British national prevents  a  person
       being removed from the United Kingdom, it is a relevant factor.

   22. The appellants husband and child will remain in the United Kingdom as
       it is unreasonable on the facts to expect them  to  return  with  the
       appellant to live in Iraq.

   23. The appellant would therefore have to be returned alone as  it  would
       not be possible or reasonable to expect this family unit to  continue
       their family life together in Iraq.

   24. I do not  find  it  reasonable  in  all  the  circumstances  for  the
       appellant and her child to be split as would occur if  the  appellant
       was  removed  in  isolation.  It  is  clear  the  child  has  a  good
       relationship with her mother. Removing this mother  from  this  child
       would entail very serious hardship for the appellant.

   25. The question in cases of this nature turns upon the reasonableness of
       the decision under challenge; for a decision that is  not  reasonable
       cannot be said to be proportionate.

   26. At [19] of the decision of the Court of Appeal in R  (MA  (Pakistan))
       [2016] EWCA Civ 705 the Court said the following:

             19.  In my  judgment,  therefore,  the  only  questions  which
                  courts and tribunals need to  ask  when  applying  section
                  117B(6) are the following:


                  (1) Is the applicant liable to deportation? If so, section
                  117B is inapplicable and instead the  relevant  code  will
                  usually be found in section 117C.


                  (2) Does the  applicant  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                  parental relationship with the child?


                  (3) Is the child a qualifying child as defined in  section
                  117D?


                  (4) Is it unreasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
                  United Kingdom?


             20.  If the answer to the first question is  no,  and  to  the
                  other three questions is yes, the conclusion must be  that
                  article 8 is infringed.


   27. In this appeal the answers are no, yes, yes and yes,  when  answering
       the above four questions.

   28. On the facts of this matter find that the appellant succeeds pursuant
       to article 8  ECHR  on  the  basis  of  an  ability  to  satisfy  the
       immigration rules in EX.1 and pursuant to  section  117B(6)  and  the
       failure to establish it is reasonable in all  the  circumstances  for
       this family to be split to secure the appellant's removal to Iraq. It
       is not made out the public interest requires the  appellants  removal
       from the United Kingdom sufficient to outweigh the positive  elements
       in her favour.

   29. I allow the appeal on the basis it is not a proportionate decision.



Decision

   30. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal  is  allowed  on  human
       rights grounds only.




   Anonymity

   31. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


       I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8 May 2018












