
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02369/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Via Teams                            |                                     |
|On 5 August 2021                     |On 16 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE



                                   Between

                                     SOK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Thompson
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born in 1988. He appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made  on  21  February  2020  refusing  his  claim  for   international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a  decision  dated  17  January
    2021, dismissed his appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I notified the representatives at the Upper  Tribunal  initial  hearing
    that I intended to set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    My reasons were as follows. First, the  judge  erred  in  law  for  the
    reasons given in Ground 1. At  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  the
    judge had asked first the appellant's counsel, Mr  Thompson,  and  then
    the appellant himself to use counsel's laptop computer  to  attempt  to
    search for evidence of an organisation, Asayash Sulaimaniya,  of  which
    the uncle of Marwan (a person against whom  the  appellant  claimed  to
    have given evidence in court and who had subsequently committed suicide
    in prison) was purportedly a member. Counsel could not find evidence of
    the existence of the organisation on the internet  and,  as  the  judge
    records at [31], 'the appellant then carried out a  search,  which  did
    not yield any result either.'

 3. Although the judge does not refer in  terms  in  his  findings  to  the
    appellant's failure to find the uncle's organisation on  the  internet,
    that failure was, as  described  by  the  judge,  an  instance  of  the
    appellant being unable to support claims made in  his  appeal.  In  the
    context of the decision as a whole, I am satisfied that the appellant's
    failure to find the organisation contributed to the  judge's  rejection
    of the appellant's account as unreliable. However, whilst acknowledging
    that the appellant should be  able,  where  possible,  to  substantiate
    assertions made in evidence, I do not consider that it was  appropriate
    or fair to  expect  the  appellant  without  prior  notice  to  use  an
    unfamiliar computer operating with a script  designed  for  a  language
    which he did not speak to look for  that  evidence.  By  adopting  this
    procedure, the judge erred in law.

 4. Ground 2 is less compelling although I  did  not  ask  Mr  Walker,  the
    Senior Presenting Officer at the initial hearing, to  make  submissions
    in respect of it. However, as the decision will in  any  event  be  set
    aside with none of the findings of fact surviving, I do not propose  to
    address Ground 2.

 5. There had been a number of  adjournments  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    caused by the absence of original documents which the appellant  wished
    to adduce in the evidence. Mr Walker,  the  Senior  Presenting  Officer
    before the Upper Tribunal, helpfully referred me to a note on his  file
    which indicated that the missing documents may have been  left  on  the
    2017  asylum  appeal  file  (reference:  PA  059582017).  I  told   the
    representatives that I would endeavour to have this file linked  to  PA
    023692020 in readiness for the next hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.
    It would be prudent for the appellant's representative  to  check  with
    the First-tier Tribunal that the  files  have  been  linked  when  that
    hearing is listed.







    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following a  decision
    de novo.



         Signed                              Date 4 August 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt   of   court   proceedings.























