
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02781/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1.2. 2018                        |On 7.2.2018                       |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                           MAHDI ABDOLAHIYAN -SOHI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood of IAS Manchester
For the Respondent:    Mr McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
 2. The Appellant was born on 10 February 1980 and is a national of Iran.
 3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.
 4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Lloyd-Smith  promulgated  on  1  February  2017  which
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    dated 3 March 2016  to refuse the Appellants protection claim.
 5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons which were in essence  that
    it was not accepted that the Appellant was at risk because it  was  not
    accepted that he was gay.
 6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge was in error: the
    Judge failed to apply anxious scrutiny to the appeal; her assessment of
    the plausibility of the Appellants claim was flawed and her  assessment
    of the documentary evidence was flawed.
 7.  On 15 May 2017 Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Manuell  refused
    permission to appeal. The application was renewed and on 22 August 2017
    Upper Tribunal Plimmer gave permission to appeal on grounds 1-3.  There
    was an additional ground that there had been procedural  unfairness  in
    that the Respondent did not produce a new  refusal  letter  or  put  in
    writing her response to the additional claim put  forward  at  the  CMR
    that the Appellant was at risk on return because he was a Christian and
    how she dealt with  the  Court  Attendance  Note  and  the  witness  Mr
    Khorrami and the Appellant's mental health.

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Wood  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

    Ground 1

    (a) The Judge referred to having an arrest warrant  (paragraph  11  and
    19(ii) under the heading 'Documents'). The document she had before her,
    now at page 17 of the consolidated bundle (CB), is a document headed in
    the translation 'Court Attendance Note.'(CAN)

    (b) In  relation  to  that  CAN  at  paragraph  18  under  the  heading
    'Screening Interview ' she refers to the warrant stating  that  he  was
    wanted in relation to 'illicit material and hosting gay  parties'  when
    this is not what the CAN states.

    (c)The Respondent relied on the COIS to challenge the CAN but the  COIS
    related to an arrest warrant which this  was  not.  There  was  nothing
    about the CAN that was  inconsistent  with  the  material  about  court
    documents and what was relevant was its reliability not authenticity.

    (d) The Judge failed to acknowledge that the HOPO had no issue with the
    evidence of Reverend Jackson.

    (e) The Judge failed to deal with  the  medical  evidence  at  page  23
    (consolidated bundle) and taken that into account in her assessment.

    Ground 2/3

    (f)  The Judge in her assessment of the plausibility of the  Appellants
    account makes no refence to HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037. She did not
    accept that the Appellant  had  a  gay  relationship  or  lived  a  gay
    lifestyle in Iran but she had background material before  her  (CB  35)
    which was the Respondents own material showing that there were  venues,
    gay people met and  if  they  lived  a  low  profile  they  could  live
    together.  His  account  was  therefore  not  inconsistent   with   the
    background material. She failed to take into account his claim that  he
    was 'careful' at University. In relation to the party which the  police
    raided there was no evidential basis for rejecting this account  as  at
    CB 35 it was stated that arrests at private home parties were common.

    Ground 4

    (g) The Respondent failed to set out the basis on which his claim to be
    a Christian was rejected.

    (h) There was no requirement for the  Appellant  to  obtain  an  expert
    report in relation to the CAN.

    (i) In relation to the CAN issue was taken with the difference  between
    the date of the incident and the date  the  document  was  served  this
    issue was not put to the Appellant in  cross  examination  and  it  was
    unfair if he did not know what points were being taken against him.

    (j) In relation to the witness Milad it was  irrelevant  to  take  into
    account his demeanour. In relation to  him  leaving  court  before  the
    Appellants case had finished there was no basis for drawing an  adverse
    inference from this.

    (k)  The  Judge  failed  to  follow  the  Joint  Presidential  Note  on
    Vulnerable Adults

    (l) In relation  to  her  adverse  findings  about  amendments  to  the
    Screening Interview the Appellant made  these  before  the  substantive
    interview  and  he   maintained   that   there   were   problems   with
    interpretation.

 9. The decision was the sum of its parts and was unsafe.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr McVitie submitted that :

      a)  In  relation  to  the  allegation  of  procedural  unfairness  the
         Appellant made a late claim at the CMR that  he  had  converted  to
         Christianity. The Respondent having agreed to deal with a new issue
         was entitled to challenge this even if it was not  in  the  refusal
         letter.

      b) It was of course open to the Appellant to make amendments to the SI
         but the Judge was also entitled to make  adverse  findings  arising
         out of those changes if they are significant.

      c) In relation to the  claim  that  the  Appellant  was  a  vulnerable
         witness it was open to the Judge to reject the evidence  relied  on
         to suggest that the Appellant was vulnerable.  The  amended  letter
         now produced by the Doctor was not of course before the Judge.

      d) In relation to calling the CAN an arrest warrant  it  was  still  a
         document requiring his attendance  at  court.  The  Judge  directed
         herself appropriately in relation to the evidence. The  mistake  in
         the name was not material. The Judge had to look at the document in
         the round.

      e) In relation to the Dorodian witness  the  Judge  did  not  have  to
         explicitly accept that she was honest although she appears to  have
         done so.

      f) The Judge was entitled to take into account the plausibility of the
         Appellants account of the  party  that  led  to  the  police  being
         called.




Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. In a very detailed analysis of the evidence before her  it  is  alleged
    that the Judges assessment does not reflect an anxious scrutiny because
    of mistakes she made.

13. It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail every
    single argument advanced before her, nor consider  in  isolation  every
    single piece of evidence. She must weigh all  of  the  evidence  before
    her, and give clear reasons for her conclusions such that the  parties,
    and in particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for  her
    decision. In this case the Judge set out at paragraph 16 that  she  did
    not find the Appellant to  be  a  credible  witness  finding  that  his
    evidence was inconsistent between his various accounts, unreliable  and
    evasive and then summarises thereafter reasons for  her  findings.  She
    then detailed her reasons for coming to that conclusion  under  various
    headings.

14. While the Judge in her summary of the documents before her refers to  a
    'warrant of arrest ' at paragraph 11 in her detailed assessment of  the
    Appellants 'Documents' at paragraph (ii) she was clear  that  what  she
    had been provided with was a Court Attendance Note. Any  references  to
    it as a warrant may have been due to the fact that this  was  what  the
    Appellant called the document that had been issued at Q148  of  the  AI
    ('they have an arrest warrant.') and she refers at  Documents  (ii)  to
    him having been asked to try and obtain  this  arrest  warrant  he  had
    referred to. While there is another reference to it  as  a  warrant  at
    'Screening Interview (iv) and that it related to' illicit material  and
    hosting gay parties' I am satisfied that this was a  simple  error  and
    does not suggest she did not carefully examine the correct document  as
    she accurately states under the heading 'Documents'  that  the  reasons
    for the notice was 'possessing indecent films  and  images  and  having
    illicit relations.'

15. In her assessment of the CAN the Judge at  paragraph  12  had  directed
    herself correctly as to the law in Tanveer Ahmed but gave a  number  of
    reasons which were open to her as to why she did  not,  as  she  states
    find  it  reliable:  no  where  does  she  state  she  was  looking  at
    authenticity. It was open to the Judge to comment on the lack of expert
    evidence given that the Appellants representative, Mr Adejumbo of  IAS,
    had advised the court on 14 November that they had instructed an expert
    in relation to what he called a 'court summons' and that they  required
    the substantive hearing to be vacated as the report would not be ready.
    That such a report was never served after  a  2  month  adjournment  to
    obtain it was a clear basis for the Judges comment. It was open to  the
    Judge to note that the claim that the CAN had been served on his mother
    in relation to indecent films and illicit  relations  was  inconsistent
    with his cousins account that the document related to the fact he had a
    'gay party' referred to in the AI at Q148, the SI in which he was  said
    to be wanted in respect of a sexual assault on another male and what he
    later said in oral evidence. It was open to the Judge to  question  why
    when it is claimed that the police had  attended  in  possession  of  a
    warrant on 25 October 2015 the date of the CAN is  15  June  2016.  She
    also noted that there was no evidence of how the  documents  came  into
    possession of the Appellant. These  were  all  matters  the  Judge  was
    entitled to take into account in her assessment of the  reliability  of
    the documents where the burden was on the Appellant to establish  their
    reliability.

16. In relation to  the  Judges  assessment  of  the  plausibility  of  the
    Appellants account of his lifestyle and the party which was  a  central
    feature of his case the Judge was entitled to look at the  plausibility
    of the account. She was not  required  to  refer  to  specific  caselaw
    provided her approach was correct. The assessment  of  credibility  may
    involve an assessment of the plausibility, or  apparent  reasonableness
    or truthfulness of what was being said.  This could involve a judgement
    on the likelihood of something having happened, based  on  evidence  or
    inferences.   Background  evidence  could  assist  with  that  process,
    revealing the likelihood of what was said having occurred.   Background
    evidence could reveal that adverse  inferences  which  were  apparently
    reasonable when based on an understanding of life in this country  were
    less reasonable when the circumstances of life in the country of origin
    were exposed.  Plausibility was an aspect in the process of arriving at
    a decision, which might vary from case to  case,  and  not  a  separate
    stage in it.

17. It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail every
    single argument advanced before her, nor consider  in  isolation  every
    single piece of evidence. She must weigh all  of  the  evidence  before
    her, and give clear reasons for her conclusions such that the  parties,
    and in particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for  her
    decision. She was entitled  to  consider  whether  his  claim  to  have
    realised  he  was  gay  and  then  have  without  any  issues  4-5  gay
    relationships and a lengthy one with  Saied  was  consistent  with  the
    'hostility  and  dire  consequences  '  that  could  follow  from  such
    relationships. It was open to her to be concerned in essence about  his
    account of openly identifiably gay men, identifiable by their walk  and
    makeup which she found was inconsistent  with  the  objective  material
    about their isolation and repression. The material relied on by Mr Wood
    at page 35 talks of gay people keeping a low profile and this  did  not
    appear to be what the Appellants account described. In relation to  the
    party the fact of such parties occurring is of course set  out  in  the
    background material but the Judge was not required to accept that  this
    one occurred as the Appellant claimed and  she  set  out  a  number  of
    reason at paragraph 18 'Party' (ii)-  (vi)  including  why  the  police
    would use flashing lights if they intended to raid the party, why would
    the police raid the party and break down the door (but  then  knock  on
    the door of their party) if it was simply a complaint about music.

18. In relation to  the  argument  that  the  Judge  failed  to  treat  the
    Appellant as a vulnerable witness  the  Judge  gave  clear  reasons  at
    paragraph 18 'Documents' (i) why she attached no weight to the  doctors
    letter which in the body of  the  letter  referred  to  another  person
    entirely. The letter amending that mistake was not before the Judge and
    on the basis of what was before her  she  reached  that  there  was  no
    reliable evidence before her that there was a basis  for  treating  the
    Appellant as vulnerable.

19. In relation to the criticism of the Judges approach  to  the  Screening
    Interview it was open to  the  Judge  to  the  Judge  at  paragraph  18
    'Screening  Interview'  (i)-(iv)  (actually  (v)  as  there  were   two
    paragraph (iii)s) to draw attention to matters that concerned about the
    Screening Interview and how it differed from his later  account  taking
    into account his later amendments: she was not  bound  to  accept  that
    such amendments addressed these concerns.  Thus it was open her to note
    that the reason he gave for fleeing was significantly different ,  that
    he sexually assaulted another male and that this was how he  summarised
    the reason for fleeing at 4.1 and he confirmed that he had been accused
    of an offence of assault at 5.6. She notes that he made no  mention  of
    the conduct of the interview at the time or of any  distractions  which
    he later referred to but was able to correct  a  date  in  one  of  the
    answers but not the two separate references to him assaulting  someone.
    Given that he corrected a date it was open to her to conclude that  the
    interview was read back to him and question why he failed to amend what
    he now said was such a fundamental mistake at two  separate  places  in
    the SI. She also noted that his comment 'I never  thought  I  would  do
    this' was more consistent with regret for an assault  rather  than  his
    fear arising out of his sexuality. She also notes  that  the  level  of
    detail about his education, being fingerprinted his journey did not sit
    well with his claim to have been distracted.

20. In relation to the criticism of the Judges assessment of the Appellants
    witness  Mr  Khorammi  which  she  dealt  with  at  paragraph  19  'Gay
    Relationship' it is wrong to suggest she referred to his demeanour what
    she said is that he had to be told to face the Judge as  he  looked  to
    the Appellant for guidance and answers from which she was  entitled  to
    draw an adverse inference. It was of course then open to her to note at
    (a)- (f) a number  of  inconsistencies  between  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant  and  Mr  Khorammi  that  cumulatively  that  undermined  his
    credibility. It was not unreasonable to find it surprising  that  given
    the nature of their relationship and having been told he could stay  as
    soon as the witness gave evidence he left court with no explanation and
    little acknowledgement of the Appellant.

21. In relation to the  claim  that  it  was  procedurally  unfair  for  an
    application for an adjournment to be  refused  and  for  the  Judge  to
    proceed when the Respondent had not issued  a  new  refusal  letter  or
    otherwise put in writing their challenges to his claimed  conversion  I
    am satisfied that there was no  unfairness.  In  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  it  was  held  that   Where   an
    adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it is  important
    to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether
    the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied  is  that  of
    fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's right to a
    fair hearing.

22. In relation to the argument that it was unfair to refuse an adjournment
    the chronology and the circumstances whereby the case came  before  the
    Judge and in which the Appellant raised a new matter, a factual  matrix
    that was not set out in his grounds of appeal or raised  at  the  first
    CMR on 14 November 2016 was set out in the Judges decision at paragraph
    15. The Appellant appeared in person at the CMR on 4 January  2017  and
    produced a bundle that  included  evidence  as  to  his  conversion  to
    Christianity. The case was adjourned to a substantive hearing  date  on
    24 January 2017 although there is no record of the issue of the consent
    of the Respondent being addressed. Mr  Wood  came  on  record  the  day
    before the hearing on 23 January 2017 and requested an  adjournment  on
    the basis that he needed to  take  full  instructions  to  include  his
    account of 'all aspects of his case, including  those  which  were  not
    explored at the asylum interview.'  That  application  was  refused  by
    Designated Judge McClure who noted  that  the  case  had  already  been
    adjourned for 2  months  at  the  request  of  the  Appellant  previous
    representatives, if the Appellant wished to instruct new solicitors  it
    was a matter for him. The Judge notes in paragraph  15  'there  was  no
    renewal of an adjournment application at the beginning of  the  hearing
    or at any stage.' The Judge notes that Mr Woods skeleton argument which
    contained at paragraph 13 an argument that it was  procedurally  unfair
    to refuse an adjournment had been the Judge noted:

         "Placed on my bench prior to me entering court.  Mr. Wood saw  that
         I had not had the opportunity to read this, did not invite me to do
         so  prior  to  the  hearing  commencing  and  did  not  renew   his
         adjournment request.  He  only  asked  that  the  reasons  for  the
         refusal of the adjournment be read to him, which  it  did,  did  no
         more."

23. I therefore find that the Judge was entitled to assume that Mr Wood was
    ready to proceed having been provided with a full bundle  and  Mr  Wood
    not renewing his application nor alerting the  Judge  to  the  argument
    contained in his skeleton argument. There was no procedural  unfairness
    in proceeding when no application for an adjournment was made.

24. In relation to the new issue raised at the second  CMR  the  Appellants
    conversion to Christianity the statutory powers of the  court  although
    not explicitly referred to by the Judge are set out at s 85 and  86  of
    the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002 and in so far as  they
    are relevant to this appeal provide

    (4)    On an appeal under section 82(1) against a decision the Tribunal
    may consider any matter which it thinks relevant to  the  substance  of
    the decision,  including  a  matter  arising  after  the  date  of  the
    decision.

    (5)    But the Tribunal must not  consider  a  new  matter  unless  the
    Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.

    (6)    A matter is a "new matter" if- (a)it  constitutes  a  ground  of
    appeal of a kind listed in section 84, and (b)the  Secretary  of  State
    has not previously considered the matter in the context of-

         (i)      the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or

         (ii)     a statement made by the appellant under section 120.

    86.    Determination of appeal

    (1)    This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1)

    (2)    The Tribunal must determine-

         (a)      any matter raised as a ground of appeal, and

         (b)      any matter which section 85 requires it to consider."

25. There is therefore a requirement for the Tribunal to deal  with  a  new
    matter of the Respondent consents. It would appear in  this  case  that
    the Respondent implicitly consented to deal with this new matter as the
    Judges record of proceedings noted at the beginning of the hearing that
    the parties agreed that if the  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was
    'gay/Christian' the appeal would succeed.

26. The Appellant relied in their skeleton  argument  on  Rule  24  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014  which provides:

    "24. - (1)   Except in  appeals  to  which  rule  23  applies,  when  a
         respondent is provided with a copy  of  a  notice  of  appeal,  the
         respondent must provide the Tribunal with-

             (a) the notice of the decision to which the notice  of  appeal
             relates and any other document the respondent provided to  the
             appellant giving reasons for that decision;

             (b) any statement of evidence or application form completed by
             the appellant;

             (c) any record of an interview with the appellant in  relation
             to the decision being appealed;

             (d) any other unpublished document which is referred to  in  a
             document mentioned in subparagraph (a) or relied upon  by  the
             respondent; and

             (e) the notice  of  any  other  appealable  decision  made  in
             relation to the appellant. (2) The  respondent  must,  if  the
             respondent intends to change or add to the grounds or  reasons
             relied upon in the notice or the other documents  referred  to
             in paragraph  (1)(a),  provide  the  Tribunal  and  the  other
             parties with a statement of whether the respondent opposes the
             appellant's case and the grounds for such opposition.

         (3)      The documents listed in paragraph (1)  and  any  statement
         required under paragraph (2) must be provided in writing within  28
         days of the date on which the Tribunal sent  to  the  respondent  a
         copy of the notice of appeal  and  any  accompanying  documents  or
         information provided under rule 19(6).

27. However failure to comply with Procedure  Rules  is  not  automatically
    fatal under Rule 6:

    6. -   (1)   An irregularity resulting from a failure  to  comply  with
         any requirement in these Rules, a practice direction or a direction
         does not of itself render void the proceedings or any step taken in
         the proceedings.

         (2)      If a party has failed to  comply  with  a  requirement  in
         these Rules, a practice direction or a direction, the Tribunal  may
         take such action as it considers just, which may include-

             (a) waiving the requirement;'

28. I note again that this matter was not raised in advance of the  hearing
    commencing and was not raised in Mr Woods letter of 23 January 2017  to
    suggest that his client was disadvantaged by not having the  fact  that
    the  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  genuinely
    converted to Christianity, which was the basis of  their  challenge  in
    the course of the hearing, committed  to  writing.  This  argument  was
    contained within the  skeleton  argument  and  not  raised  before  the
    hearing started. The Judge makes clear that at paragraph  16  that  the
    Appellant was given the opportunity to present this aspect of his  case
    and of course  called  witnesses  and  it  was  explored  during  cross
    examination. The Judge was clearly satisfied that that having consented
    to deal with a new matter raised at a late stage the Appellant was  not
    deprived of the opportunity to advance his claim and have it tested  in
    court. There was no procedural unfairness.

29. I was therefore satisfied that  the  Judge's  determination  when  read
    fairly and as a whole  set  out  findings  that  were  sustainable  and
    sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning and did not deprive
    the Appellant of the opportunity of a fair hearing..

CONCLUSION

30. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

31. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
2.2.2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
