
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02251/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th April and 12th November 2018 |On 03rd January 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                               FEBI ACHAEMPONG
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Saeed, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Bart-Stewart promulgated on 8 February 2018, in which  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision to refuse his protection and  human  rights
    claim dated 15 February 2017  was  dismissed.   Further  to  the  first
    hearing in this appeal on 30th of April 2018, I found an error  of  law
    in the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart,  set  that
    decision aside (so far as it related to the human rights parts  of  the
    appeal, there being no challenge to the protection or EEA matters,  the
    findings on which stand) and listed a further  hearing  to  remake  the
    decision under appeal.  The  procedural  history  to  this  appeal  and
    reasons for the error of  law  are  set  out  in  my  earlier  decision
    included as an annex to the present one, the contents of which will not
    be repeated here in savers where necessary.

The Respondent's Decision

 2. The Respondent considered the Appellant's private and  family  life  in
    the United Kingdom.  The claim under the Immigration Rules was  refused
    on the basis that the Appellant failed to meet the suitability criteria
    in S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM given his past use of  deception  to  enter
    the United Kingdom.  However, the Respondent went on  to  consider  the
    other  substantive  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as   the
    Appellant sought leave to remain on the basis of his family  life  with
    his partner and two children, all of whom were at that  point  Ghanaian
    citizens.  The Appellant remains married to another individual and  had
    not established that he meets the definition of having a  partner  with
    the person who he claims to be in  a  relationship  with,  nor  had  he
    established that he is in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
    her.  The requirements of the rules in R-LTRPT of Appendix FM were also
    not satisfied because the Appellant did not have leave to remain at the
    time of his application, and his claimed partner is the other parent of
    the children and leave  to  remain  on  that  basis  had  already  been
    refused.  It was not accepted that there was a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the children with  conflicting  evidence  as  to  his
    involvement with them.

 3. Further, the Appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to remain  on  the
    basis of  private  life,  specifically  that  he  would  not  face  any
    significant obstacles reintegrating into Ghana  where  he  has  social,
    familial and cultural ties as well as where he completed his  education
    and had a work history.  There were no exceptional circumstances and no
    basis for grant  of  discretionary  leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

The evidence

 4. Included in the Appellant's bundle as a statement made by the Appellant
    on 3 November 2015 prepared for his previous appeal, in which  he  uses
    and address in Dagenham, does not claim to be in  a  relationship  with
    his partner but states that he goes to see his children  every  weekend
    in Corby while the mother is working.

 5. The Appellant made three written  statements  in  the  course  of  this
    appeal, dated 11 January 2018, 14 April 2018 and 6  August  2018.   The
    Appellant's  first  statement  deals  in   part   with   his   previous
    relationship with an EEA national and in  part  with  his  relationship
    with current family members.  The Appellant's eldest daughter has  been
    registered as a British Citizen and has resided in the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for 11 years (as at the  date  of  that  statement)  since
    birth.  She has been diagnosed as diabetic and  has  to  take  insulin,
    requiring additional care.  The Appellant is in the process  of  trying
    to establish contact and shared residence rights with  regards  to  his
    other children, including a declaration of parenthood  for  his  second
    child  in  family  court  proceedings.   The  previous   family   Court
    application was returned and a new one submitted on 5 January 2018.

 6. In his statement dated 14 April 2018 (unsigned), the Appellant sets out
    an update to his previous  statement  and  his  disagreement  with  his
    previous appeal decision.  He refers to  family  court  proceedings  to
    establish child contact and residence rights for his three children and
    confirmation that he is the biological father of his second child.   He
    sees his children every weekend and  attends  church  with  them.   The
    Appellant states that his relationship  with  his  partner  has  soured
    since the earlier appeal decision but they have agreed that he stays in
    London from Tuesday afternoon to Thursday afternoon and at other  times
    he looks after the children while  she  works  nights.   The  Appellant
    sleeps in his eldest son's room when staying in the  family  home  (the
    second child).  The Appellant again refers to his EEA national wife.

 7. In his written statement signed and dated 6 August 2018, the  Appellant
    states that he is getting on much  better  with  his  partner  and  his
    residing with her and their children in Corby.  He said that  at  times
    he spent Tuesday and Wednesday at his cousin's address  in  London  but
    would always be in Corby from Thursday to Monday so his  partner  could
    go to college and to work.  He has permanently lived with his family in
    Corby since the previous appeal hearing in September  2016.   Prior  to
    that and since 2012 they have lived together on an on-off basis with  a
    difficult relationship, in part because the Appellant was still married
    to someone else and would not divorce her and in part  because  he  was
    not able to work and support the family.

 8. The Appellant's partner and second  child  were  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom for 30 months and  the  Appellant
    has been asked for information from the Respondent as well.  I note  at
    this point, that at the date of the hearing  before  me  there  was  no
    positive reconsideration by the Respondent of the Appellants Case.

 9. The Appellant refers to being the sole parent dropping off and  picking
    up children from school, being registered as the authorised  parent  on
    school records, refers to family photographs  and  letters  of  support
    from others.  The Appellant describes a very  close  relationship  with
    his eldest child, her recent diagnosis of diabetes and his support  for
    his second child who has sleep apnoea.  This includes staying with  him
    in hospital in London for sleep studies while the  other  children  can
    remain at home with their mother.  The Appellant is trained as to  what
    to do case of an emergency during the night for his son.  The Appellant
    is very attached to his youngest child has now one year old.

10. Part of this statement, said to be made by the  Appellant,  is  clearly
    written by and/or copied and pasted from his partner's statement.

11. The Appellant attended the hearing, adopted his written statements  and
    gave oral evidence in English.  He stated that  his  partner  supported
    his appeal but one of his children were sick over the  weekend  so  she
    had to stay at home with them and in her absence her written  statement
    is relied upon.

12. The Appellant remains married to an EEA  national  who  he  stated  was
    working in the United Kingdom and to whom he speaks once  in  a  while.
    The Appellant stated that  his  relationship  with  this  person  ended
    around 2010 and he didn't have an answer as to why he had not  divorced
    her.

13. The Appellant's family in the United Kingdom include  his  partner  and
    three children, born in 2006, 2009 and 2017.  The  Appellant  has  been
    permanently living with them since August 2016 and has also been  in  a
    relationship with his partner throughout  the  time  since  then.   His
    relationship is not the best but they try to reach  agreement  for  the
    sake of the children and sometimes when the couple argue the  Appellant
    leaves and goes to his cousin's house or  a  friend's  house.   In  the
    period between August 2016 and 2017, the Appellant stated that he takes
    the children to school during the week, looks after them every Saturday
    and Sunday night while the mum is working (which she has been  able  to
    do since a grant of leave to remain) and at the weekend they  help  out
    at and attend church, ride bikes and go to the park.  The Appellant and
    his partner sometimes go together to church maybe once or  twice  in  a
    month.

14. Prior to 2016, the Appellant was living in London and said that he went
    to Corby a couple of days week to help with childcare.   The  situation
    changed after the Appellant  was  in  immigration  detention  when  his
    partner realised that he was then no help with the children and it  was
    difficult for her to work, so she agreed he could stay  more  often  to
    help with the children.  He stated he lives at the address six  days  a
    week and the other day with his cousin because his  partner  wanted  to
    take responsibility for the children one day a week.  It is normally  a
    weekday but not the same day every week.  At the address in Corby,  the
    Appellant sleeps in his son's room due to his sleep apnoea although  he
    does not know if his partner does this on the night he is not there.

15. In  cross-examination,  the  Appellant  was  asked  further  about  his
    partners non-attendance at the hearing  and  was  asked  if  it  was  a
    coincidence that she was not here given the  previous  indication  that
    she was not likely to attend.  One of  the  children  was  vomiting  on
    Saturday night and on Sunday, he could not go to school on Monday,  the
    day of the hearing.  It was planned  for  the  Appellant's  partner  to
    attend court, she was going to come with the youngest child  while  the
    elder ones were at school and their godmother was going to collect them
    from  school.   The  children's  godmother  lives  in  Corby  and   had
    previously made a statement in support of the Appellant's appeal.

16. The Appellant lives in Corby and sometimes elsewhere with a  friend  or
    his cousin if his  had  an  argument  with  his  partner.   He  is  not
    registered for council tax at the address in Corby but stated  that  he
    is on the water and TV licence bills.  The Appellant was bailed by  the
    CIO to live at his partner's address and continues  to  be  subject  to
    monthly reporting restrictions.

17. In relation to the family court proceedings, the Appellant stated  that
    he pursued these because his name was not on the birth certificate  for
    his second child and sometimes his partner threatens that he  would  be
    able to see the children in the future when she gets angry.  The  order
    for residential contact was said to be in case the Appellant wanted  to
    take the children away in the future.  In re-examination the  Appellant
    sought to clarify his answer that when the children  were  on  holidays
    the agreed residence order would allow him to take the children and for
    example bring them to London to stay with his  cousin.   The  order  is
    something proper to  prevent  an  argument  with  his  partner  if  she
    threatens to stop him seeing the children.

18.  The  Appellant's  partner  and  two  youngest  children  are  Ghanaian
    citizens, the eldest child is a British Citizen.  When  asked  why  the
    family could not live in Ghana, the Appellant  said  that  he  met  his
    partner here, the children  can't  speak  any  language  of  Ghana  and
    haven't been there.  The second child also has difficulties from  birth
    and with sleep apnoea which  the  Appellant  did  not  think  could  be
    supported in Ghana.  It was agreed that all of the  children  would  be
    able to continue with their education in Ghana but  there  was  concern
    that the Appellant would not be able to afford the required  medication
    for his eldest daughter, albeit he did not know  how  much  this  would
    cost.

19. The Appellant first met Rev Searle in the summer of  2017  and  he  has
    been to the Appellant's home about four  times  most  recently  earlier
    this year.  Mr Muhammad is a friend  of  the  Appellant  who  lives  in
    London and provides him with financial support, he last saw him in  the
    summer.

20. Rev Searle attended the hearing,  confirmed  and  adopted  his  written
    statements and gave  oral  evidence  in  English.   He  has  known  the
    appellant for two years and two months, coming to his church often with
    at least one of his children, sometimes all three and his partner comes
    when she can.  He has seen the Appellant with his partner and  children
    as a family unit as claimed, seeing him with his children on a  regular
    basis over the last two years including at the family home.

21. Rev Searle last went to the family home  a  couple  of  months  ago  to
    assist the Appellant's partner with her statement, which  was  done  on
    his computer and he witnessed her signing and dating it.

22. In  cross-examination,  Rev  Searle  was  asked  if  he  knew  why  the
    Appellant's partner had not attended the hearing.  He said that she has
    a level of fear about coming  to  court  and  is  very  reticent  about
    sharing details of her private life and her past, including  about  the
    children and her partner.  She also has a fear of  the  Respondent  and
    immigration generally and is worried about affecting her own status  in
    United Kingdom.  Rev Searle did not expect her to  attend  the  hearing
    she was scared of coming  to  court  and  there  are  problems  in  her
    marriage with the Appellant.  She is afraid of the Appellant being sent
    back to Ghana and didn't originally want the children to know  anything
    about that possibility although she now seems to  talk  to  the  eldest
    child about this.  Marriage counselling services have  been  identified
    for the couple but they do not have the financial resources  to  pursue
    it and have not attended any sessions.

23. Mr Mohamed attended the hearing, confirmed his details and adopted  his
    written statement and gave oral evidence in English.  He said  that  he
    met the Appellant in 2005 and visits him regularly in  Corby  where  he
    has seen the Appellant together with his  partner  and  children.   The
    last time was about a month ago.

24. In cross-examination, Mr Muhammad says the Appellant  and  his  partner
    have been in relationship for about 10 years.  When  the  Appellant  is
    not in Corby with the family, he comes  to  London  and  lives  with  a
    family friend in Dagenham.  Mr Muhammad provides financial  support  to
    the Appellant and also sometimes lends him his car.

25. Mr Mante attended the hearing, confirmed his details  and  adopted  his
    written statement, then gave oral  evidence  in  English.   He  is  the
    Appellant's cousin who the Appellant sometimes resides with when he has
    issues with his partner.  The Appellant also  brings  his  children  to
    stay with Mr Mante on the weekends and school holidays.  The  Appellant
    lives in Corby when needed to care for his children and spends time  at
    his cousin's address, particularly if there is a misunderstanding  with
    his partner.  Whether and when the Appellant comes  to  live  with  his
    cousin fluctuates and it  is  irregular.   Mr  Mante  states  that  the
    Appellant has a  very  close  relationship  with  his  children  but  a
    difficult relationship with his partner and he could give  no  examples
    of when he had seen the Appellant and his partner together.

26. There is a written statement from the Appellant's  partner  signed  and
    dated 6 August 2018, witnessed by Rev Searle.  She states that  she  is
    the Appellant's partner who has lived with her and  their  children  in
    Corby on and off since 2012.  The Appellant looks  after  the  children
    from Thursday to Monday each weekend, sleeping and living with them  in
    Corby, allowing her to work nights and weekends and the children to  be
    looked after.  The Appellant has permanently moved in  and  lived  with
    the family after the  last  appeal  hearing  in  September  2016.   The
    Appellant's partner was told the  hearing  did  not  go  well  and  the
    Appellant was likely to be sent back  to  Ghana,  at  which  point  she
    realised she did not want to lose him or  have  a  situation  where  he
    could not have contact with and look after the children.  The level  of
    contact increased and the  Appellant's  immigration  bail  address  was
    changed to the family home.

27. The Appellant and his partner still have arguments, following which  he
    goes and stays with his cousin.  The arguments  include  problems  that
    the Appellant is unable to work and provide for the family and that  he
    is still married to another woman.  The Appellant  is  described  as  a
    good father with a close  relationship  with  his  children,  including
    supporting them with their medical needs.

28. If the Appellant were not permitted to remain in the United Kingdom, it
    would be detrimental  for  the  health  of  the  eldest  two  children,
    particularly with their different medical problems and the need  for  a
    parent to stay overnight with one child in hospital on occasion.

29. The Appellant's partner ends her statement stating that  she  hopes  to
    come to court to give evidence in support of the application but  there
    were two possible problems.  First, there is no one to look  after  the
    children who would be at school and second, the Appellant has not  been
    able to work, she has no savings and may not be able to afford the cost
    of coming to London.

30. As above, there are parts of the statement of the  Appellant's  partner
    which  are  identical,  or  virtually  identical  to  sections  of  the
    Appellant's statement.

31. The Appellant's bundle included a letter from his eldest child dated 17
    August 2016 in which she expresses her fondness of her father and  that
    he takes care of her and her brother while her mother is at  work.   An
    almost identical letter dated 1 August 2018 was also on file.

32. In addition to the witness evidence, the Appellant's bundle included  a
    report from Diana Harris, Independent Social Worker dated 14 June  2017
    and a significant volume  of  other  documentation  including  previous
    immigration  documents,  unofficial  blood  test   report,   employment
    documents, medical documents in relation to the  Appellant's  children,
    family court documents, photographs and a number of supporting  written
    statements from individuals who did not attend the oral  hearing.   The
    supporting written statements consistently talk of the Appellant caring
    for his children in Corby from  Thursday  night  to  Monday  while  his
    partner is studying and/or at work and talk about a loving relationship
    with his children.

33. The conclusion of the Independent Social Worker is that it  is  in  the
    best interests of the Appellant's children  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom in their  current  circumstances,  with  both  parents  sharing
    caring and  parental  responsibility  for  them.   The  assessment  was
    conducted with the Appellant and his two eldest children  present  (the
    youngest child had not been born at that time), the Appellant's partner
    not being involved in the main assessment  session,  with  a  follow-up
    telephone interview with her afterwards.

34. At the oral hearing, the  Appellant  handed  up  further  documents  in
    relation to his family court proceedings.  These included an order  for
    directions issued on 24 October 2018, referring to the children  living
    with their mother and a first hearing  dispute  resolution  appointment
    being listed for 18 December 2018.  Further to  this  a  consent  order
    signed on behalf of the Appellant and by the Appellant's partner on  10
    August 2018, was submitted to the court on 4 November 2018 dealing with
    contact arrangements.  There is no sealed copy or evidence of  approval
    from the court of the same.

35. The consent order included a prohibited steps order to take  effect  in
    respect of all three children such that no  person  shall  remove  them
    from the jurisdiction of England and  Wales,  or  the  children  school
    nursery.  The agreed arrangements for the children state as follows:

         "(a) for the avoidance of doubt the  applicant  father  shall  have
         parental responsibility and shared residence for the children ...

         (b)  the agreed arrangements for the child one and three will be as
         follows:-

             i)   at all times other than those set out here  the  children
             will reside with the Respondent Mother.

             ii)  the Applicant Father shall have residential contact every
             week from Thursday after school when  Applicant  Father  shall
             collect  them  to  the  following  Monday  morning  when   the
             Applicant father shall drop them to school.

             iii) the Children will also reside with the  Applicant  Father
             for the first half of the school holidays with specific  dates
             to be agreed between the Parties, save  for  when  the  School
             Holiday is for just one day in which  case  they  will  reside
             with the Respondent mother.

             iv)  nothing in the above  order  shall  prevent  the  parties
             agreed to further additional contact between them.

         2.   The proceedings in relation to  Child  2,  ...  For  whom  the
         Applicant Father claims paternity, shall continue and  be  referred
         to a District Judge for directions."

Closing submissions

36. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Melvin relied on  his  outline  written
    submissions in respect of the appeal rather than original  reasons  for
    refusal letter which is now out of  date  as  the  facts  have  changed
    dramatically since then.  The two crucial issues in  this  appeal  were
    identified as first, whether there is a subsisting relationship between
    the Appellant and  his  claimed  partner;  and  secondly,  whether  the
    Appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  any
    of his three children.

37. As to the claimed relationship, the Respondent  does  not  accept  that
    there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  as  claimed  and
    submitted that it was clear that the Appellant's  claimed  partner  was
    not supporting the appeal given that  she  had  failed  to  attend  the
    hearing and give live evidence.  There was conflicting evidence  as  to
    her reasons for absence today, which were not credible.  It is  further
    entirely unclear as to why the  Appellant  would  pursue  family  court
    proceedings if he was in a genuine  subsisting  relationship  with  the
    children's mother.  It was however accepted  that  there  has  at  some
    point been some kind of relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    claimed partner given that a child was born in 2017  but  there  is  no
    evidence of a current relationship.

38.  The  Respondent  accepts  that  the  Appellant   has   some   parental
    responsibility for his three children but  submitted  that  the  actual
    contact between them has been exaggerated.  It was accepted that  there
    was sufficient evidence that the Appellant resided  with  his  children
    for three days a week and assists with medical appointments  for  them.
    However, for the other three or four days a week he does not live  with
    the children, or even in the same location as  them,  or  have  contact
    with them.

39. The Respondent does not accept that there is a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship between the Appellant and his children and raises
    significant concerns that the  children  were  being  used  solely  for
    immigration  purposes.    Mr   Melvin   highlighted   the   Appellant's
    immigration history and past findings of  adverse  credibility  against
    him.  His history included the  use  of  false  Ghanaian  documents,  a
    spurious asylum claim, protracted  applications  for  leave  to  remain
    which have been unsuccessful, continued reliance on a past relationship
    with an EEA national of which there was little evidence and  no  reason
    for the couple not to have divorced and in conclusion it was  submitted
    that this Appellant would do or say anything to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, including using his own children for this purpose.

40. Mr Melvin submitted that it was difficult to argue  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for the children to leave the United Kingdom if there was  a
    genuine parental relationship, given that  it  would  be  in  the  best
    interest to remain in the United Kingdom.  There  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the children had ever been to Ghana,  they  spoke  English
    and although  they  have  some  awareness  of  the  culture  and  other
    languages in Ghana from their parents,  they  are  well-established  in
    education and integrated into the United Kingdom.

41. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Saeed submitted that there is sufficient
    evidence to find a genuine and subsisting parental relationship between
    the Appellant and his three children and that his motive for it such  a
    relationship is not relevant for the purposes of section 117B(6) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and in any event this  was
    not specifically put to the Appellant and he has had no opportunity  to
    respond to an allegation about his motives.

42. It was further submitted that both parents should be  treated  equally,
    it being likely that discretionary leave to remain has been granted  to
    the mother and second child, as the eldest is now a British citizen and
    it would be inconsistent not to grant the other parent, in a  situation
    where both parents are involved in the children's upbringing, the  same
    leave to remain.  The Respondent has accepted that the Appellant  looks
    after his children three days a week and some level  of  parental  role
    has also been accepted.

43. Mr Saeed submitted that the Appellant was in a  relationship  with  his
    claimed partner and there was no intention  to  hide  that  there  were
    problems in that relationship and it is  a  difficult  one,  hence  the
    family court proceedings.

Findings and reasons

 1. The Appellant previously appealed an earlier decision of the Respondent
    dated  20  March  2015  refusing  his  human  rights  claim  based   on
    essentially the same parental relationships as in  the  present  appeal
    (in respect of his two eldest children, the youngest  not  having  been
    born at the time of the  previous  appeal).   In  accordance  with  the
    principles set out in  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-
    Territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka  [2002]  UKIAT  00702,   the   earlier
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is the starting point in  this
    appeal, although to a significant extent I  accept  that  matters  have
    moved on and changed since that decision.

 2. It is noteworthy that in the previous appeal the Appellant did not rely
    on any relationship with a partner and  in  his  evidence  before  that
    Tribunal, the Appellant stated simply that he had an understanding with
    his children's mother and that she is happy for him to stay with her as
    it takes the pressure off her having to find a babysitter and she knows
    the children always look forward to seeing him.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 19 November 2015, the appeal was dismissed
    on human rights grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant.   In  that
    decision it was not accepted that the Appellant's second child was  his
    biological son in the absence of being referred to in that way  by  the
    mother and a lack of DNA evidence.  However such DNA evidence has since
    been produced and there  are  family  court  proceedings  to  have  the
    Appellant formally recognised as the father.  There is  no  substantive
    challenge by the Respondent of the paternity of the  Appellant's  three
    children, the youngest having  been  born  since  the  previous  appeal
    determination.

 4. In relation to the Appellant's parental relationship  with  his  eldest
    child, the key findings were as follows:

         "9.  I therefore find as a matter of fact that he is the father  of
         one child ..., A child with whom he does  not  reside.   She  lives
         with her mother in Corby and the appellant lives in London.

         10.  There is evidence before the Tribunal that the appellant  sees
         his daughter at weekends in [his partner's] letter dated 10 January
         2014.  Today, some 22 months after that letter was written there is
         nothing evidence to cover the period  from  February  2014  to  the
         present date to demonstrate that  the  appellant  has  any  ongoing
         contact with his daughter.   The  various  school  reports  in  the
         papers predate January 2014, the photographs are undated, the train
         ticket information refers to dates in 2013.  It is clear from  this
         that the appellant would order his train tickets online and receive
         an online booking with a code to collect the ticket from the  self-
         service ticket machine.  He has been sent his booking  confirmation
         to various dates in 2013 but there is no credible evidence  or  any
         evidence  that  he  has  visited  his  daughter  since  then.  [The
         appellant's partner] has not supported  the  appeal  or  given  any
         evidence in support.  I'm not prepared to  accept  the  appellant's
         claim in evidence before the Tribunal that he has  had  any  recent
         contact with his daughter as alleged or at all.  I find as a matter
         of fact that the appellant has not  demonstrated  the  family  life
         exists between him and his daughter.

         11.  Overall I find the appellant is not a  credible  witness.   He
         obtained his original visitor visa by deception and he was evasive,
         vague and incredible in his evidence before the Tribunal.

         12.  I find as a matter of fact the appellant does not demonstrated
         that he has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with
         [his daughter].  This was  a  matter  raised  in  the  refusal  and
         despite the enormous size of the appellant's bundle as stated above
         there is no evidence to show contact is or has been  ongoing  since
         [his partner] wrote a letter in support in January 2014. ..."

 5. In the present appeal, the Appellant relies on  having  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship  with  his  partner  and  also  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his three children, whose  best  interests
    would be to remain in the United Kingdom  with  him  and  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom  in  accordance
    with section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  The Respondent accepts that if there is a genuine and subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and his children  (specifically  the
    eldest two children who are qualifying children on  the  basis  of  the
    eldest being a British Citizen and the second eldest having been living
    continuously in United Kingdom for more  than  seven  years),  then  it
    would be unreasonable to expect them to leave the United  Kingdom  (for
    the reasons given in submissions  set  out  above).   The  two  primary
    factual issues to be determined are therefore whether the Appellant  is
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner  and  whether
    he is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  children.   I
    deal first with the claimed relationship with his partner.

 6. I find on the basis that the Appellant  has  three  children  with  his
    claimed partner, that he has at some point(s) in  time  being  in  some
    form of a relationship with her.  I do not however find that  this  has
    been a genuine subsisting relationship for the length of  time  claimed
    by the Appellant, nor that there is any current genuine and  subsisting
    relationship between them  for  the  following  reasons.   For  ease  I
    continue to refer to  her  as  the  Appellant's  'partner'  as  he  has
    claimed, but  this  should  not  be  taken  as  an  acceptance  of  the
    relationship or any finding that she is in fact his partner.

 7. The Appellant claims to have been in a relationship  with  his  partner
    since at least 2005, his evidence only being  that  they  split  around
    2009 but  then  reformed  their  relationship  and  were  again  living
    together full-time from 2012.  During this period, the  Appellant  made
    various  applications  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of   his
    relationship with a different person, an EEA  national  spouse  between
    2006 and 2010, to whom he  remains  married.   Although  the  Appellant
    states that their relationship broke down in around 2010, no steps have
    been taken to obtain a divorce and no specific reason has been given by
    the Appellant as to why  he  has  not  sought  to  do  so.   Given  the
    Appellant's persistence in seeking to pursue an EEA ground  during  the
    course of these appeal proceedings and his evidence that his continuing
    marriage is a source of problems with his claimed partner and in  light
    of the other adverse credibility findings I make against  him,  I  find
    the reason for him remaining married to the EEA national is  likely  to
    be solely because of a perceived immigration benefit in doing so.   The
    relationship with the EEA national is not directly relied upon  by  the
    Appellant in the appeal before me, but it is a  relevant  part  of  his
    immigration history only to  the  extent  that  it  overlaps  with  the
    claimed period of the relationship with  his  partner  that  is  relied
    upon.  On the assumption that it was a genuine and  subsisting  marital
    relationship such that the applications for an EEA Residence Card  were
    genuine, it undermines the Appellant's claim to also  have  been  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner at the same time.

 8. The Appellant has maintained at various times during the present appeal
    proceedings, that he has been permanently cohabiting with  his  partner
    and children since 2012 and although his relationship has difficulties,
    it has been a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  throughout  that
    period.   That  is  the  scenario  that  was  also  presented  to   the
    Independent Social Worker for the purposes of her  assessment.   It  is
    however  inconsistent  with  his  partner's   evidence   and   entirely
    inconsistent with the Appellant's position before the Tribunal in  2015
    and the application for leave to remain which preceded it,  wherein  he
    claimed not to be in a relationship at all and placed  no  reliance  on
    any such relationship with a partner.  As such there were  no  findings
    in 2015 of any genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  partner.
    There is no evidence before me to suggest to the contrary and I find at
    that time there was no relationship.

 9. As to the present position, whilst I accept that the Appellant and  his
    partner had a third child in June 2017, suggesting at least  some  form
    of relationship in late 2016, there  is  a  lack  of  evidence  of  any
    current relationship  other  than  what  is  stated  by  the  Appellant
    himself.

10. There is a written statement signed by the  Appellant's  partner  which
    says very little about their relationship other  than  they  had  lived
    together on and off since 2012 and more permanently since the  previous
    appeal Tribunal decision in  2016,  with  continuing  problems  in  the
    relationship.  I attach very little weight to the limited  contents  of
    that statement as regards the claimed relationship on the basis that in
    significant part, the statement is identical to that submitted  by  the
    Appellant of the same date (although at least in  part  it  appears  to
    have been copied by the Appellant rather than the other way round)  and
    the two statements have clearly not been written independently of  each
    other.  It is also very odd that the Appellant's partner's signature on
    her statement was witnessed by Rev Searle, his evidence being  that  he
    helped only with her statement because of printer problems, but had  no
    involvement in the Appellant's statement signed on the same date and on
    his case, rom the same family home.  There is no particular reason  why
    the signature on a written statement needed to have been  witnessed  at
    all for the purposes of these proceedings, nor why it was in fact  done
    in this case.

11. There is a suggestion in the statement that the Appellant's partner may
    not be able to attend the appeal hearing, but it  is  for  a  different
    reason than that  given  for  her  non-attendance  on  the  day  and  a
    different reason again to that given by Rev Searle as to  why  she  may
    not have attended the hearing in  any  event.   I  do  not  accept  the
    Appellant's account as to why his partner did  not  attend  the  appeal
    hearing (as per her indication of the possibility of not doing  so  and
    Rev Searle's evidence that he did not expect her to attend),  based  on
    the claimed illness of one of his children as this was not supported by
    any medical evidence nor any statement from the mother.  I find it much
    more likely that there was no intention on the part of the  Appellant's
    partner to attend the oral hearing, to avoid the possibility  of  cross
    examination and  because  in  fact  there  was  no  relationship.   The
    witnessing of her signature on her written statement may have  been  an
    attempt to bolster the credibility of the same without her  attendance,
    although no such submission was in fact made before me.  In any event I
    do not find that the Appellant's partner genuinely supports this appeal
    on the basis of any claimed relationship between her and the  Appellant
    and for the further reason set out below, it is likely  that  her  very
    limited support of this appeal is in the interests of  maintaining  the
    status quo of the Appellant  providing  convenient  childcare  for  the
    children to allow her to continue with her current work arrangements.

12. The written statements from the  Appellant's  eldest  daughter  do  not
    refer to any subsisting relationship between her parents, only that the
    Appellant looks after the children while the mother is  at  work.   The
    other  supporting  statements  and  oral  evidence,  as  well  as   the
    Independent Social Worker report are all on the  basis  of  an  assumed
    claimed relationship rather than providing any specific evidence of it.
     In particular I note that very few examples  could  be  given  of  the
    Appellant and his partner together or as a  family  together  with  the
    children, including,  only  occasional  attendance  at  church  by  the
    Appellant's partner with the rest of the family.

13. Although it is stated  that  the  Appellant  has  been  bailed  to  his
    partner's address  in  Corby,  there  is  little  in  the  way  of  any
    documentary evidence of him living there and he accepted  that  he  was
    not registered for council tax there, although said he was on the water
    bill and TV licence.   The  consistent  position  before  me  from  the
    written and oral evidence, was that the Appellant stayed in the  family
    home in Corby only for  part  of  the  week,  from  Thursday  afternoon
    through to Monday morning, during which time he  cared  for  his  three
    children when his partner was neither studying or at work  doing  night
    shifts (and resting during the day).  I reject  the  Appellant's  claim
    that he resided there for 6 days a week or only  infrequently  went  to
    stay elsewhere as an exaggeration.

14. The Appellant stays in his son's room when stays at  the  family  home,
    not sharing a room with his claimed partner and I do  not  accept  that
    there were any medical reasons for him to do so to assist with his  son
    sleep apnoea given that there was no medical  evidence  that  this  was
    required nor done by his mother on days  when  the  Appellant  was  not
    staying at the property.  I do not find  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    claimed partner are cohabiting as a couple in the usual sense  of  that
    word, even if he stays at the property a number of nights  in  a  given
    week.

15. Leaving aside the aspect of the family court proceedings in relation to
    the paternity of the Appellant's second  child,  the  majority  of  the
    family court proceedings for residence and contact with the Appellant's
    children are fundamentally inconsistent with the  claimed  relationship
    and cohabitation with his partner.  Even in a  difficult  relationship,
    there would be no plausible need for such proceedings to be  issued  or
    pursued, even, as the Appellant claims, on a preventative basis in case
    he wants to take his children away for  a  short  break  to  stay  with
    friends or to prevent a future dispute.  The nature of the terms agreed
    by the Appellant and his claimed partner to settle these parts  of  the
    proceedings in relation to  the  eldest  and  youngest  child,  do  not
    suggest any subsisting relationship or cohabitation at all and  instead
    agree that the children  shall  reside  with  their  mother,  with  the
    Appellant having residential contact from Thursday after school to  the
    following Monday morning and  with  specific  arrangements  for  school
    holidays.  As to the usual weekly arrangements, they  seem  to  reflect
    the existing position and although nothing in  the  agreement  prevents
    greater contact, none is evident in the material  and  evidence  before
    me.

16. For all of these reasons, I do not find the Appellant to be credible in
    maintaining that he is in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
    his claimed partner, or that he is cohabiting with her  and  I  do  not
    find that she had any  intention  of  supporting  this  aspect  of  his
    appeal.  The Appellant is not in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with a partner as claimed.  There is in  any  event  no  submission  on
    behalf of the Appellant that he could meet the requirements of Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to remain on the basis
    of such a  relationship,  nor  any  substantive  submissions  that  his
    removal would constitute a disproportionate interference with it.

17. I turn next to  whether  the  Appellant  is  in  a  genuine  subsisting
    parental relationship with any or  all  of  his  three  children.   The
    eldest child, born in 2006 is  now  a  British  Citizen  who  has  been
    resident in the  United  Kingdom  from  birth.   The  findings  of  the
    previous Tribunal in a decision promulgated on  19  November  2015  are
    that at that time, there was no  evidence  of  any  recent  contact  or
    relationship between the Appellant and his daughter and no genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship.  That  is  the  starting  point  from
    which I assess whether there is  evidence  postdating  that  appeal  to
    suggest any change in that position.

18. As to the other two children,  the  second  was  born  in  2009,  is  a
    Ghanaian national who presently has discretionary leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom until December  2020  (in  line  with  his  mother).
    Although at present the Appellant is not identified as  his  father  on
    his birth certificate, there are ongoing family  court  proceedings  in
    relation to that and  the  Respondent  has  not  made  any  substantive
    challenge to the Appellant's claimed paternity and  to  deal  with  the
    change of circumstances since the  previous  decision  in  this  regard
    above.  The third child was born in mid-2017 and  is  also  a  Ghanaian
    national.  This child is not a qualifying child  for  the  purposes  of
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act 2002.

19. The strongest of  the  three  parental  relationships  is  between  the
    Appellant and his daughter, the eldest child, given her  age  and  that
    she has made a statement in support of this appeal; however, in essence
    the evidence is broadly generic as to the relationship with each  child
    and I find no fundamental distinction between  them.   The  findings  I
    make below are in relation to all three children.

20. There is  broadly  consistent  evidence  before  me  of  a  significant
    increase in contact between the Appellant and his  children  from  late
    2016, including him staying with them on a regular basis and  providing
    care while their mother was  studying/at  work/resting  after  a  night
    shift from Thursday afternoons  to  Monday  mornings.   There  is  also
    evidence from different sources of  the  Appellant  attending  hospital
    appointments in London with his second child, including overnight stays
    in hospital with him for  sleep  study  purposes.   The  evidence  also
    includes an increased  role  by  the  Appellant  with  regards  to  the
    children's school from late 2016 and documentary evidence in  the  form
    of photographs.  The supporting written statements, including the  oral
    evidence from  witnesses  outside  of  the  family,  also  consistently
    support an ongoing  relationship,  at  least  since  2016  between  the
    Appellant and his children.

21. The report of the Independent Social Worker also finds that there is  a
    genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    children, albeit I attach  little  weight  to  this  report  given  the
    circumstances  under  which  the  assessment  was  conducted  and   the
    misrepresentation of  the  family  situation  to  Ms  Harris  which  is
    inconsistent with the earlier findings of Judge Grant in  2016  and  my
    findings as to the Appellant's claimed relationship with  his  partner.
    The situation presented to the Independent Social Worker was  that  the
    Appellant had been  consistently  and  permanently  living  within  the
    family unit since 2012, in a  genuine  relationship  with  his  partner
    throughout  that  time  and  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship with his children throughout that time; which  is  clearly
    not the case based on earlier Tribunal findings as well as my own.   In
    addition, there was no assessment of the family together and  the  only
    input from the Appellant's claimed partner was a brief  telephone  call
    after the main assessment and no  critical  analysis  of  that  claimed
    relationship at all.

22. There is little dispute on the facts that the Appellant  provides  care
    for his children for part of the week, is involved in  their  education
    and medical care.  That much is accepted by the Respondent, however  it
    was submitted that this did not amount  to  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship because the Appellant's motives for doing so were
    to obtain an immigration advantage.  There is considerable force in the
    suggestion of the Appellant's motive  being  for  immigration  purposes
    rather than a motivation of parental responsibility  given  first,  the
    significant and substantial change in the  level  of  contact  and  the
    relationship with his children after the dismissal of  the  Appellant's
    previous appeal, the timing of which I do not find  is  a  coincidence.
    Secondly, the Appellant's  pursuit  of  family  court  proceedings  and
    reliance on the same for immigration purposes  in  circumstances  which
    are  fundamentally  inconsistent  with   his   claimed   relationships,
    particularly with his partner.  Thirdly,  the  Appellant's  immigration
    history and previous adverse credibility findings, including  deception
    and the use of false documents, form  part  of  the  relevant  context.
    Finally, the Appellant's claimed  partner's  motives  for  her  limited
    support of the appeal form part of the context, her  evidence  (to  the
    extent that that can be relied upon for the  reasons  already  set  out
    above) is that she appeared  to  have  a  change  of  heart  after  the
    previous appeal Tribunal decision, that she wanted the Appellant to  be
    able to maintain  a  relationship  with  his  children  essentially  to
    provide convenient childcare for them while she was working.

23. For these reasons,  I  have  little  hesitation  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant  was  primarily  motivated  by  immigration  reasons  to  re-
    establish contact with his children, pursue  family  court  proceedings
    and establish  a  relationship  with  his  children  in  late  2016,  a
    significant change of circumstances from the findings of Judge Grant in
    November 2016.  However, I do not find that that in itself can lead  to
    a  conclusion  that  there  is  no  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship in existence.  Whether there is such a  relationship  must
    be based on the factual  reality  of  the  Appellant's  day-to-day  and
    overarching parental role in his children's lives and given the  child-
    centred focus of the assessment in section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  must  also  be  viewed  from  the
    perspective of the children involved.  Whatever the Appellant's  motive
    for the relationship does not change how it  would  be  viewed  by  the
    children themselves or how in reality that relationship  is  undertaken
    and maintained.  On the facts of this  case,  I  have  found  that  the
    Appellant does undertake a direct parental role in his children's lives
    for approximately half of the week, being involved socially, with their
    education and in support of  medical  conditions.   I  find  that  this
    amounts to a genuine and subsisting parental relationship regardless of
    the Appellant's reasons or motive for how that situation came about  in
    late 2016.

24. As the Respondent expressly accepted at the outset of the last  hearing
    before me, if I were to find that the Appellant was in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his children  (primarily  the  eldest  two
    children for the reasons already set  out  above),  then  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the children to leave the  United  Kingdom  such
    that section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 would be satisfied and the public interest does  not  require  the
    Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.  On this basis and despite
    the adverse credibility findings made against the Appellant, the appeal
    must therefore be allowed on human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in the earlier error of law decision, the making  of
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law.  As such it was necessary to set aside the decision.

The appeal is remade as follows:

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date 31st December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02251/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th April 2018                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                               febi achaempong
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Saeed, Solicitor, Legal Eagles Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Bart-Stewart promulgated on 8 February 2018, in which  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision to refuse his protection and  human  rights
    claim dated 15 February 2017 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Ghana, born on 8  March  1968,  who  was
    issued with a transit visa for one day on 1 November 1999, pursuant  to
    which the Appellant travelled to the  United  Kingdom  and  decided  to
    stay.  He has returned to Ghana on four occasions  since  then,  albeit
    not in recent years.   On  9  June  2016  an  application  for  an  EEA
    Residence Card to certify permanent residence in the United Kingdom was
    made, which was refused by the Respondent and the appeal  against  that
    refusal was dismissed on 11 April 2007.  A further application for  the
    same was made on 13 October 2010 and refused by  the  Respondent  on  8
    February 2011.  On 24 August 2014, the  Appellant  was  encountered  by
    police and despite giving a  false  identity,  his  true  identity  was
    confirmed  and  he  was  arrested  and  served  with  paperwork  as  an
    overstayer.

 3. A human rights claim was made on 10 September 2014, which  was  refused
    by the Respondent and the appeal against that refusal was dismissed  on
    19 November 2015.  An application for permission to apply for  Judicial
    Review of the same refusal was lodged on 28 July  2016  and  permission
    was refused on 5 August 2016.  Following his detention for  removal  on
    17 August 2016, the Appellant claimed asylum the following  day  and  a
    few days later lodged a further application for permission to apply for
    Judicial Review which was refused permission on 24 October 2016.

 4. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
    claim on 15 February 2017.  The Appellant's asylum claim, based on  the
    fear of persecution on return to Ghana from unknown persons because the
    Appellant had helped people who were witches or gay, was refused on the
    basis that it did not fall within the Refugee  Convention  and  in  any
    event was  not  considered  credible.   Although  that  aspect  of  the
    decision was challenged on appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  there
    are no further challenges in relation to that part of  the  Appellant's
    claim therefore the detail is not set out here.

 5. The Respondent considered the Appellant's private and  family  life  in
    the United Kingdom.  The claim under the Immigration Rules was  refused
    on the basis that the Appellant failed to meet the suitability criteria
    in S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM given his past use of  deception  to  enter
    the United Kingdom.  However, the Respondent went on  to  consider  the
    other  substantive  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as   the
    Appellant sought leave to remain on the basis of his family  life  with
    his partner and two children, all of whom were at that  point  Ghanaian
    citizens.  The Appellant remains married to another individual and  had
    not established that he meets the definition of having a  partner  with
    the person who he claims to be in  a  relationship  with,  nor  had  he
    established that he is in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
    her.  The requirements of the rules in R-LTRPT of Appendix FM were also
    not satisfied because the Appellant did not have leave to remain at the
    time of his application, and his claimed partner is the other parent of
    the children and leave  to  remain  on  that  basis  had  already  been
    refused.  It was not accepted that there was a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the children with  conflicting  evidence  as  to  his
    involvement with them.

 6. Further, the Appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to remain  on  the
    basis of  private  life,  specifically  that  he  would  not  face  any
    significant obstacles reintegrating into Ghana  where  he  has  social,
    familial and cultural ties as well as where he completed his  education
    and had a work history.  There were no exceptional circumstances and no
    basis for grant  of  discretionary  leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. Judge Bart-Stewart dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  8
    February 2018 on all grounds.  The detail in relation to the protection
    claim is not set out here as there is no  further  challenge  to  those
    findings.  In relation to private and family life, it was not  accepted
    that the Appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
    his partner.  As to  the  Appellant's  children,  although  their  best
    interests would be to remain in the United Kingdom with  their  mother,
    taking into  account  the  Appellant's  poor  immigration  history  and
    conduct as well as his extended family in  Ghana,  there  would  be  no
    disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights if removed from
    the United Kingdom.

The appeal

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on four grounds.  First, that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused  to  consider   or   determine   the
    Appellant's claim that he had obtained permanent  residence  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  Secondly,  that
    the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in  failing  to  accept
    that there were extant family proceedings such  that  pursuant  to  the
    decision in MS  (Ivory  Coast)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ 13, he should be granted discretionary leave
    to remain at least to pursue  those  proceedings.   Thirdly,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in  considering  the  wrong
    facts in relation to the Appellant's claimed family life and that there
    was a lack of evidential basis for the findings made on  it.   Finally,
    there is an allegation that the First-tier Tribunal was biased was  the
    Appellant.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hodgkinson on the  Article  8
    grounds only on 7 March 2018.  Permission was refused on the EEA  point
    and in relation to the  claim  of  bias.   The  Appellant  renewed  his
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the  EEA
    point but this was further refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on  11
    April 2018.

10. At the oral hearing, I sought clarification of the  precise  nature  of
    the challenge under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights given that the extensive handwritten grounds of appeal  were  at
    best difficult to follow and confused.  Mr  Saeed  put  the  Article  8
    grounds of appeal in three ways.  First, in relation to  the  last  two
    paragraphs of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  that  insufficient
    reasons had been given why removal was proportionate on  the  facts  of
    this case.  Secondly, that there was a factual error in  the  judgement
    that only two children were referred to but  the  Appellant  has  three
    children in  United  Kingdom.   Thirdly,  that  family  life  had  been
    accepted from 2016 onwards but the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  go
    through the balancing exercise or attach sufficient weight to the  best
    interests of the children when doing so.

11. The second related limb in the appeal is in reliance on  the  decisions
    in MS and MH (pending family proceedings - discretionary leave) Morocco
    [2010] UKUT 439  (IAC),  which  were  referred  to  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but not applied due to the  finding  that  the  Appellant  had
    misled the court by stating that family court proceedings had  actually
    been issued when in fact an application  had  been  made  but  not  yet
    formally issued.  It was submitted that MH only requires a person to be
    in the "process of seeking" an order in the family court and there  was
    no need to await the actual  issue  of  proceedings.   In  the  present
    appeal, the Appellant's initial application to  the  family  court  had
    been rejected for administrative reasons and had  been  resubmitted  to
    his local court.

12. Mr Saeed also submitted that the EEA  points  remain  relevant  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal assessment under Article 8 because they would  show
    that the Appellant  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  lawfully.   However,
    permission to appeal had not been granted on this ground and this point
    was not pursued further.

13. In response, Mr Tufan submitted that the findings made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in relation to the pursuit of  family  court  proceedings
    were lawful and open to it on the evidence available.  There remained a
    significant question as to why  family  court  proceedings  were  being
    pursued at all given the Appellant's claim to be living in  the  family
    home with his children.  At this point  Mr  Saeed  clarified  that  the
    Appellant's relationship with his partner  was  a  tumultuous  one  and
    proceedings were also pursued because he had  not  been  named  on  the
    birth certificate of one of his three children as the father.

14. In any event, the key issue in the appeal was submitted to  be  whether
    the Appellant could benefit from section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  that  if  he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with qualifying children in United Kingdom,  it
    would be unreasonable for  them  to  leave.   The  Appellant's  adverse
    immigration history would be relevant to the question of reasonableness
    and would have to  be  taken  into  account.   Although  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 was not expressly cited  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, it was submitted that in substance the  assessment  made
    was in accordance with it.

15. As a separate point, Mr Tufan said it was unclear whether the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant promulgated on 19 November  2015  in
    relation to this  Appellant  was  before  Judge  Bart-Stewart,  but  an
    additional copy  was  submitted  and  potentially  relevant  given  the
    findings of existence or otherwise of family life contained therein.

Findings and reasons

16. I deal first with what was described in oral submissions is the  second
    limb of the appeal, that in relation to the case of MH and family court
    proceedings.  The Appellant's claim in relation to  this  point  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, as contained in his written  statement  signed
    and dated 11 January 2018, was that he was  still  in  the  process  of
    trying to establish contact and shared residence rights with two of his
    children and for the third to be declared to be his son.  The Appellant
    said this was being pursued via family court  proceedings  against  the
    children's mother over contact and  residence  issues  with  all  three
    children.  The Appellant stated that he previously sent an application,
    but it had been returned as a new form had to be used.  This  was  done
    and resubmitted on 5  January  2018.   There  had  previously  been  an
    application to the First-tier Tribunal for directions that  the  family
    court release documents in relation to the proceedings which  Mr  Saeed
    has said was  in  anticipation  of  their  issue,  which  had  not  yet
    happened.

17. In  the  documentary  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Appellant had included a copy of an application form under section 8 of
    the Children Act 1989 for various  orders  in  relation  to  his  three
    children, including for acknowledgement of parental responsibility  and
    a contact order for the oldest child, a declaration of  fatherhood  for
    the second eldest child and a contact order for the  third  child.   In
    addition, there was an application for  a  shared  residence  order  in
    respect of all three children.  The  application  form  is  signed  and
    dated 5 January 2017 but has not been issued in the family  court.   It
    seems from a letter from the East London Family Court dated  3  January
    2018, that the application was returned because it was made on an older
    version of the form.  A further application form, similarly  completed,
    signed and dated 17 September 2017 was also in the  Appellant's  bundle
    but again did not evidence that any proceedings had been issued.

18. The issue is dealt with in paragraph 19 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, further to which no additional consideration was given to the
    argument that the appeal should be allowed on the basis of  MS  because
    the Appellant was pursuing family proceedings because it was found that
    no such proceedings had in fact been issued  and  the  suggestion  that
    they had was "totally misconceived and misleading".

19. Mr Saeed submits that that was a material  error  of  law  because  the
    Appellant could benefit from  MS  if  proceedings  were  being  pursued
    without any requirement that they had actually  been  issued.   On  the
    facts in MS, the  appellant  in  that  case  had  already  had  contact
    proceedings issued in the family  court  which  had  been  ongoing  for
    nearly a year by the time the  then  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    heard the  initial  appeal  and  the  Respondent  had  dealt  with  the
    situation by given assurances or  undertakings  not  to  remove  people
    during such proceedings.  The Court of Appeal found that as a matter of
    principle the tribunal should  have  decided  whether  the  appellant's
    removal on the facts as they were when appeal was heard, i.e.  with  an
    outstanding application for  contact  with  the  appellant's  children,
    would have violated Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  If successful on that basis, then the  appellant  should  have
    been granted discretionary leave to remain for sufficient  duration  to
    cover the outstanding contact application.  It  was  inappropriate  for
    the Respondent to proceed on the basis  of  undertakings  or  temporary
    admission and therefore leave an individual in limbo.

20. The Court of Appeal in DH (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2010] EWCA Civ  207  confirmed  that  the  decision  in  MS
    concerned the unacceptability of keeping an individual in limbo  rather
    than giving legal effect, by the grant limited leave to  enter  outside
    the Rules, to her accepted entitlement to remain here for  a  specified
    purpose.  That specified purpose being  the  pursuit  of  family  court
    proceedings.  On the facts in that case, there  was  correspondence  in
    relation to contact with children but no family court  proceedings  had
    been issued.  The tribunal considered the current situation,  that  the
    appellant in that case would lose the opportunity of  pursuing  an  in-
    country application for contact if removed at that point  and  how  the
    present situation was likely to develop.  The appeal against the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision was dismissed, although it was accepted that  there
    may be a discreet Article 8 issue about attending  contact  proceedings
    in the United Kingdom for which entry may be sought in the future.

21. The issue of pending family proceedings following MS was considered  by
    the Upper Tribunal in MH, where it was held that the  Court  of  Appeal
    had accepted in MS that a  decision  to  remove  an  applicant  in  the
    process of seeking a contact order may violate Article 8, in particular
    on the basis that removal of a parent/applicant  during  contact  order
    proceedings would be unlawful  because  it  prejudged  the  outcome  of
    contact proceedings and, more importantly, would deny the  applicant  a
    possibility of any further meaningful involvement  in  the  proceedings
    which may breach Article 6 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.
    On the facts, the appellant in MH had sought permission to remain in in
    the United Kingdom under Article 8  in  order  to  pursue  an  existing
    application  in  family  proceedings  for  a  contact  order  with  his
    daughter.

22. There is nothing in the authorities referred to above to suggest that a
    person being in the process of seeking family  court  proceedings,  nor
    the reference to pending family proceedings, that it was  envisaged  or
    intended that this was wide enough to incorporate a person who had  not
    actually had any proceedings issued  by  the  family  court.   Further,
    given that on the facts of MS and MH family court  proceedings  had  in
    fact been issued, I do not find  that  the  mere  intention  to  pursue
    family court proceedings, even with attempted but  invalid  application
    having been made, is sufficient to show that a person is in the process
    of  pursuing  such  proceedings  to  take  any   benefit   from   these
    authorities.

23. Put differently, as the Upper Tribunal confirmed  in  Mohammed  (Family
    court proceedings - outcome) [2014] UKUT 419, there is nothing  in  the
    later case of RS  (immigration  and  family  court  proceedings)  India
    [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC) (as approved by the Court of Appeal in Mohan  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1363)  which
    followed that supports  the  notion  that  a  mere  possibility  of  an
    application being made (or pursued)  is  a  relevant  criterion  in  an
    immigration appeal when deciding  whether  to  adjourn  the  appeal  or
    direct a grant of discretionary leave to remain for such proceedings to
    be pursued.

24. For these reasons, I do not find any error of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to not consider further the possibility  of  family
    court proceedings given that none had been issued in this case  and  in
    light of the later findings that proceedings  were  being  pursued  for
    immigration purposes only.

25. In any event, had the First-tier  Tribunal  gone  on  to  consider  the
    guidance  from  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  RS  in  relation  to   actual
    proceedings, it would have been relevant to take into  account  factors
    such as whether the contemplated family  proceedings  would  likely  be
    material to the immigration decision; the public  interest  in  removal
    irrespective of the outcome of family proceedings; and whether  contact
    proceedings had been initiated to delay  or  frustrate  removal  rather
    than promote the child's welfare.  In assessing these matters, a  judge
    would normally want to consider the degree of the appellant's  previous
    interest in and contact with the  child  or  children;  the  timing  of
    contact proceedings and  the  commitment  with  which  they  have  been
    progressed; when a decision is likely to be reached; what materials (if
    any) are already  available  or  can  be  made  available  to  identify
    pointers as to where the child's welfare lies.  These factors  were  in
    essence taken into account  by  Judge  Bart-Stewart  when  reading  her
    determination as a whole (this much is discernible  from  the  decision
    despite the findings set out further below) and for the reasons  given,
    it  is  highly  unlikely  that  the  intent  to  pursue  family   court
    proceedings would materially make any difference to the outcome of  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.  I  would  also  note  that  even  by  the
    hearing before me, no family court proceedings had yet been issued.

26. Separately, there has never been a claim by the Appellant in the course
    of these proceedings that either Article 6 or Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights would be engaged on the discreet  procedural
    fairness point, that  he  would  be  unable  to  effectively  issue  or
    participate in any contact proceedings once issued if  he  had  already
    been removed from the United Kingdom.   For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,
    there can be no error of law on this basis either.

27. In relation to the other grounds of appeal under Article 8 more widely,
    it would be helpful to first to set out the findings made by Judge Bart-
    Stewart against which to assess the grounds of appeal.  This is however
    a  far  more  difficult  task  than  it  should  be  given  the  wholly
    unstructured and jumbled way in which  her  findings  and  reasons  are
    randomly set out.  This section  of  the  decision  from  paragraph  35
    onwards follows no logical order and does not even deal separately with
    the  protection  findings  which   are   interspersed   amongst   other
    considerations in an entirely random fashion.  When  dealing  with  the
    Article 8 aspects, there is  no  clear  structure  of  considering  the
    Appellant's ability to meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    or  otherwise,  an  assessment  of  the  children's   best   interests,
    assessment of his right to respect  for  private  and  family  life  in
    accordance with the 5 stage approach in  Razgar,  including  ultimately
    the factors to be taken into account on both sides  for  the  balancing
    exercise to determine proportionality of removal.

28. The result is that the findings are confused,  in  places  inconsistent
    and in other respects issues are seemingly not determined at all.   For
    example, when considering whether the Appellant meets the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules, there is no clear finding on whether he fails
    to meet the suitability requirement in S-LTR.1.6, instead the Appellant
    is given 'the benefit of the doubt' on this point even in light of  the
    findings  of  his  use  of  deception  and  other  adverse  credibility
    findings.

29. There is a consistent finding that the Appellant has not established  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his  claimed  partner  but  no
    clear finding as to whether he has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with any of his children (and although reference  is  made
    to a third child expected in July 2017 and whose birth certificate  was
    provided in the bundle, the decision focuses  exclusively  on  the  two
    older  children).   Although  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship appears to be accepted in paragraph 51 and  55,  supported
    by the evidence referred to primarily in paragraphs 38 to 41; there  is
    also a finding in paragraph 55 that the parental involvement is motived
    by the Appellant's desire to remain in the United Kingdom and a  wholly
    equivocal statement in paragraph 63 that 'even if the appellant now has
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child
    ...' suggesting no actual finding of such a relationship.  There is  no
    clear finding as to  actual  contact  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    children nor as to whether or not they are or have ever lived together.

30. The best interests of two (of the three)  children  are  considered  at
    various points in the decision with reference made to  their  residence
    since birth, age, nationality, education and medical conditions as well
    as development of private life particularly for the eldest  child.   In
    paragraph 56 it is stated that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect
    either child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  which  is  followed  by
    consideration of whether it would be reasonable for them to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom without the Appellant.  The  latter  is  a  relevant
    consideration only expressly under section 117C in deportation appeals,
    which is not the present case.  The former  would  appear  to  indicate
    that it is in the best interests of  the  children  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom with their mother but if that is the assessment,  it  is
    not clearly expressed in the decision.

31. Further, although in paragraph 56 the conclusion as  to  reasonableness
    would appear to be in the Appellant's favour with regards to  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM (although no express conclusion is  given  on  that
    point) and further to section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002; that is also questioned by the terms of  paragraph
    63 of the decision to the effect that even if there is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship, it does not meant the Appellant should not  be
    removed.  There is however no consideration of nor  proper  application
    of the assessment of reasonableness for the purposes of section 117B(6)
    in accordance with MA (Pakistan) and even if  the  conclusion  on  this
    point was clearer in the decision, there is a lack of adequate  reasons
    for it.

32. Although the use of a balance sheet approach  is  not  proscribed  when
    determining the final proportionality assessment, it has been  strongly
    recommended by Lord Thomas in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 60 and endorsed widely elsewhere, including
    most recently by the Senior President of the Tribunals in TZ (Pakistan)
    and PG (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA
    Civ 1109.  There are scattered references to matters of public interest
    in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and to some of  the  factors  set
    out in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    (which is quoted) but there is a  lack  of  clear  application  of  all
    relevant matters as the 'cons' or of the 'pros' for the Appellant  when
    it is ultimately found that there is no breach  of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights or of the weight to be attached  to
    these factors.

33. Overall, I find the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on human rights grounds involved the making of material errors of  law.
    As set out above, these include a failure to make clear and  consistent
    findings on material  parts  of  the  claim;  a  failure  to  expressly
    consider the Appellant's third  child  at  all;  a  failure  to  assess
    whether it is reasonable for the qualifying  child(ren)  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom for the purposes of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM and/or
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in
    accordance with MA (Pakistan) and ultimately a  failure  to  take  into
    account all  relevant  matters  when  conducting  the  final  balancing
    exercise for the purposes of Article 8.  As such, the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

34. It is appropriate for the re-making of the appeal to be  undertaken  by
    the Upper Tribunal as only limited further fact  finding  is  required.
    That re-making will include consideration of the best interests of  the
    children and Article 8 grounds only.  There has been  no  challenge  to
    the First-tier Tribunal's findings made in relation to  the  protection
    claim and no successful challenge on either the  EEA  issue  (on  which
    permission was refused) or the family proceedings  point,  on  which  I
    have found no error of law.  Consequently,  the  conclusions  on  those
    matters are to remain standing.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions

 A. The Appellant is to file with the  Upper  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
    Respondent any further evidence on which he wishes to rely so  that  it
    is received no later than 14  days  prior  to  the  date  of  the  next
    hearing.

Signed   [pic]         Date     18th May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

