
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02462/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Thursday 16 January 2020          |On Wednesday 29 January 2020         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     H K
                         [Anonymity Direction Made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph, Counsel instructed by Chambers
Solicitors (Slough)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
appeal involves a protection claim and minor children.  Accordingly,  it  is
appropriate to make an anonymity direction. Unless and until a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family. This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.

                            DECISION AND REASONS




    BACKGROUND

      1. By a decision promulgated on 20 November 2018 ("the Decision"), the
         Tribunal  found there to be an error of  law  in  the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan, itself promulgated on  11  July
         2019 allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
         decision of 20th June 2018 under section 32(5) of the  UK  Boarders
         Act 2007 seeking to deport the Appellant from the UK as  a  foreign
         criminal.  The Decision is annexed hereto for ease of reference.

      2. The Appellant's immigration history is set out at [2]  and  [3]  of
         the Decision and I do not need to repeat that.  The Appellant  does
         not challenge  the  dismissal  of  his  appeal  by  Judge  Khan  on
         protection grounds.  That claim is therefore no longer in issue.

      3. The human rights claim made by the Appellant rests in large part on
         his relationship with Ms N, his partner, who is a Polish  national,
         and his children who are British  citizens.   As  such,  the  legal
         framework  is  relatively  straightforward.   Section  117  of  the
         Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("Section  117")
         applies, in particular Section 117C.  As Section  117C  is  already
         set out at [54] of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  as  recorded
         at [6] of the Decision, I do not need  to  repeat  that  reference.
         Nor do I need to repeat the references to case-law as  set  out  at
         [8] and [9] of the Decision.

    THE ISSUES AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK

      4. The approach to be adopted by the Tribunal and relevant issues were
         not in dispute between the parties.  It was agreed that the  issues
         to be decided in the context of the relevant legal framework are as
         follows.

      5. Does the Appellant meet Exception 1 set out at  Section  117C  (4)?
         This issue can be dealt with very shortly as it is accepted on  his
         behalf that he cannot.  His residence in the UK has not been lawful
         in order to meet the half of life provision in  Section  117C(4)(a)
         (there is an error in  the  citation  at  [54]  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal decision set out in the Decision as the  words  "most  of"
         are omitted).  Since he is unable to meet that  provision,  it  has
         not  been  argued  either  that  the  Appellant  is  socially   and
         culturally integrated in the UK or that there are very  significant
         obstacles to integration in Iraq but I can deal with the extent  to
         which those provisions are met when assessing the case outside  the
         two exceptions.

      6. Does the Appellant meet Exception 2 set out  at  Section  117C  (5)
         based on  what  is  accepted  to  be  his  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with Ms N and their two children?  In other words,  is
         the impact of the deportation of the Appellant on Ms  N  and  their
         children unduly harsh?  That encompasses both the scenario of Ms  N
         and the children going to Iraq with the Appellant and remaining  in
         the UK without him.  The Respondent accepts however that Ms  N  and
         the children could not be expected to go to Iraq with him (in other
         words that it would be unduly harsh for them to do so).  This issue
         is therefore confined to the impact of deportation of the Appellant
         with Ms N and their children remaining in the UK.

      7. Are there very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  the  two
         exceptions  which  apply  to  render   the   decision   to   deport
         disproportionate?   Although  Section  117C(6)   refers   to   that
         provision applying only to those sentenced to at least  four  years
         (which does not apply here), it was accepted by the Court of Appeal
         in NA (Pakistan) and others v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 that this is  a  drafting  oversight
         and that this provision applies also to those  sentenced  to  under
         four years if they are unable to meet the two exceptions (see  [24]
         to [27] of that  judgment).   As  such,  if  I  conclude  that  the
         exceptions (in practice Exception 2) is not met  in  this  case,  I
         must  nevertheless  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  very
         compelling circumstances over and above the two exceptions.

      8. When conducting this assessment, I bear in mind also  the  guidance
         of the Supreme Court concerning the "balance sheet approach":  [83]
         and [84] in the speech of Lord Thomas in Hesham Ali v Secretary  of
         State for  the  Home  Department  [2016]  UKSC  60  ("Hesham  Ali")
         (although that judgment pre-dates the introduction of Section  117,
         the approach still has validity).

      9. Turning then to what those circumstances might be in this case, the
         Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department  [2018]  UKSC  53  held  that  the  nature  and
         seriousness of the offence (and therefore the public interest  more
         generally) was not to be weighed in the  balance  when  considering
         Exception 2 (in other words, whether the impact is unduly harsh  is
         a threshold test only).  However, as the Tribunal concluded  in  MS
         (s.117C(6): "very  compelling  circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]
         UKUT 122 (IAC) ("MS (Philippines)"), "[i]n determining pursuant  to
         section  117C  (6)  ...   whether   there   are   very   compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2
         ... , such as to outweigh the public interest in the deportation of
         a foreign criminal, a court or tribunal  must  take  into  account,
         together with any other relevant  public  interest  considerations,
         the seriousness of the particular  offence  of  which  the  foreign
         criminal was convicted...Nothing  in  KO  (Nigeria)  ..  demands  a
         contrary conclusion".  Section 117C (2)  is  therefore  relevant  -
         "The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in the deportation of the criminal".



     10. As the Tribunal  makes  clear  in  MS  (Philippines),  "[t]here  is
         nothing in Hesham Ali ... that requires  a  court  or  tribunal  to
         eschew the principle of public deterrence, as  an  element  of  the
         public interest, in determining a deportation appeal  by  reference
         to section 117C (6)".  In relation  to  the  public  interest  more
         widely, the Tribunal,  in  RA  (s.117C:  "unduly  harsh";  offence;
         seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC) ("RA (Iraq)") gave guidance
         that "[r]ehabilitation will not ordinarily bear material weight  in
         favour of a foreign criminal"

     11.  When  conducting  the  assessment  under  Section  117C  (6),  the
         additional issue on which the Appellant places most emphasis is the
         delay of the Respondent in considering the Appellant's human rights
         representations and the passage of time  since  the  offence.   The
         Appellant  relies  on  the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  MN-T
         (Columbia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
         Civ 893 ("MN-T (Columbia)") for what it has to say about  delay  in
         deportation.

     12. In that case, the  appellant  satisfied  Exception  1  "by  a  wide
         margin" but could  not  benefit  from  the  exception  as  she  was
         sentenced to a term of imprisonment of more than four  years.   The
         Court observed at [29] of the judgment that "[i]f the claimant were
         a person who only just satisfied the  conditions  of  Exception  1,
         there would be much force" in the point  that  the  development  of
         private and family life during the period of delay was part of  the
         exceptions within Section 117C (6) and could not therefore be taken
         into account as circumstances  over  and  above  those  exceptions.
         However, the Court went on to say at [30] of the judgment that when
         evaluating the circumstances in an assessment  under  Section  117C
         (6), the Tribunal was required to consider  all  the  circumstances
         collectively both those within Exceptions 1 and 2  and  those  over
         and above those exceptions. In carrying out  that  assessment,  the
         Tribunal "must  have  regard  to  the  high  public  importance  of
         deporting foreign criminals".

     13. Importantly for the Appellant's case, the Court went on to say  the
         following about the delay itself:

             "35.      I agree that rehabilitation alone would not  suffice
             to justify the Upper Tribunal's decision in this case.  If  it
             had not been for the long delay by the Secretary of State  for
             the Home Department in taking action to  deport,  in  my  view
             there would be no question of  saying  that  'very  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in  Exceptions  1
             and 2' outweighed the high  public  interest  in  deportation.
             But that lengthy delay  makes  a  critical  difference.   That
             lengthy delay is an exceptional circumstance.  It has  led  to
             the  claimant  substantially  strengthening  her  family   and
             private life here.  Also, it has led to her rehabilitation and
             to her demonstrating the fact of  her  rehabilitation  by  her
             industrious life over the last 13 years.  This is one of those
             cases which is on the borderline.  The  Upper  Tribunal  might
             have decided either way.  The Court of Appeal would  not  have
             reversed the Upper Tribunal's decision if the  Upper  Tribunal
             had decided that because of the  high  public  importance  the
             claimant must be deported.  In the event  the  Upper  Tribunal
             decided this matter in favour of the claimant.  This  was,  in
             my view, an evaluative decision within  the  range  which  the
             Upper Tribunal was entitled to hold that there  were  in  this
             case  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2,  which  outweighed  the  high
             public interest in deportation..."

     14. In relation to the effect of delay in the context of the assessment
         of circumstances within Section 117C (6), the Appellant  relies  on
         the House of Lords judgment in EB Kosovo v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41 ("EB (Kosovo)"). At [14] to [16]
         in the speech of Lord Brown, it was said that delay may be relevant
         in any one of three ways as follows:

             "14.      First, the applicant may during the  period  of  any
             delay develop closer personal and social  ties  and  establish
             deeper roots  in  the  community  than  he  could  have  shown
             earlier.  The longer the period of  the  delay,  the  likelier
             this is to be true.  To  the  extent  that  it  is  true,  the
             applicant's  claim  under  article  8  will   necessarily   be
             strengthened....

             15. Delay may be relevant in a second, less obvious, way.   An
             immigrant without leave to  enter  or  remain  is  in  a  very
             precarious situation, liable to be removed at any  time.   Any
             relationship into which such an applicant enters is likely  to
             be, initially, tentative, being entered into under the  shadow
             of severance by administrative order.  This is the  more  true
             where the other party to the  relationship  is  aware  of  the
             applicant's precarious position.  This  has  been  treated  as
             relevant  to  the   quality   of   the   relationship....    A
             relationship so entered into may well be imbued with  a  sense
             of impermanence.  But if months pass  without  a  decision  to
             remove being made, and months become years, and year  succeeds
             year, it is to be excepted that  this  sense  of  impermanence
             will  fade  and  the  expectation  will  grow  that   if   the
             authorities had intended to remove the  applicant  they  would
             have taken steps to do so. This result  depends  on  no  legal
             doctrine but on an understanding of how, in some cases,  minds
             may work and it may affect the proportionality of removal.

             16. Delay may be relevant, thirdly,  in  reducing  the  weight
             otherwise to be accorded to the requirements of firm and  fair
             immigration control, if the delay is shown to be the result of
             a   dysfunctional   system   which    yields    unpredictable,
             inconsistent and unfair outcomes..."

         As is evident from  what  is  said  about  the  last  category,  EB
         (Kosovo) was a removal and not a deportation case.  To that extent,
         it can be distinguished, particularly in relation to what  is  said
         about  the  diminution  of  the  public  interest.   However,   the
         Appellant relies on the case predominantly in relation to the first
         and second categories which he says apply here.

     15. In the course of submissions, Mr Joseph  confirmed  that  no  issue
         arises under EU law.  The Appellant has never made  an  application
         for a residence card under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
         Regulations 2016.  The Appellant is not legally  married  to  Ms  N
         (although they have undergone  a  religious  marriage)  and  cannot
         therefore qualify as a family member.  For whatever reason, he  has
         not made an application for a residence card as an extended  family
         member.

    EVIDENCE AND SUBMISSIONS

     16. I  now  turn  to  the  evidence  and  submissions.   I  heard  oral
         submissions from both representatives, and  I  received  a  helpful
         skeleton argument from Mr Joseph.  I do not record the  submissions
         separately as the matters canvassed are covered either above or  in
         the Discussion section below in relation to the law as  it  applies
         to this case or within the context of the evidence recorded  below.



     17. I have before me a bundle of  evidence  adduced  by  the  Appellant
         before the First-tier Tribunal to which I  refer  as  necessary  as
         [AB/xx].  I also have a supplementary bundle filed by the Appellant
         on 7 January 2020 in accordance with my earlier directions to which
         I refer as [ABS/xx].  In addition, I have a Respondent's bundle  to
         which I refer as [RB/xx] as well as the PNC report relating to  the
         Appellant printed on 2 April 2019 ("the PNC report").  I have  read
         and have regard to all the documents even if I do not  specifically
         mention them.

     18. I also heard oral evidence from the Appellant and Ms N.   Ms  N  is
         currently suffering mental health problems.  Mr Joseph did not seek
         any particular arrangements  in  relation  to  the  giving  of  her
         evidence, but I made clear to her that if, at any time, she  wished
         to have a break, she should ask.  As it  was,  few  questions  were
         asked of her and that was not necessary.  I observe  that  she  was
         nonetheless  visibly  distressed  during  her  evidence   but   was
         comforted by having the Appellant sit alongside her and was on that
         basis able to complete her evidence.

    The Appellant's Evidence

     19. The Appellant has made two written statements,  one  which  appears
         unsigned and undated at [AB/A1-8], a copy of which was signed on 21
         June 2019 ("the Appellant's First Statement") and the second  which
         appears at [ABS/A1-8] which was signed at  the  hearing  before  me
         ("the Appellant's Second Statement").  He adopted  both  statements
         in his oral evidence and confirmed the truth of both.

     20. The circumstances of the Appellant's offence are described  at  [5]
         and [6] of the Appellant's First Statement.   Having had his asylum
         appeal rejected in 2003, the Appellant says that  he  was  "wrongly
         advised by someone" to pay for  a  document  showing  that  he  had
         indefinite leave to remain.  He did so, obtaining a letter dated 12
         May 2004 with a different surname and date of birth. He used  those
         details to obtain a replacement document and then a travel document
         on which he travelled to Iran, Poland and  Germany.   He  used  the
         false identity over a number of years from 2004 to  2009  when  his
         true  identity  was  discovered.   He  was  then   prosecuted   for
         possessing a false document (the travel document) and  for  seeking
         to obtain leave to remain by  deception  and  sentenced  to  twelve
         months in prison.  The Appellant pleaded guilty to the offences.  I
         observe that the PNC report shows that  this  was  the  Appellant's
         only offence.  The Respondent does not dispute  that  this  is  the
         position.

     21. The Appellant says in his first statement that he accepts  that  he
         "did wrong" and that he is "very remorseful".  He says that he "was
         young and foolish and made a mistake" but that he is not a risk  to
         public safety and has "never posed a threat to the public  good  or
         public safety".

     22. The Appellant was then notified that he was to  be  deported.   His
         appeal was heard on 1 July 2011.  By a decision  promulgated  on  6
         July 2011 (at [RB/J1-11]),  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  his
         appeal.  The Appellant was at that stage already in a  relationship
         with Ms N.  The Tribunal found that the relationship was a  durable
         one which "may serve to qualify the Appellant as an extended family
         member" ([21]).   The  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  Respondent's
         failure to consider the issue meant that the decision to issue  the
         deportation order was "not in accordance with the law"  and,  based
         on a concession made by the  Respondent's  representative  to  that
         effect, allowed the appeal to the extent of  remitting  the  matter
         back to the Respondent to consider it.  As I  have  already  noted,
         the Appellant does not suggest  that  he  has  any  entitlement  to
         remain under EU law and therefore I do not need to  take  the  2011
         decision as a starting point.  The Tribunal expressly  declined  to
         deal with Article 8 ECHR  in  that  decision,  having  reached  the
         conclusion that it did applying EU law.

     23. Following the allowing of that appeal, the Appellant  records  that
         his solicitors submitted further representations on 12 August 2011.
          It was not until 3 August 2016 that those were considered, leading
         to a further decision to deport him  on  that  date.   However,  by
         then, the Appellant's circumstances had changed as his two children
         had been born.  Accordingly, a statement of additional grounds  was
         submitted in August 2016.  Thereafter, there was  yet  more  delay,
         culminating in a judicial review challenge to the delay  which  was
         settled when the Respondent agreed to make a decision within  three
         months.  The further decision which is that under appeal was served
         on 28 February 2019.

     24. The Appellant's case is mainly founded on his relationship with  Ms
         N and with his two children, [D] born in April 2012 and [L] born in
         2015.  He says that his children and partner are  "all  emotionally
         and physically dependent" on him.  He points out that he  has  been
         unable to work due to his status and therefore  Ms  N  works  full-
         time.  He would like to be able  to  work  to  support  his  family
         financially but, at present, he plays "a big part" in  bringing  up
         the children and takes care of the home.

     25.  [D] attends primary school.  [L] now attends  reception  following
         nursery school.  In the Appellant's First Statement,  he  describes
         the children as "both doing really well" and  being  "very  happy".
         He speaks about what he does for them -  taking  them  and  picking
         them up from school, feeding  them,  helping  them  with  homework,
         telling them stories, taking them to and from football and swimming
         and taking them to football  matches.  In  the  Appellant's  Second
         Statement, he sets out in some detail  the  family's  normal  daily
         routine.  I have regard to what is there said about the  extent  of
         the Appellant's involvement with the children's upbringing.

     26. The Appellant points out that, due to  his  unsettled  status,  the
         family has been unable to holiday together other  than  within  the
         UK.  Ms N took the children to Poland  in  2016  and  2017  but  he
         describes her as being "very scared"  to  travel  without  him  and
         being "very anxious and nervous".

     27. This is not a case where  the  Appellant  was  separated  from  his
         children by imprisonment for his criminal offence.  The offence and
         imprisonment pre-dated their birth.  Accordingly, the children have
         grown up with two parents at  all  times.   I  was  told  that  the
         children were not made aware of these  proceedings  at  the  outset
         (although they would have been aware that there  was  some  problem
         which resulted in their father being unable to go on holiday abroad
         with them).  However, when the appeal was allowed by the First-tier
         Tribunal decision which has now been set aside, they were told that
         the situation was resolved.  In the Appellant's  Second  Statement,
         he describes how they then  had  to  explain  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's decision had been overturned.  He says  that  "they  are
         really sad to say the least" and that "[t]hey can't comprehend what
         is happening and are now even more stressed about  me  being  taken
         away from them".  He says  that  the  children  "have  become  very
         clingy and even more attached to [him]".  They worry  where  he  is
         even when he goes to the shops.

     28. In his oral evidence, the Appellant said  that  the  children  were
         still doing very well at school.  There is apparently currently  no
         impact on their  education  from  the  threat  of  the  Appellant's
         deportation.  There are no long-lasting health concerns.   [L]  has
         tonsillitis and is awaiting an operation which can be  expected  to
         deal with that concern.  He also has a problem with his speech  for
         which he is awaiting therapy.

     29. That the children are apparently doing well is confirmed  by  other
         evidence.  At [AB/G2-4] is [L]'s  school  report  for  2019.   That
         reports a difficulty making friends and being a quiet member of the
         class who enjoys school.  There are not  however  said  to  be  any
         concerns about him or his behaviour.  It is expected that  he  will
         gain confidence over time.  The teacher comments as follows:

              "It has been a pleasure to teach [L] this year.  He  made  so
             much progress in many areas of  his  development.   [L]  is  a
             quiet natured boy but he is always willing to learn  something
             new.  He takes on board all learning and  applies  this  on  a
             daily basis.  I wish [L] all the best for  the  future  and  I
             know he will enjoy the challenge of Reception."

     30. At [AB/G5-28] appear various documents relating to [D]'s  education
         recording  his  achievements  both  academically  and   in   extra-
         curricular activities,  particularly  sport.   His  2017-18  report
         shows that he is either meeting expectations or exceeding  them  in
         core subjects.  His teacher comments as follows:

             "I have really enjoyed having [D] in my class  this  year;  he
             has been a joy to teach.  [D] is a bright  boy  who  has  made
             lots of progress in all areas, particularly his English  where
             his writing is now beautifully joined.  Occasionally, [D]  can
             lack confidence in himself and gets worried  when  talking  in
             front of the class.  Hopefully in  Year  2  he  will  grow  in
             confidence as I am sure he has even more  to  give.   [D]  has
             built solid friendships this year and is a popular  member  of
             the class.  Good luck in Year 2 [D] we will miss you  in  Year
             1!"

     31. I was told that the Appellant  had  intended  to  obtain  a  report
         concerning the impact on the children of his  deportation  but  the
         cost of  such  a  report  from  an  adult  and  child  psychologist
         approached by his solicitors had been prohibitive.

     32. Ms N has suffered  from  depression,  anxiety  and  panic  attacks,
         particularly following the birth of their youngest child.   I  deal
         with the evidence about that in  more  detail  when  recording  her
         evidence  below.   The  Appellant  says  that  he  has  been   "her
         backbone".  He says that her issues stem from her  father  who  was
         "an abusive alcoholic" but that he has supported  her  "emotionally
         and physically for  her  to  move  forward  and  become  a  happier
         person".

     33. In the Appellant's Second Statement, he says however that Ms N  "is
         not dealing with this on-going issue  very  well  at  all.   It  is
         affecting her health and the way she functions on a  daily  basis".
         He describes her not being  able  to  sleep  and  therefore  having
         little energy to deal with the  children.   The  Appellant  records
         that Ms N was prescribed Sertraline recently to help deal with  her
         mental health problems.  However, this had an  adverse  effect  and
         she suffered a further panic attack leading  to  her  being  rushed
         into a walk-in centre  on  4  January  2020.   Her  medication  was
         subsequently changed.

     34. In terms of the effect of separation, the Appellant says that  they
         "would be broken as a family if [he] was removed".  He  fears  that
         the lack of his support and help with the children  would  have  "a
         massive impact" on Ms N's mental health and that the  deterioration
         which would be caused would affect her ability to work as she would
         have to look after  the  children  full-time.   He  says  that  his
         children would be  "devastated"  and  that  "it  would  be  further
         detrimental to their development".

     35. The Appellant also describes a very close relationship with  family
         and friends in the UK.  His family now is Ms N and their  children.
         He has cousins in the UK.

     36. The Appellant is an Iraqi born in Baghdad in 1982.   The  Appellant
         gave oral evidence that he has no family remaining  in  Iraq.   His
         father was killed prior to his departure from Iraq and his  brother
         had been kidnapped (although  his  evidence  at  the  time  of  his
         representations in 2009 was that his brother was  arrested  by  the
         authorities).   A  document  at  [RB/G9]  appears  to  confirm  his
         father's death in October 1999.  It is said  that  the  Appellant's
         father was killed by a group in Baghdad and his body dumped in  the
         street.   Although the appeal decision relating to the  Appellant's
         asylum appeal is not in evidence, some paragraphs are cited in  the
         Respondent's earlier deportation decision in 2011 which appears  at
         [RB/H1-10] and some of the relevant  paragraphs  are  contained  in
         First-tier Tribunal Judge M  A  Khan's  decision  in  this  appeal.
         Those paragraphs indicate that the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  was
         found not to be credible in terms of the risk  to  him  on  return.
         The Tribunal concluded that the Appellant could return to  live  in
         the Kurdish area of Iraq.  It does not  appear  from  the  extracts
         cited however that the Tribunal took  issue  with  the  Appellant's
         claim that his father was dead and that his brother was abducted or
         arrested.

     37. The Appellant did not challenge the First-tier Tribunal's dismissal
         of his protection appeal.  He did not argue before me that he is at
         risk on return to Iraq; nor indeed did he seek  to  persuade  Judge
         Khan to depart from the 2003 findings.  However, in  terms  of  his
         position on return to Iraq, the Appellant says that  he  no  longer
         speaks Arabic and  cannot  read  or  write  Kurdish  and  so  would
         "struggle to reintegrate" in Iraq.  He came to the UK in 1999, aged
         seventeen and has spent over twenty years in the UK  and  "this  is
         the only place [he considers] as home".   Ms  N  and  his  children
         could not be expected to go to Iraq  due  to  the  difficulties  in
         adjusting to life there.  They are also practising  Christians  and
         have not converted to Islam (although I note that I was  told  that
         the Appellant and Ms N had entered into a religious marriage).  The
         Appellant remains  a  Muslim  but  is  not  religious  and  is  not
         practising.

    Ms N's Evidence

     38. Ms N has made two written statements, one  which  appears  unsigned
         and undated at [AB/B1-5], a copy of which was  signed  on  21  June
         2019 ("Ms N's First Statement") and the  second  which  appears  at
         [ABS/B1-5] which was signed at  the  hearing  before  me  ("Ms  N's
         Second Statement").   She  adopted  both  statements  in  her  oral
         evidence and confirmed the truth of both.

     39. Much of what is said in Ms N's statements replicates what  is  said
         in the Appellant's statements and I do not  therefore  repeat  that
         evidence.

     40. Ms N was born in Poland in 1978.  She came to the UK  in  2004  and
         has been working here since.  She was granted  permanent  residency
         in November 2018.  She is working as an accounts' administrator  on
         a full-time basis.  She  earns  �21,000  pa  (letter  at  [AB/I1]).
         However, I was told that as a result of her health  concerns  which
         have recently worsened, she was signed off sick at the beginning of
         January 2020, currently until the end of the month.

     41. The Appellant has produced at [ABS/C1-2] the  most  recent  medical
         notes for Ms N which concern the attendance at the  walk-in  centre
         on 4 January 2020.  Those read as follows:

             "Feels has stress and anxiety - worrying too much about life -
             undergoing court case as home office want to deport partner to
             his country in Iraq.  Under Chapel surgery  -  came  yesterday
             and given Sertraline - told by GP to  come  back  if  worsens.
             Panic attack last night and scared if occurs again -  occurred
             after using Sertraline has two kids - 4 and  7.   Partner  has
             taken the kids to families house to  give  pt  some  time  and
             space alone.  Does not feel suicidal - as kids would stop  her
             from doing this and also very religious no thoughts of harming
             her kids or doing anything to  them.   Started  on  Sertraline
             50mg - only taken one tablet (given 14 tablets in total).  Has
             diarrhoea since taking the tablet - feels panic  attack  since
             taking  the  tablet.   Feeling  down  about  the  court  case.
             Reduced sleep and anxiety.  No self harm.

               1. Stop the  sertraline  -  pt  to  give  medication  to  the
                  pharmacist

               2. URGENT GP apt with Chapel surgery on Monday

               3. Pt will stay with her family member  this  weekend  for  a
                  break

               4. If gets suicidal, anxiety,  self  harm,  any  feelings  of
                  severe depression or  harming  kids  or  any  concerns  to
                  contact CRISIS, 111 (checked has contact numbers) or  come
                  back/go to A&E

               5. Pt wants anxiety tablets - explained propranolol - prefers
                  daily does than PRN - so trial 40mg - aware SE

               6. Letter printed for GP on Monday and for pt."

     42. At [AB/F1-2], there is a letter dated 11 June 2019 from Ms  N's  GP
         surgery (Dr Dhamu) who summarises Ms  N's  previous  mental  health
         problems as follows:

             "22-Jul-14: the  initial  concern  for  the  patient's  mental
             health has been detailed in  a  letter  to  the  Adult  Mental
             Health Services Berkshire, outlining  'panic  attacks  in  the
             past' with current  feelings  of  'anxious/panicky/depressed'.
             Around this time, it was found she  was  pregnant  and  wasn't
             keen on medical therapy to treat her symptoms.  There were  no
             thoughts of suicide or self-harm, though she was  experiencing
             'negative  thoughts  towards  her  baby'.   She  was   offered
             diazepam 5mg and sertraline 50mg though it  is  not  clear  if
             these were taken at the time.

             24-Jul-14. She was reviewed by  the  mental  health  services.
             Please find attached report.

             Over the following week, she was reviewed twice,  and  further
             guidance was sought from the psychiatric services with  regard
             to optimizing her medication in light of  her  pregnancy.   It
             was decided that Promethazine should be started.

             01-Aug-14. She was reviewed again by mental  health  services.
             They comment on a  history  of  panic  attacks,  which  'first
             started in adolescence' and she  contributes  their  onset  to
             'severe  domestic  abuse  her  family  experienced  from   her
             alcoholic father'.   It  describes  on  finding  out  she  was
             pregnant, these attacks have come back in  'severe  form'  and
             'of equally severe degree'.  She is afraid to leave the house.
              She has also developed 'secondary depressive symptoms'.

             She was referred to talking therapies, given written material,
             given  crisis  information,  and  it  was   stated   that   no
             safeguarding concerns for her child were raised at the time  -
             equally, it was denied that any domestic violence  was  taking
             place.  The patient was referred to the  high  risk  pregnancy
             team in light of the above situation.

             In early pregnancy, she was progressing with  pregnancy  well,
             taking  sertraline  100mg  OD.   She  was  attending   talking
             therapies - 'finding it helpful'.

             18-Dec-14. 'Mood stable'.  Still taking sertraline.

             31-Dec-14. 'Less anxious better sleep good support'.

             03-Jun-15. Post-partum  review.   Still  taking  sertraline  -
             'helps with anxiety sleep'.

             05-Nov-15. 'doing very well no  insomnia  no  panic  attacks',
             'came with supportive partner who agrees  she  is  doing  very
             well'.

             31-Aug-16. Letter written stating 'her partner [HK]  has  been
             supporting her at appointments for her and  her  children  [L]
             and [D]'

             After this date, there is no further  mention  of  her  mental
             health status, nor mention of panic attacks or similar, in her
             notes for me to comment on.

             Specifically, she was under the support of talking  therapies,
             as well  as  the  surveillance  of  the  adult  mental  health
             services (Berkshire) during her period of time with depressive
             symptoms and panic attacks".

     43. Annexed to that  letter,  at  [AB/F3-6]  are  progress  notes  from
         Berkshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust.  The following  extracts
         from the notes are relevant:

             "28 Jul 2014...

             [S]'s  short  assessment  of  [Ms  N]  and  her   symptomology
             discussed.  It appears that [Ms N] is having anxiety  symptoms
             than depression [sic] associated with the pregnancy.  In  view
             of her early pregnancy I discussed suitable medication  regime
             with the Pharmacist  ...suggested  sertraline  50mg  daily  to
             start with and to  help  with  agitation  and  panic  attacks,
             promethazine 25mg prn up to tds was recommended and this  dose
             can be increased if necessary to 50mg mg prn tds.

             ...

             28 Jul 2014...

             ...

             T/c to [Ms N] to inform her of h/v opportunity on 01/08/14  at
             1300pm.

             Brief triage of current needs and risks involved.

             Perinatal case - approx. 2-4 weeks, no formal confirmation yet
             - planned pregnancy

             She has one 2 year old son - [D] ...

             Throughout our conversation [Ms N] remained tearful ...

             She reported having some history of anxiety and panic  attacks
             in her adolescence (19-20s) - which was  related  to  domestic
             violence from her alcoholic father.

             Was never  formally  diagnosed,  at  that  time  treated  with
             diazepam PRN - her mental state stabilised  after  moving  out
             from family home.

             Current episode started last week with strong panic  attack  -
             [Ms N] felt unable to find any explanation or triggers to  it.
             Today she reported having further panic attack.  These appears
             to severely affecting her functioning.

             At the time of her  attack  [Ms  N]  reports  struggling  with
             palpitations, hyperventilation,  dizziness,  numbness  in  her
             limbs, hot flashes.

             In the last couple of  days  her  general  anxiety  increased,
             complains of agitation  and  impulsivity,  feeling  guilty  of
             looking after her little son without irritability, tearful  ++
             at the time of call.

             Denied current suicidal or  self-harming  thoughts.   Risk  to
             child requires further assessment - currently supported by her
             husband, has one sister  in  Woking,  who  would  be  able  to
             support [Ms N] with childcare if required.

             ...

             28 Jul 2014...

             ...

             She states that she is feeling very unwell and has  not  taken
             her antidepressant or diazepam as her GP has  advised  her  to
             think about the effects on the baby.

             ..."

     44. Ms N has a sister living in the UK (Woking), but her sister has her
         own child who suffers from autism.  Her sister cares for the  child
         while her sister's partner works full-time and therefore Ms N  says
         in her second statement that her sister would be unable  to  assist
         with childcare if the Appellant  were  deported.   The  Appellant's
         cousins live in the UK.  However, they too  have  their  own  young
         children and Ms N says would be unable to assist.

     45. Ms N has been in a relationship  with  the  Appellant  since  2007.
         They moved in together in 2012.  They are  engaged  to  be  legally
         married.  They have been engaged since 2008 but she would  like  to
         get married in Poland where her family all live.  It  is  important
         to her to marry in a Christian church.  They have  been  unable  to
         travel to Poland to marry due to the uncertainties  concerning  the
         Appellant's immigration position.

     46. In Ms N's Second Statement, she says  that  her  "life  would  fall
         apart" if the Appellant were deported.  She would not  be  able  to
         work and support her family.  She  would  not  be  able  to  afford
         childcare and would not  have  support  of  extended  family.   The
         Appellant's absence would "have a huge impact on all of us mentally
         and physically". She fears that she would have a breakdown  if  the
         Appellant were not there as she "won't be mentally able  to  cope".
         She says that the  children  "will  be  besides  themselves".   She
         reiterates that they have become worried even when the Appellant is
         only going to the shops.  In relation to [L]'s speech problems, she
         confirmed that he has so far undergone three therapy  sessions  and
         additional lessons arranged by the school and they have completed a
         form  for  further  referral/assessment.  [L]'s  difficulties   are
         confirmed by documents from  Berkshire  Healthcare  NHS  Foundation
         Trust at [AB/C29-31].  I note from  those  documents  that  [L]  is
         being exposed to both the English and Polish language but there  is
         no suggestion that  he  is  being  taught  to  speak  his  father's
         language(s).

    Other Evidence

     47. At [AB/C1-2], there is a statement from [NA]  who  is  one  of  the
         Appellant's cousins.  He  confirms  the  contact  between  the  two
         families  and  says  that  "[w]e  are  there  for  each  other  for
         everything".   He  says  that  the  Appellant  is  "an  outstanding
         husband and father" and "the backbone of that family".  As  to  the
         impact of deportation, he says that he is "very close to his family
         and I know they will not be able to  manage  a  day  without  him."
         [NA] did not attend to give evidence.

     48. In relation to the  Appellant's  offence,  the  Judge's  sentencing
         remarks dated 15 September 2009 appear at [RB/D2-3] as follows:

             "You have pleaded guilty to having a false identity  document,
             a travel document, which you were using to travel on and  also
             you have pleaded guilty to seeking leave to enter this country
             by deception.  The circumstances are that that travel document
             was obtained with your  photograph  in  it,  but  in  a  false
             identity, somebody else's identity, and you  have  been  using
             that document since.

             The Courts  have  made  it  very  clear  that  use  of  forged
             documents in this way is regarded very seriously and  that  is
             because the intention behind such offences and the  effect  of
             them is to undermine checks on people's identity and on  their
             right to be in this country and to travel and that is why  the
             Courts have indicated custodial sentences will follow.

             Some time has been taken up in this case to establish properly
             what your status is in this country and it is  quite  apparent
             to me, in the light of what has been put before me,  that  the
             position is that you have at no stage been  granted  leave  to
             remain in this  country,  but  whatever  the  outcome  of  any
             current application might be, that is the  situation  and  was
             the situation at the time of your arrest in June.

             I give you credit for  your  plea  of  guilty.   I  take  into
             account what is said about you and the fact that you have been
             here  some  time  without  coming  to  the  attention  of  the
             authorities.

             In all of the circumstances, the sentence will be  one  of  12
             months' imprisonment.

             ...

             It is an automatic consequence of the  sentence  that  I  pass
             that  you  will  be  subject  to  the  automatic   deportation
             provisions of Section 32 of the Borders Act.

             In view of the nature of this offence, I recommend  that  when
             you have served the sentence you be deported,  but  ultimately
             that is a  decision  not  for  me,  but  for  the  immigration
             authorities.

             That sentence is concurrent on each count.

             ..."

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

     49. I follow the approach to the issues as  set  out  at  [5]  to  [14]
         above.  I therefore begin with Exception 1. It is accepted  on  the
         Appellant's behalf that he cannot satisfy that exception.  However,
         it may be relevant to consider the reasons why he cannot meet  that
         exception and the extent to which he can, when assessing  the  case
         outside the exceptions.  Although I accept that the  Appellant  has
         been in the UK for more than  half  his  life,  he  has  been  here
         unlawfully and therefore cannot  satisfy  the  first  part  of  the
         exception.

     50. There is limited evidence as  to  the  degree  of  the  Appellant's
         social and cultural integration in the UK which is  perhaps  to  be
         expected given that he has been unable to work  for  at  least  the
         past ten years.  It is not clear whether he was working  unlawfully
         prior to that date using the false document confirming that he  had
         indefinite leave to remain.  There is a document at [RB/I24]  which
         suggests that the Appellant was working in 2001, 2002 and 2005  and
         prior to that undertook college courses in the UK in  IT,  English,
         Mathematics and Geography.   As a minor when he arrived,  he  would
         have been entitled to education.  He may also have been entitled to
         work as an asylum  seeker  before  his  claim  was  determined  but
         certainly his work in 2005 would appear to have  been  carried  out
         unlawfully (presumably using the false status document).   Whatever
         the position, I have little if any evidence as to  the  Appellant's
         integration in that context.  I also accept that the Appellant  has
         been here unlawfully throughout his stay and to that extent  cannot
         be said to be compliant with the  law.   That  undermines  to  some
         extent a claim to be integrated.

     51. I note however that the  Appellant  speaks  excellent  English  and
         there is evidence which was not challenged that he has  family  and
         friends in the UK as well as his own family.  He also describes the
         UK as "his home".  Although, he committed an offence over a  period
         of time, that was his only offence (other than remaining in the  UK
         without leave) and came to  an  end  over  ten  years'  ago.  I  am
         prepared to accept on the  evidence  I  have  and  in  the  limited
         context in which this issue can be considered, that  the  Appellant
         is socially and culturally integrated.

     52. I also accept that the Appellant's return  to  Iraq  will  be  very
         difficult  for  him.   I  accept  (since  the  evidence   was   not
         challenged) that he has no family members  in  Iraq.   He  has  not
         lived there for over twenty years.   He  says  that  he  no  longer
         speaks Arabic and cannot read or write in Kurdish.   I  accept  his
         evidence in that regard.  I have noted that the children are  being
         taught to speak Polish but not their father's language(s).  He also
         speaks excellent English and I infer that this is the way in  which
         he and Ms N communicate.  There is no suggestion  that  she  speaks
         his language(s) nor he her language.  However, he grew up  speaking
         Arabic and/or Kurdish and to the extent that  he  was  educated  in
         Iraq, he would have learnt to read and write in those languages.  I
         have no reason to think that he could not pick up  the  language(s)
         again were he to return.  After all, he has learnt to speak English
         to a very high standard notwithstanding that he did not arrive here
         until he was aged seventeen and did  not  apparently  receive  much
         education in this country.

     53. There is no doubt that the situation in Iraq is  volatile  and  the
         Appellant may face difficulties in settling back there (whether  in
         Baghdad  or  the  Kurdish  areas).    Perhaps   surprisingly,   the
         Appellant's evidence about that situation was very  limited  and  I
         can only base my findings on the evidence before  me.   Although  I
         find that the Appellant will face significant obstacles  on  return
         based on his absence from that country, the general  situation  and
         lack of family members there, I cannot find on  the  evidence  that
         those are very  significant  based  on  the  high  threshold  which
         applies.

     54. I turn then to the crux  of  the  Appellant's  case  regarding  the
         impact on Ms N and the two children of the Appellant's  deportation
         (Exception 2).

     55. I can deal very shortly with whether it would be unduly  harsh  for
         them to travel to Iraq with the Appellant.  The Respondent concedes
         at [92] of her decision letter under appeal that it would be unduly
         harsh for the two children to go to Iraq.   Accordingly,  for  that
         reason, it is  accepted  that  Ms  N  could  not  return  with  the
         Appellant.

     56. I therefore have to consider only whether it is unduly harsh for Ms
         N and the two children to remain in the UK without  the  Appellant.
         I have regard to the case-law  and  to  the  high  threshold  which
         "unduly harsh" entails.  I also accept that  what  is  required  is
         something which goes beyond the normal consequence  of  deportation
         for a family.

     57. If I am considering the position of the two children taken alone, I
         find that it would not be unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK
         and for the Appellant to return to Iraq. I accept the evidence that
         they are upset by the prospect of the Appellant  leaving  them.   I
         accept also that I cannot be guided in this regard by  the  effects
         of separation in the past as there has been none (save  when  Ms  N
         took the two children to Poland for two short holidays on her own).
          I accept that the children, now aware of the prospect, are anxious
         and have become "clingy" to the Appellant as  a  result.   However,
         none of that is more than would be expected for a child faced  with
         the possibility of being separated from a parent.

     58. I anticipate that [D] would be more greatly affected  than  [L]  by
         the separation as he is older, but both are  of  a  young  age  and
         would adapt in due course.  There is nothing in the evidence  which
         suggests that their education and development  thus  far  has  been
         affected by the prospect of separation from their father.  Whilst I
         understand the reason for the  lack  of  any  independent  evidence
         about the impact on the children,  I  reiterate  that  I  can  only
         decide the case on the evidence before me.

     59. The position in relation to Ms N and of the impact on the family as
         a whole is however more nuanced.    I  begin  by  noting  that  the
         medical evidence in relation to Ms N is not disputed.  As  such,  I
         accept that she suffers from long-standing depression, anxiety  and
         panic attacks which conditions are treated with medication.   There
         is no formal diagnosis.  She has suffered such  problems  from  her
         late teens as a result  of  domestic  violence  from  an  alcoholic
         father.  They emerged again acutely when she fell pregnant with her
         youngest son.  She also suffered a further attack in early  January
         which she has connected with these proceedings.  I see no reason to
         disbelieve her as to the causes  of  her  problems  or  indeed  the
         impacts of her condition.

     60. Although there is no formal medical report dealing with the reasons
         for her mental health issues, it appears from the evidence that she
         suffers acutely at times of stress and I can  readily  accept  that
         the prospect of  the  Appellant's  deportation  and  the  connected
         appeal proceedings would generate sufficient  stress  to  spark  an
         attack (although I do note that the GP's letter does not  say  that
         she has suffered any such attacks previously, for  example  at  the
         time of the 2016 or 2019  decisions  to  deport).    Based  on  the
         totality of the evidence, however, I accept that the deportation of
         the Appellant would likely exacerbate her condition.

     61. Ms N does however have her sister in the UK as well as  members  of
         the Appellant's family with whom she  has  close  contact  and  who
         could be expected to help her through any such episodes.   She  has
         also sought medical help at times of crisis and could  be  expected
         to do that again.  I realise that this is  no  substitute  for  the
         support of the Appellant, but  she  would  have  other  avenues  of
         support to help her cope.

     62. There is however the additional question of the  impact  which  any
         exacerbation of her symptoms would have on the children.   On  that
         point, I have little evidence.  However, I have evidence  that  the
         Appellant  is  the  children's  main  carer  and  that  the  recent
         exacerbation of Ms N's symptoms has meant that she has been  unable
         to sleep and has therefore lacked energy to deal with the children.
          It can readily be inferred that, were she to be left to  care  for
         the children alone, a deterioration  in  her  mental  health  would
         impact on her ability to look after the children which is, in turn,
         likely to affect their wellbeing.

     63. Again, though, Ms N has her sister and the Appellant's  cousins  to
         help her through any such periods.  I recognise that  they  are  no
         substitute for  the  Appellant.   I  accept  the  evidence  of  the
         Appellant and Ms N that she depends on him for support.  I was able
         to observe for myself the effect it had on her ability to cope with
         the hearing that he was able to sit next to her  and  comfort  her.
         However, although I  take  account  of  what  she  says  about  her
         sister's circumstances and those of the Appellant's cousins, the GP
         notes that, when she became ill recently, she went to stay with her
         sister.  [NA] says in his statement that he and the Appellant  (and
         therefore their respective families) are there for each  other  for
         everything.  The fact that the Appellant's cousins have  their  own
         families and young children does not on the evidence  prevent  them
         from helping Ms N  and  the  children  were  the  Appellant  to  be
         deported.

     64. I have carefully  considered  the  evidence  about  the  impact  of
         deportation of the Appellant on Ms N and the children  and  whether
         it can be said that the impact is more than the commonplace  effect
         of separation of a family.  I accept that, particularly based on Ms
         N's mental health, the likely adverse effect of deportation in that
         regard and the  potential  effect  of  such  deterioration  on  her
         ability to care for the children, the impact is likely to  be  very
         harsh.  Taken alone, however, and particularly  given  the  limited
         independent evidence as to  impact  on  her  medical  condition,  I
         cannot accept that the impact is shown to be unduly harsh.

     65.  However,  I  take  into  account  my  assessment  in  relation  to
         Exceptions  1  and  2  alongside  other   relevant   factors   when
         considering whether there are very  compelling  circumstances  over
         and  above  those  exceptions  (applying  Section  117C  (6)).   In
         carrying out that assessment, I follow the "balance sheet" approach
         advocated in Hesham Ali.

     66. I begin that assessment by considering the best  interests  of  the
         two children.  As I have already observed, the children  have  been
         brought up with both parents.  This is not a case where  they  have
         been  separated  from  their  father  before  due  to  imprisonment
         following offending.  Furthermore, their father is their main carer
         as their mother works full-time.  Although they are at a young  age
         and adaptable to change, they are likely to be the more affected by
         a loss of their father.  I have no difficulty in accepting that  it
         is in their best interests to continue to be  brought  up  by  both
         parents.  Since it is accepted that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
         them to go to live in Iraq, it is clearly in their  best  interests
         that family life with both parents continue in the UK.

     67. Dealing first with the Appellant's family life and  the  impact  of
         deportation and separation on Ms N and the  two  children,  I  have
         already found that this impact would be very harsh  but  not  of  a
         sufficient intensity to be unduly harsh.  I incorporate what I have
         already said about the evidence when reaching that conclusion.

     68. Ordinarily, where family life is formed whilst a person is  in  the
         UK unlawfully, it could be given little weight  in  the  Article  8
         balancing exercise.  However, in this case, I take into account the
         delay of the Respondent in re-considering the Appellant's case.   I
         appreciate that the case of EB (Kosovo) was not  a  case  involving
         deportation.  As such, the relevance of delay as a reason to reduce
         the public interest in removal does not apply.  It was relevant  in
         EB (Kosovo) because of the  effect  of  systemic  failings  on  the
         public interest of  maintaining  the  immigration  control  system.
         There is not the same  connection  between  delay  and  the  public
         interest in deportation of foreign criminals.

     69. However, the first and  second  categories  are  of  relevance.   I
         emphasise that the circumstances of the  delay  in  this  case  are
         unusual.  This is not a case of  delay  in  physically  removing  a
         person following an earlier dismissed appeal.  In  this  case,  the
         Appellant's appeal was allowed on the first occasion  in  2011.   I
         accept that this was  only  in  order  that  the  Respondent  could
         reconsider the Appellant's case, taking into account Ms N's  status
         as an EEA national.  It may be  questionable  whether  that  was  a
         legally correct approach given that no application had been made on
         that basis (as the Respondent  pointed  out  in  later  decisions).
         However, the appeal decision was not challenged by the  Respondent;
         indeed, the appeal was allowed on a concession by the  Respondent's
         representative.  From a lay person's point of view, the fact of the
         appeal being allowed is likely to have given the Appellant and Ms N
         cause to expect a positive outcome when the Appellant's case was re-
         considered.   During  the  five  years  which  it  took  for   that
         reconsideration   and   thirty   months    for    the    subsequent
         reconsideration (for which Mr Tufan could  offer  no  explanation),
         the Appellant and Ms N strengthened their family life significantly
         with the birth of their two children who are now  aged  seven/eight
         and four/five years.

     70. The case of MN-T (Columbia) on which the Appellant also relies  may
         be distinguishable on its facts. In that  case  the  appellant  was
         someone who had indefinite leave to remain prior to the offence and
         would have satisfied Exception 1 if her offence had led to  a  term
         of imprisonment of under four  years.   Neither  of  those  factors
         applies here. However, in general terms, what is said  at  [35]  of
         the judgment as set out at [13] above still largely applies and  is
         consistent with the first and second  categories  of  delay  in  EB
         (Kosovo).  For those reasons, although  ordinarily,  I  could  give
         little weight to family life formed whilst the Appellant  was  here
         unlawfully (particularly in light of Section 117B (4)), I give more
         weight to it based on the Respondent's  significant  delay  over  a
         period of nearly eight years for  which  no  explanation  has  been
         given.  During that period, the family life which the Appellant had
         formed with Ms N previously was substantially strengthened as  they
         now have two children who have been allowed to grow up to date with
         two parents.

     71. Turning then to the Appellant's private life, although he has  been
         here unlawfully throughout the period, he has been in  the  UK  for
         over twenty years.  For nearly eight years of that period,  he  was
         awaiting the outcome of reconsideration of his case  following  his
         successful appeal in 2011.   I repeat what I say about  the  likely
         effect of that allowed appeal on  the  Appellant's  expectation  of
         being able to remain.  As such, I can give greater  weight  to  the
         private life formed in the UK, in particular in  the  period  after
         2011.  As it is, though, most of the Appellant's  private  life  is
         concerned with his family relationships, in the main with Ms N  and
         his children.  As such, this aspect adds little if anything to  the
         weight to be given to family life.

     72. What is relevant however in  this  regard  is  the  impact  on  the
         Appellant of return to Iraq.  Although the Appellant did not pursue
         his protection claim and his evidence did not focus on the problems
         created by the general situation there (such as travel within Iraq,
         registration etc), there is no doubt that  the  situation  in  Iraq
         will render it difficult for the Appellant to  re-integrate  there,
         particularly since he no longer has any family members in Iraq.  He
         has not lived there since 1999, before the fall of Saddam  Hussein.
         It is therefore likely that he would find the country much  changed
         from that which he left.  He was aged only seventeen when  he  left
         and would therefore have little if any employment history there.  I
         have no evidence as to what education he undertook nor  whether  he
         has qualifications which would enable him to find  work  but  given
         his period of absence, he is likely to find it very difficult to re-
         integrate.  Although I have not accepted that  the  evidence  shows
         that there are very significant obstacles to integration, given the
         high threshold which that implies, the  obstacles  are  nonetheless
         significant.

     73. On the other side of the balance sheet,  I  have  to  consider  the
         Appellant's offence.   I  accept  that  this  was  not  an  offence
         involving violence and that the Appellant is not a risk  to  public
         safety.  However, it is still a serious offence and  one  affecting
         the public interest.  This was not simply a one-off use of a  false
         document such as the use of a false passport in order to gain entry
         and seek  asylum.   It  involved  the  deliberate  obtaining  of  a
         document to which the Appellant knew he  was  not  entitled  in  an
         identity  which  was  sufficiently   different   to   prevent   the
         authorities realising that he was not entitled to it.  Moreover, he
         used that document to obtain other documents to which he also  knew
         he was not entitled which led eventually  to  his  prosecution.   I
         have no doubt that, had he not been caught and prosecuted  at  that
         time, he would have continued to use the documents.

     74. The offending therefore  amounts  to  a  deliberate  and  continued
         practice of dishonesty.  The fact that the documents suggested that
         the Appellant had  an  immigration  status  to  which  he  was  not
         entitled which enabled him to remain in the UK (and  possibly  also
         to  work  illegally)  involves   the   undermining   of   effective
         immigration control.  That is also to be weighed in favour  of  the
         public interest (Section 117B (1)).

     75. As noted at [9] above, when assessing  the  case  applying  Section
         117C (6), it is appropriate to take into account the seriousness of
         the offence within this assessment, not simply on the basis of  the
         sentence passed but also the nature of the offence.  I accept  that
         this offence, whilst undermining of the immigration system and  one
         of dishonesty, is not at the most serious end of the spectrum.   It
         is not one involving violence or of a sexual nature.  It is not one
         involving drugs which has serious  and  long-term  effects  on  the
         wider society and on those who are vulnerable.  Although  I  accept
         that the undermining of the immigration system and dishonesty  does
         affect society at large, its impact is less than  some  other  such
         offences.  This is not a case where  the  Appellant  was  supplying
         false documents to others.

     76. I also accept that the Appellant deeply  regrets  the  offence.   I
         accept that  he  is  not  a  risk  to  the  public.   However,  the
         continuation of risk is not  the  only  factor  in  favour  of  the
         deportation of foreign criminals.   As  the  Tribunal  held  in  RA
         (Iraq), "[r]ehabilitation will not ordinarily bear material  weight
         in favour of a foreign criminal".  That is because, as the Tribunal
         there explains, an individual is expected to comply with  the  law.
         In that regard, although I  also  accept  that  the  Appellant  has
         remained in the UK unlawfully (which is  obviously  not  compliance
         with the law), I give less weight to that factor,  particularly  in
         the period following the offence because he has  been  waiting  for
         the Respondent to reconsider his case.  I also weigh in the balance
         in favour of the public interest, the deterrence  of  others.   The
         deportation of foreign offenders may deter others  from  committing
         similar crimes.

     77. However, the passage of time since  the  offence  is  something  to
         which I attach importance.  I have set out at [69] and [70]  above,
         the impact which the Respondent's delay has had  in  this  case  of
         allowing the Appellant to strengthen his family life.  I give  more
         weight to that family life as a  result.   I  have  accepted  that,
         although the impact of deportation would not be unduly harsh on  Ms
         N and the children, it would still have  very  harsh  consequences,
         particularly if Ms N's health deteriorates to the extent  that  she
         is unable or less able to care for the children.  I emphasise  that
         I do not view  the  passage  of  time  as  diminishing  the  public
         interest in deportation.  That  the  Appellant  has  not  committed
         further offences for over ten years is not of itself a  reason  why
         he should not be deported in the public interest for the reasons  I
         have given.  The impact is on the  level  of  interference  on  the
         other side of the scales.

     78. Balancing the impact of deportation on  the  Appellant,  Ms  N  and
         their children against the public interest  to  which  I  give  due
         weight, this is a borderline case.  However, I have concluded  that
         the balance comes down in the Appellant's favour.  The interference
         in this case  outweighs  the  public  interest.  Deportation  would
         therefore be disproportionate.

     79. For those reasons, I allow the appeal.

DECISION

I allow the appeal on human  rights  grounds  (Article  8  ECHR).   For  the
avoidance of doubt, the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  on  protection  grounds
contained in  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan  is
preserved.


[pic]
Signed:                                      Dated: 24 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02462/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 29 October 2019           |20 November 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               MR JUSTICE DOVE
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H K
                         [Anonymity Direction Made]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr A Joseph, Counsel instructed by Chambers
Solicitors (Slough)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
appeal involves a protection claim and a minor child.   Accordingly,  it  is
appropriate to make an anonymity direction. Unless and until a  tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the Appellant (as  he  was  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal) is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. On the 11th July 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge M.A.  Khan  allowed
         the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  of  the
         20th June 2018 under section 32(5) of  the  UK  Boarders  Act  2007
         seeking to deport the Appellant from the UK as a foreign  criminal.
         This is the appeal by the Respondent against the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal and for ease of reference we shall refer to the
         parties as they were known before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The essence of the Appellant's immigration history is  as  follows.
         Having left Iraq on the 8th July 1999 the Appellant  travelled  via
         Iran and Turkey to the UK where  he  claimed  asylum  on  the  27th
         September 1999. His claim to asylum was refused on the 23rd  August
         2001 and an appeal against that decision was dismissed on the  10th
         March 2003. Permission to appeal against that decision was  refused
         on the 8th May 2003.  On  the  7th  June  2009  the  Appellant  was
         detected attempting to enter the UK using a false  travel  document
         which led to his conviction at Isleworth Crown Court  on  the  25th
         August 2009 for "possessing a false/ improperly obtained/ another's
         identity document"  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  one  year's
         imprisonment and recommended for deportation.

      3. During the course of his determination in relation  to  the  appeal
         against the  decision  to  deport  the  Appellant,  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge noted the findings which have been set out above  in
         respect of the relationship between the Appellant and  [Ms  N]  and
         the conclusion that had  been  earlier  reached  that  this  was  a
         durable relationship. Indeed the relationship continued up  to  the
         time of the appeal decision in the present case, and the First-tier
         Tribunal Judge heard evidence from both the Appellant  and  [Ms  N]
         testifying to their continuing relationship, and to the  fact  that
         they have now have two  children  (aged  7  and  4)  for  whom  the
         Appellant assumes day to day caring responsibilities whilst [Ms  N]
         works in order to enable the household to be financially supported.
         There was evidence that the younger child required  speech  therapy
         and further evidence that [Ms N] suffered from depression,  anxiety
         and panic attacks which meant that on occasions she has had to work
         part time, albeit she  was  working  full  time  when  the  hearing
         occurred.

      4. Against the background of the Appellant's immigration history,  the
         findings reached in earlier appeals, and  the  evidence  which  was
         heard at the hearing, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reached  the
         following conclusions. Firstly, he dismissed the Appellant's  claim
         to  protection  and  under  Article  3  reliant  on  the   previous
         determination in 2003 when the  Appellant's  claim  in  respect  of
         those matters had been dismissed. He went on to  assess  the  claim
         made by the Appellant under Article 8  and  reached  the  following
         conclusions:

             "52.      I find that the Tribunal  were  further  correct  in
             their findings that the appellant had established  family  and
             private life under Article 8 of the ECHR but  they  did  [not]
             come to any conclusion on this point. However, great  deal  of
             water has passed under the bridge since 2011. Further  changes
             were made to the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
             by the  2014  Act.  The  2014  Act  inserted  into  article  8
             assessment section 117A to 117D.

             53. Section 117C inserted Article 8 assessment  as  additional
             considerations in cases involving foreign criminals.

             54. Section 117C states:

                  '(1) The deportation of  a  foreign  criminal  is  in  the
                  public interest.

                  (2)  The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                  criminal, the  greater  is  the  public  interest  in  the
                  deportation of the criminal.

                  (3)  In the case of foreign criminal  ('C')  who  has  not
                  been sentenced to a period of imprisonment for four  years
                  or more, the  public  interest  requires  C's  deportation
                  unless Exception 1 of Exception 2 applies.

                  (4)  Exception [1] applies where -

                      (a)   C has been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
                      Kingdom for C's life,

                      (b)   C is socially and culturally integrated in  the
                      United Kingdom, and

                      (c)   there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
                      C's integration  into  the  country  to  which  C  is
                      proposed to be deported.

                  (5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                  subsisting relationship with the qualified partner,  or  a
                  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with   a
                  qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the
                  partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                  (6)  In the case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  four
                  years, the public  interest  requires  deportation  unless
                  there are very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above
                  those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                  (7)  The consideration in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
                  taken  into  account  where  a  court   of   tribunal   is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted.'

             55. I heard oral evidence from the appellant, his partner  and
             his cousin [Mr A]. I find the  evidence  all  three  witnesses
             generally credible and consistent. I find that since the  last
             hearing in 2011, the appellant's partner has  given  birth  to
             two children, the eldest is now 7 and  the  youngest  4  years
             old.  This  shows  that  the  appellant's  and  his  partner's
             relationship has  grown  great  deal  stronger  and  has  been
             consolidated by the presence of two children in  their  lives.
             Both children are British citizens  and  therefore  qualifying
             under legislation. The appellant's partner is an EEA  national
             exercising her treaty rights in the UK, and therefore she is a
             qualified person.

             56. The appellant has been present in the life of his  partner
             since late 2007 and from day one in the  lives  of  their  two
             sons. I accept that the appellant has  had  a  great  deal  of
             input into the lives  of  his  two  children  and  indeed  his
             partner. I accept the evidence that his partner  suffers  from
             depression, anxiety and panic attacks.

             57. I find that the  appellant's  deportation  would  have  an
             extremely grave effect on the lives of his partner and his two
             children and his deportation would be unduly  harsh  on  them.
             The appellant has lived in the UK since July 1999. He  entered
             this country at the age of 17 and he has spent nearly 20 years
             of his life in the UK, this is more than half his life."

         In the light of these conclusions the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
         allowed the appeal.

      5. Sections 117A-117D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
         2002 make specific provision in relation to  the  consideration  of
         Article 8 in immigration cases. In particular  section  117C  makes
         specific provision for cases involving foreign criminals as set out
         in paragraph 54 of the determination above.

      6. The question of the correct approach to examining whether or not in
         any particular case the effect of a foreign criminal's  deportation
         on a partner or child would be unduly harsh was recently considered
         by the Court of Appeal in the case of Secretary of  State  for  the
         Home Department v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213  in  which  the
         Court of Appeal noted the approach taken to  the  consideration  of
         this question in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53; [2018] 1 WLR 5273.  Giving  the  leading
         judgment in the Court of Appeal Holroyde LJ concluded that in order
         to apply the observations of Lord  Carnwarth  in  KO  (Nigeria)  at
         paragraph 22 that the approach taken to the question should  be  as
         follows:

             "34.      It is therefore now clear that a tribunal  or  court
             considering section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act must focus, not on
             the  comparative  seriousness  of  the  offence  or   offences
             committed by the foreign criminal who faces  deportation,  but
             rather, on whether the effects of his deportation on  a  child
             or partner would go beyond the degree of harshness which would
             necessarily be involved for any child or partner of a  foreign
             criminal faced with deportation. Pursuant  to  Rule  399,  the
             tribunal or court must  consider  both  whether  it  would  be
             unduly harsh for the child  and/or  partner  to  live  in  the
             country to which the foreign criminal is to  be  deported  and
             whether it would be unduly harsh for the child and/or  partner
             to remain in the UK without him."

      7. The application of this approach was distilled by  Holroyde  LJ  in
         the following conclusions:

             "38.      The decision in KO (Nigeria) requires this court  to
             adopt an approach which  differs  from  that  taken  by  Judge
             Griffith and Judge Finch. In the circumstances of this appeal,
             I do not think it necessary to refer to decisions predating KO
             (Nigeria),  because  it  is  no   longer   appropriate,   when
             considering section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act,  to  balance  the
             severity of the `consequences for SAT and the children of PG's
             deportation against the  seriousness  of  his  offending.  The
             issue is whether there was evidence on which it  was  properly
             open to Judge Griffith to find that deportation  of  PG  would
             result for SAT and/or the children in a  degree  of  harshness
             going beyond  what  would  necessarily  be  involved  for  any
             partner or child of a foreign criminal facing deportation.

             39. Formulating the issue in that way, there  is  in  my  view
             only one answer to the question. I  recognise  of  course  the
             human realities of the situation, and I do not doubt that  SAT
             and the three children will suffer great  distress  if  PG  is
             deported. Nor do I doubt that their lives will in a number  of
             ways be made more difficult than  they  are  at  present.  But
             those, sadly, are the likely consequences of  the  deportation
             of any foreign criminal  who  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a partner and/or children in this country. I
             accept Mr Lewis's submission  that  if  PG  is  deported,  the
             effect on SAT and/or their three children will not  go  beyond
             the degree of harshness which is necessarily involved for  the
             partner or child of a foreign criminal who is  deported.  That
             is so, notwithstanding that the passage of time  has  provided
             an opportunity for the family ties between PG, SAT  and  their
             three children to become stronger than they were at an earlier
             stage. Although no detail was provided to this  court  of  the
             circumstances  of  what  I  have  referred  to  as  the  knife
             incident, there seems no reason to doubt that it  was  both  a
             comfort  and  an  advantage  for  SAT  and  the  children,  in
             particular R, that PG was available to intervene when his  son
             was a victim of crime.  I  agree,  however,  with  Mr  Lewis's
             submission that the knife incident, serious though it may have
             been, cannot of itself elevate this case above the norm.  Many
             parents of teenage children are confronted  with  difficulties
             and upsetting events of one sort or another, and have to  face
             one or more of  their  children  going  through  "a  difficult
             period" for one reason or another, and the fact that a  parent
             who is a foreign criminal will no longer be in a  position  to
             assist in such circumstances cannot of itself  mean  that  the
             effects of his deportation are unduly harsh  for  his  partner
             and/or children. Nor  can  the  difficulties  which  SAT  will
             inevitably face, increased as they are by her laudable ongoing
             efforts to further her education and so to improve her earning
             capacity, elevate the case above the commonplace so far as the
             effects of PG's deportation on  her  are  concerned.  In  this
             regard,  I  think  it  significant  that  Judge  Griffith   at
             paragraph 67 of her judgment referred to  the  "emotional  and
             behavioural fallout" with which SAT  would  have  to  deal:  a
             phrase which, to my mind, accurately summarises the effect  on
             SAT of PG's deportation, but at the  same  time  reflects  its
             commonplace nature.

             40. So far as PG's offending history is concerned, I accept Mr
             Lewis's submission that neither the  nature  of  the  offences
             committed after PG had served his  prison  sentence,  nor  the
             overall passage of time, can assist SAT or  the  children  now
             that KO (Nigeria) has made it clear that  the  seriousness  of
             the offending is not a relevant consideration when determining
             pursuant to section 117C(5) of  the  2002  Act  whether  undue
             harshness would be suffered."

      8. In support of the Respondent's appeal Ms Jones submitted  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed  to  consider  or  apply  the
         unduly harsh test. The matters which were set out in paragraphs 55-
         57 of the decision which the First-tier Tribunal Judge  alluded  to
         are common place effects of a foreign criminal's  deportation  upon
         his or her immediate family and were not capable  of  demonstrating
         of how the unduly harsh test had been  passed.  In  particular,  Ms
         Jones  submitted  that  the  reasons  provided  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge for concluding that  deportation  of  the  Appellant
         would be unduly harsh were inadequate and  failed  to  provide  the
         necessary  degree  of  particularity  to  justify  his  substantive
         conclusion that the unduly harsh test had been met.

      9. In response Mr Joseph alluded to the fact that no oral  submissions
         had been made on behalf of the Respondent in respect of the  unduly
         harsh test, and indeed the representative  of  the  Respondent  had
         conceded that "the Respondent's case is not the strongest" ([39] of
         the First-tier Tribunal's decision). Mr Joseph submitted that there
         were particular reasons in the present case which were well capable
         of establishing the unduly harsh test  had  been  passed.  Each  of
         these types of cases were fact sensitive and there was  a  need  to
         carefully scrutinise the  different  relationship  which  would  be
         affected by the deportation. He submitted,  therefore,  that  there
         was no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's conclusions.

     10. We are satisfied that the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  must  be
         allowed  for  the  following  reasons.   Having   scrutinised   the
         determination (including in particular  paragraphs  55-57)  in  our
         view there  are  no  adequate  reasons  provided  for  the  Judge's
         conclusion that the deportation of  the  Appellant  would  have  an
         unduly harsh impact on his partner and children. In particular, the
         reasons provided do not begin to engage with the question  of  why,
         applying the correct approach set out by the Court of Appeal in the
         decision in PG (Jamaica), the circumstances  in  the  present  case
         demonstrate a degree of harshness  which  goes  beyond  that  which
         would normally be involved for any partner or child  of  a  foreign
         criminal facing deportation. It is insufficient that  in  paragraph
         57  of  the  determination  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's
         deportation would be unduly harsh on his immediate family is simply
         asserted. It is necessary when applying the unduly harsh  test  for
         reasons to be provided which demonstrate that  the  decision  maker
         has  engaged  with  the  question  of   which   elements   of   the
         circumstances  of  the  case  being  considered  reach  beyond  the
         inevitable (and no doubt in many cases harsh) repercussions of  the
         deportation for an immediate family member, and go further so as to
         justify the conclusion that deportation  would  have  unduly  harsh
         consequences for the immediate family member or  members  affected.
         That reasoning is required to address not only the consequences  of
         the Appellant's partner and children accompanying him to  Iraq  but
         also the consequences  of  them  remaining  in  the  UK  whilst  he
         returns, alone, to his home country.  That is an exercise which  is
         simply not evidenced by the reasons contained in the  determination
         which we are considering, and this amounts in our view to  a  clear
         error of law on the part of the First-tier Judge in this case.

     11. We received submissions from the  parties  as  to  their  views  in
         relation to the form of any relief, were we to  be  satisfied  that
         there were  errors  of  law  in  the  determination.  There  was  a
         consensus that if the Respondent's appeal was to be successful then
         the appropriate relief would be to set aside the decision of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Khan and for the matter to be  retained  within
         the Upper Tribunal and for directions to be given for a hearing  to
         occur in order to enable the decision to be remade.



DECISION

We are satisfied that the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan
discloses an error of law.   We  set  aside  that  decision.   We  make  the
following directions for a resumed hearing:

      1. Within 6 weeks from the date when this decision is promulgated, the
         Appellant shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the  Respondent
         any further evidence on which he seeks to rely.

      2. The resumed hearing will take place before UTJ Lesley Smith on  the
         first available date after 8 weeks from the date when this decision
         is promulgated, with a time estimate of � day.  If  an  interpreter
         is required for that hearing, the Appellant's  representatives  are
         to inform the Tribunal within 14  days  from  the  date  when  this
         decision is promulgated, indicating the language spoken.


[pic]
Signed:     Dated: 19 November 2019
Pp Mr Justice Dove

