
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02012/2019 (p)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Cardiff Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |On 15 April 2021                     |
|Without a Hearing under Rule 34      |                                     |
|On 12 April 2021                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    K J D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Philips, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
                    (written representation only)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (written representation only)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt who was born on 1 January 2001.  He
    arrived clandestinely in the United Kingdom on 29 July 2017 and claimed
    asylum on 17 August 2017.  The basis of his claim was that he feared  a
    family in Egypt, in effect, there was a blood feud.

 3. On 15  February  2019,  following  an  earlier  asylum  interview,  the
    Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's  claims   for   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 23 December 2020, Judge Malcolm allowed the appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8 of the ECHR but he  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds and  under  Art  3  of  the  ECHR.   In
    essence, as regards the  appellant's  international  protection  claim,
    Judge Malcolm accepted that the appellant would be at risk in his  home
    area as he claimed  but  concluded  that  he  could  safely  internally
    relocate within Egypt.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds, including that the  judge  had  failed  properly  to
    consider the reasonableness  of  the  appellant  internally  relocating
    within Egypt.  On 27  January  2021,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Andrew) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 6. In response to that grant of permission, the respondent filed a rule 24
    response on 5 February 2021.  Paragraphs 2 and 3 of that  response  are
    as follows:

         "2.  The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for
             permission to appeal.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant
             would be at risk in his home area and that  he  would  not  be
             able to  function  independently  due  to  his  mental  health
             issues.

         3.   The Tribunal is invited to set aside the decision of the First
             Tier and substitute it with one allowing the appeal under  the
             Refugee Convention on the basis that internal relocation would
             not be reasonable."

 7. On 10 February  2021,  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Norton-Taylor)  made
    directions  in  the  light  of  the  rule  24  response  expressing   a
    provisional view that the appeal could be disposed  without  a  hearing
    pursuant to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698)  ("UT  Rules").   In  addition,  UTJ  Norton-Taylor
    invited submissions on whether the appeal should be allowed on  Refugee
    Convention grounds - as the respondent proposed - in particular whether
    a Convention ground was engaged.

 8. In response to those  directions,  the  Home  Office  made  no  further
    submissions.  However,  on 22 February 2021 Ms Philips,  instructed  on
    behalf of the appellant, made detailed submissions in which she set out
    that the Refugee Convention  was  relied  upon  before  the  judge  and
    contending that, as the risk to the appellant arose from a  blood  feud
    between families in Egypt, it would be appropriate to allow the  appeal
    on asylum grounds, as the respondent invited the Upper Tribunal to  do.



 9. In  the  light  of  the  party's  submissions,  and  their  unequivocal
    invitations to determine the appeal without a hearing, I  am  satisfied
    that it is in the interests of justice to determine the appeal  without
    a hearing under rule 34 of the UT Rules.

10. The Upper Tribunal is invited to set aside the decision and  allow  the
    appeal on asylum grounds.  Given the Secretary of State's  position  as
    set out in the rule 24 response, it is accepted that the judge erred in
    law in  dismissing  the  appellant's  international  protection  claim.
    Further, it is accepted that appellant (as the judge found) is at  real
    risk of persecution as a result of, in effect, a 'blood  feud'  with  a
    family in Egypt and that it would not be reasonable to  expect  him  to
    internally relocate within Egypt given the judge's findings in relation
    to his vulnerability.  The Senior Presenting Officer's position set out
    in the rule 24 reply is,  in  my  judgment,  properly  based  upon  the
    premise that the appellant forms a part of a  particular  social  group
    (PSG) in Egypt, namely he is at risk as a member of a family and, as  a
    result, the Refugee Convention is engaged (see  K  and  Fornah  v  SSHD
    [2006] UKHL 46 at [39]-[52] per Lord  Hope;  [62]  and  [65]  per  Lord
    Rodger). That, as I have already indicated, lies at the  heart  of  the
    appellant's most recent submissions made by Ms Philips.

11. Accordingly, I accept the Secretary  of  State's  concession  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law in dismissing the  appellant's  appeal
    on asylum grounds.  That decision is, accordingly, set aside.

12. I also accept the respondent's invitation to allow the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the appellant has both established a risk of persecution  in
    his home are and that he cannot reasonably be  expected  to  internally
    relocate within Egypt.  That fear, in accordance  with  the  concession
    made by the respondent in the rule 24  response,  engages  the  Refugee
    Convention and so I substitute  a  decision  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds.

Decision

13. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

14. I substitute a decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

15. The judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the
    ECHR stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               13 April 2021

