
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02576/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 January 2020                    |On 16 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 MOHSIN [I]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by LKW, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Handley  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 24 June 2019.

 2. The appellant has permission to appeal to the UT on the ground set  out
    in his application dated 28 June 2019  as  "errors  in  relation  to  a
    psychiatric report, (i) - (vii)".

 3. Ground (i) says that the reasons for giving the  report  little  weight
    are inadequate; in particular, that in stating  it  was  odd  that  the
    appellant had no prior contact with specialists over his mental health,
    when there was no indication that the appellant knew or suspected  that
    he had any issues.  Mr Winter added  that  the  trigger  for  a  mental
    health assessment was that the appellant was in immigration detention -
    see [40] - a new development, which undermined the observation  of  the
    delay being "somewhat odd".

 4. Mr Clark argued that the judge was entitled to make what he did of  the
    fact that the appellant had been in the UK for 15 years without feeling
    any need for assistance with mental health issues.   The  judge  placed
    the matter in context at [40] of a record of no thoughts of or attempts
    at  self-harm,  no  learning  difficulties,   and   no   confusion   or
    disorientation.  Mr Clark also  pointed  out  that  the  report  itself
    suggested no mental health issues prior to 2018.

 5. Ground (ii) alleges an error of putting the cart before the  horse,  or
    reaching adverse credibility findings in isolation from the report.  It
    founds on the author of the report, Dr Balu, confirming the consistency
    of scarring on the appellant's body with his account of events.

 6. Mr Clark observed that the analysis of scarring was not  the  focus  of
    the report, nor of Dr Balu's expertise.  Dr Balu was simply reporting a
    description from  another  report  prepared  while  the  appellant  was
    detained, and not put before the FtT.

 7. Ground (iii) founds upon no other explanations for the scarring  having
    been advanced, on the basis of RR [2010] UKUT 000274.

 8. Mr Clark submitted that RR is not in point, because this is not a  case
    where the respondent advances  another  specific  explanation  for  the
    scarring.

 9. Ground (iv) is that the FtT was wrong in saying that it was  not  clear
    what criteria were applied to diagnose PTSD, because the criteria  were
    set out in the report.

10. Mr Clark acknowledged  that  the  criteria  were  in  the  report.   He
    submitted that the slip was immaterial.

11. Ground (v) is that the FtT failed to assess the impact of the lack of a
    contradictory report.

12. Ground (vi) is that the finding of little  weight  is  not  supportable
    because there was no challenge to the  bona  fides,  qualifications  or
    expertise of the author of the report.

13. I did not need to hear from Mr Clark on grounds (v) and (vi).

14. Ground (vii) is on the materiality of error about the report. Mr Winter
    submitted generally that if proper weight had been given to the report,
    that might have removed doubts the judge had about the evidence of  the
    appellant, such as at [33 - 34], and so a rehearing was required.

15. I reserved my decision.

16. Ground (i) correctly  identifies  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  new
    situation when a mental health assessment was first indicated, but when
    [40] is read in full, and it is noted that there was no  indication  of
    any prior difficulties, the judge's observation about  the  absence  of
    concern over mental health  problems  over  many  years  appears  quite
    restrained, and no more than appropriate.

17. Ground (ii) has an initial apparent basis in that the judge  goes  from
    saying that Dr Balu confirmed the consistency  of  scarring  to  saying
    that he  has  already  not  accepted  the  account  of  the  appellant.
    However, the decision, read fairly and as a  whole,  is  based  on  the
    evidence in the round; and it is not based on the scarring being  other
    than consistent with the account.  That was simply a feature which  did
    not take the appellant very far.

18. On ground (iii), RR is not in point.

19. On ground (v), the FtT did not need to say anything about  the  absence
    of  a  contradictory  report.   The  decision  is  correctly  based  on
    evaluating the evidence as it stood.

20. Ground (vi) leads nowhere, because the decision was based on giving the
    report such weight as it deserved, in context, and not on any criticism
    of the author.  The decision does not say or  imply  that  Dr  Balu  is
    anything but a qualified expert giving his opinion in good faith.

21. That leaves only ground (iv).  The criteria applied  to  diagnose  PTSD
    judge were stated, and the judge was wrong in thinking that  there  was
    any lack of clarity.  However, this is a minor point in the  evaluation
    of the report, which in turn was not the crux of the evaluation of  the
    evidence.  It has not been shown that this slip undermines the  overall
    adverse credibility finding, reached for several sound reasons.

22. The respondent refused the claim also  on  grounds  of  sufficiency  of
    protection and of internal relocation.  The judge overlooked to resolve
    those points, even in the alternative, which he should have done.   The
    appellant does not appear to have had any real answer to those grounds.
      However, in light of the view I have taken of the grounds of  appeal,
    it is not necessary to consider those matters any further.

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

24. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      13 January 2020
      UT Judge Macleman
