
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02604/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 October 2016                   |On 07 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     M N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr T Hodson, Elder Rahimi solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin, promulgated on 6 July 2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  30
    October 2015 to refuse him leave to enter consequent upon a refusal  of
    asylum and humanitarian protection.

 2. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  am
    satisfied that the reasons  for  making  that  order  still  apply  and
    neither party has asked me to vary that order.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran and is a Sunni Muslim. He married  a
    Shia Muslim without the consent of his in-laws  who  beat  him  and  at
    various points tried to track them down elsewhere in Iran. He was again
    attacked on 31 May 2015 when he had returned to his  home  area  in  an
    attempted reconciliation. His brother  was  seriously  injured  in  the
    attack. Following that incident, the appellant and  his  wife  fled  to
    Oromieh where they stayed for five days before leaving Iran.

 4. The appellant and his wife fear persecution on return and,  given  that
    the appellant's father-in-law was a Colonel in Sepah (the Revolutionary
    Guards), would be able to track them down again on return

 5. The respondent's case is set out in the Refusal Letter dated 30 October
    2015. In summary, she was not satisfied that the appellant is  a  Sunni
    Muslim given that he had said in his screening interview that he was  a
    Shia Muslim nor did she accept that, as the marriage had  been  legally
    registered in Iran, which requires the official consent of  the  wife's
    father, that he had neither given this or that he had attacked them  as
    a consequence of the  marriage.  Noting  also  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's account of where they had lived after they  had  fled  from
    the home area, she was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  been
    attacked by his wife's family. In addition, it was  not  accepted  that
    the appellant had left Iran illegally.

 6. Accordingly, the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was at
    risk on return, noting that in any event there would be  a  sufficiency
    of protection and /or that the appellant  would  be  able  to  relocate
    within Iran to an area where he would not be at  risk.  The  respondent
    was not satisfied either, having had regard  to  the  relevant  Country
    Guidance, that the appellant  would  be  at  risk  on  return  were  it
    accepted that he had left illegally.

 7. The respondent was not satisfied that that it would be in breach of the
    United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to article 8 of the Human  Rights
    Convention to return the appellant, his wife and their child to Iran.

 8. The judge did not accept:

      i) that the appellant is a Sunni  Muslim,  noting  [23]  that  in  his
         Screening Interview he had said he is Shia  Muslim,  rejecting  his
         explanations as to why this had been incorrectly recorded;

     ii) that the appellant's in-laws attacked him  in  Esfahan,  given  his
         answers in his Asylum Interview [25];

    iii) that the appellant's brother had been injured during the attack  in
         May 2015 given the absence of medical evidence to that effect; and,
         that it was  reasonable  to  have  expected  him  to  produce  this
         evidence;

 9. The judge found that: -

      i) the appellant had failed to mention until the hearing that his  in-
         laws had asked questions about him in Esfahan and have also  failed
         in his Screening Interview to  mention  the  core  feature  of  his
         claim, that is that his in-laws  disapproved  of  his  marriage  on
         religious grounds;

     ii) it was possible that the  appellant's  family  disapproved  of  his
         relationship and that the couple had  perhaps  secured  a  Marriage
         Certificate through bribery, but  that  if  a  Colonel  in  Sepah's
         intelligence branch could not in over a decade track down a  couple
         in Iran, it appeared he had no interest in doing  so  or  that  his
         ability to do so was  limited;  that  any  connection  between  the
         appellant's brothers claimed  injuries  and  the  marriage  is  not
         proven, nor were the injuries, nor had it been  explained  why  the
         appellant should be left virtually unscathed and the brothers  were
         seriously injured;

    iii) the appellant had failed to show that he was at risk  in  his  home
         area on account of his religion or marriage;  or,  that  they  been
         tracked down when they moved away, or would be tracked  down  again
         if they moved away again, it not being unduly harsh to expect  them
         to do so;

     iv) having had regard to SSH & HR (illegal exit; failed  asylum-seeker)
         Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC), the appellant was not at  risk  on
         account of his manner of leaving Iran or  on  account  of  being  a
         failed asylum-seeker.

10. For these reasons, the judge dismissed the appeal, dismissing  it  also
    on article 8 grounds, that ground not being pursued at the appeal.

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      i) in failing to take proper note of the fact that the interpreter  at
         the Screening Interview had been an Afghan Dari speaker rather than
         an Iranian Farsi speaker, and thus the judge had erred  in  relying
         on the Screening interview

     ii) in speculating that  as  the  appellant  had  in  his  main  Asylum
         Interview requested that his name  as  recorded  in  the  Screening
         Interview   should   be   corrected   this    indicators    current
         representatives had  gone  through  the  record  of  the  Screening
         Interview and  that  thus  he  had  had  a  proper  opportunity  of
         correcting the error  as  to  his  religion,  unnecessarily  asking
         rhetorical questions;

    iii) In requiring [25] the appellant when asked if he had seen  his  in-
         laws in Esfahan or Karaj, and when he had truthfully answered  that
         he had not, to have volunteered the  information  that  others  had
         reported people asking about him;

     iv) In improperly  requiring  the  appellant  to  provide  a  document,
         preparation of his brothers interviews where the agent  persecution
         had strong connections to the security forces  of  the  country  in
         question;

      v) In concluding that the appellant's father-in-law  had  not  tracked
         down the couple in Iran that was contrary to the cat  that  he  had
         been able to do so;

12. On 5 September 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  gave  permission  to
    appeal stating: -

         "The FTT  has  expressly  considered  the  appellant's  explanation
         regarding the use of the Dari (not far see)  interpreter,  and  was
         entitled to make the findings at  23.  The  FTT  was  entitled  the
         particular circumstances of this  case  to  find  it  difficult  to
         believe that the family would not be able to  get  a  medical  note
         confirming the bare details of the brother's admission.  There  has
         been no arguable requirement of impermissible corroboration.

         Only para 20 of the grounds of appeal is arguable. It is  difficult
         to reconcile the finding that a colonel could not  track  down  the
         couple with the detailed evidence that this is what is  alleged  to
         have happened."

13. As Mr Hodson submitted, the evidence of the  appellant  and  his  wife,
    summarised at [17] and [18] contains accounts of people coming to  look
    for the appellant. It is also clear that the judge did at [28]  proceed
    on the basis that the father-in-law had been unable to track  down  the
    couple.  There is, in this part of the decision, no attempt  to  engage
    with the evidence to the contrary.

14. Mr  Melvin,  for  the  respondent,  submitted  that  the  decision  was
    nonetheless sustainable, it being clear from [16] that  the  judge  was
    aware of the claims that the appellant and his wife  had  been  tracked
    down. He submitted further that at [25] the  judge  correctly  recorded
    that the appellant had not in his asylum interview mentioned  that  his
    in-laws had tracked him to Esfahan, and had said he had not seen  them.
    The  judge  had,  properly,  considered  the  omission   to   be   very
    significant.

15. Mr Melvin submitted further that, as  the  judge  noted  at  [27],  the
    appellant had not mentioned being  tracked  to  Esfahan  until  he  had
    written his witness statement. The judge had thus been entitled not  to
    accept that part of the account, and to note that the appellant had not
    mentioned in his screening interview the core of his account.

16. The difficulty with the respondent's submissions is that, as Mr  Hodson
    submitted, the appellant had in fact mentioned that his whereabouts had
    been found out by his in-laws in his Screening Interview at [4.1]. That
    is something which the judge omitted  from  his  consideration  of  the
    evidence of being tracked.  In that context, his conclusions about  the
    failure to mention being traced at [25] and [27], are unsafe,  as  they
    proceed from an incorrect assessment of the evidence.  Accordingly, the
    judge's observation that father-in-law could not  track  the  appellant
    down is unsustainable.

17. Given that the judge found that parts of the case were not  implausible
    [28], and given that for the reasons noted above, large  parts  of  the
    credibility assessment are unsafe, I am satisfied that the decision did
    involve the making of an error of law, and I set it aside.

18. As it will be necessary to make fresh findings on all material matters,
    I remit the decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  a  fresh
    decision on all matters.




    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on
    all issues. None  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    preserved.


Signed   Date: 4 November 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

