
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02600/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 20178                          |                              |
|Prepared 27 November 2017                     |On 13 December 2017           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     tmn
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Warren, Counsel instructed by Messrs Duncan
                  Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Vietnam, born on  [  ]  1999  appeals  with
    permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Asjad
    who in a determination promulgated on 24 May 2017 dismissed her  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  her  claim  for
    asylum made on 20 February 2017.

2.   The appellant asserted that she was a Catholic  and  had  attended  the
    "Van Phan" Church joining the Youth Catholic Church Group in 2014.  She
    asserted, moreover, that because of her fundraising activities for  the
    Youth Catholic Group she had been placed under  surveillance  and  that
    she, some of her friends and her boyfriend were part of the "Viet  Tan"
    party which criticised the government and advocated human rights.

3.   She further asserted that in March  2015  a  Taiwanese  company  called
    "Formosa" was given a lease of 70 years to build a factory on the  land
    on which her church stood which was an area which relied on the fishing
    industry. It was ordered that the church relocate to another area.  The
    local population could not relocate and  therefore  there  had  been  a
    demonstration in which she had  taken  part  on  behalf  of  the  Youth
    Catholic Group.  As a result her church was demolished  without  notice
    and the congregation had  to  rebuild  a  "church"  to  continue  their
    worship.

4.   She stated that in April  2016  the  Taiwanese  company,  Formosa,  had
    dumped toxic waste in local water which killed a lot of fish, therefore
    further damaging the livelihoods of local people.  She and three  other
    members of the church had  taken  photographs  of  the  dead  fish  and
    samples of water to check if it was safe. When they were returning home
    they were attacked by six or seven men who destroyed their  camera  and
    other evidence.

5.   The appellant was told not to return to the  area.   She  reported  the
    issue to the local police who recorded it  but  took  no  action.   She
    stated that she then felt unsafe because she  believed  she  was  being
    monitored by the government.  She was placed  under  house  arrest  but
    managed to leave her home to go to a friend's house and then leave  the
    country with the benefit of money raised by her adoptive parents.

6.   She asserted that she would face persecution  if  returned  to  Vietnam
    because she would be monitored by the government and would be  captured
    and tortured as other members of the Youth Catholic Group had been.

7.   The Secretary of State accepted the appellant was Catholic  but  stated
    that the existence of the Van  Phan  Church  could  not  be  externally
    verified.  It was not accepted that she would have come to the  adverse
    attention of the authorities or had  a  high  profile  because  of  her
    religious  activities.   It  was  stated  there  were   a   number   of
    inconsistencies in the core of her claim. Her claim was refused and she
    appealed.

8.   In paragraphs 12 onwards of the determination the  judge  set  out  her
    findings of fact and  her  decision.   She  stated  that  much  of  the
    appellant's evidence  was  conflicting,  particularly  with  regard  to
    whether or not she had friends who are part of the Viet Tan party,  and
    that she had little evidence of what had happened to other  members  of
    the church.

9.   The judge pointed to the fact the appellant said that she had  attended
    a YCCG (Youth Catholic Group) conference when she  had  said  that  the
    government prevented the group from attending meetings  but  said  that
    she had organised a demonstration.  The judge did not accept that  that
    could have been the case pointing to the appellant's young age. She did
    not accept the appellant's story of how she had  been  able  to  escape
    from house arrest at her home and pointed to other ways  in  which  the
    appellant's  evidence  was  inconsistent.  She  therefore   found   the
    appellant's claim was incredible and dismissed the claim.

10.  The grounds of appeal asserted that the judge had erred  in  making  no
    findings regarding the "Formosa incident" - the incident when she said,
    that having taken samples and photographs,  she  and  others  had  been
    attacked by six or seven men and beaten up.  It was submitted that this
    was a primary plank of the appellant's claim and the judge should  have
    made findings on whether or not the appellant had been involved in  the
    collection of data  and  photographs,  whether  or  not  she  had  been
    attacked upon her return and whether or not she had  been  deprived  of
    attention.

11.   It  was  also  asserted  that  the  appellant  had  referred  to   the
    demonstration and  to  the  "Formosa  incident"  and  the  evidence  of
    pollution by that company and that she had given that  evidence  before
    evidence regarding the pollution by Formosa was in the public domain.

12.  Ms Warren relied on the grounds of  appeal  amplifying  them  somewhat.
    In reply Mr Bramble pointed out that the  "Formosa  incident"  had  not
    been emphasised by the appellant's representative  at  the  appeal  and
    there was no evidence that the appellant would be in any difficulty  on
    return to Vietnam now.

Discussion

13.  The reality is that the "Formosa incident" is the central plank of  the
    appellant's claim and it was incumbent on the judge to make  a  finding
    thereon.  It may well have been open to the judge to find,  taking into
    account the appellant's age and the lack of evidence  as  to  what  had
    happened to demonstrators -  there  is  evidence  in  the  bundle  that
    demonstrators may have been beaten up or detained briefly -  but  there
    is no evidence of any further ill-treatment  of  demonstrators  or  any
    indication that they are detained - that the appellant would not be  at
    risk on return.  It may, indeed, be that the judge was  correct  to  be
    sceptical about the appellant's claim to have been under  house  arrest
    and somehow to have escaped.  Indeed, it  may  well  be  that  internal
    relocation would be open  to  the  appellant  even  if  her  claim  was
    accepted at its highest.  Be that as it may, however, the judge has not
    make a finding on the material parts of the evidence  and  that  is  an
    error of law.  Having found that error of law it is appropriate for  me
    to  set  aside  the  determination.   I   therefore   set   aside   the
    determination and, taking into account the  provisions  of  the  Senior
    President of Tribunals' directions I consider that  it  is  appropriate
    that this appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing afresh.

Notice of Decision

     The judgment of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

     This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.



Signed   [pic]                  Date  11 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
