
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02178/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th April 2017                      |On 5th May 2017                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AAK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Capel, Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 22nd February 2016
    refusing to grant him asylum or humanitarian  protection  and  deciding
    that his removal would not breach  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet heard the appellant's appeal  on  4th
    August 2016.  In the  'My  Findings'  section  of  the  decision,  from
    paragraph 29 to 47 of the decision the judge considered the appellant's
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.  In the  body
    of the decision it is clear that the judge finds against the  appellant
    in terms of his asylum claim, his humanitarian protection claim and  in
    relation to his human rights appeal.

 4. Under the heading 'Decisions' the judge said:-

         "48. The appeal on asylum grounds is dismissed.

         49.  The appeal on Humanitarian grounds is dismissed.

         50.  The appeal on Human rights grounds is allowed."

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal against that decision.   That
    application for permission to appeal was refused on 15th September 2016
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers.   The  appellant  renewed  that
    application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  that
    application was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on 14th November
    2016.  I note that the application for permission to appeal made by the
    appellant contends that the judge erred in law in her determination  of
    the asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.   I  note
    that the refusal of permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
    deals with all of these grounds including human rights grounds.

 6. In an application made on 15th December 2016  the  Secretary  of  State
    sought permission to appeal on  the  basis  that  the  judge  erred  in
    failing to give reasons for a finding on  a  material  matter.   It  is
    pointed out that, although it appeared from the body  of  the  decision
    that the appeal was being dismissed on all grounds, at paragraph 50  of
    the decision it states that the appeal  was  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.  It is contended that this is clearly a slip of the pen as the
    judge's findings demonstrate an intention to  dismiss  the  appeal  and
    there are no findings on which she would have allowed the  appeal.   It
    is submitted that there are no reasons  provided  for  the  finding  at
    paragraph 50.  Permission to appeal was granted  to  the  Secretary  of
    State by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle on 13th February 2017  on  the
    basis of the apparent error at paragraph 50.

 7. At the hearing before me Ms Capel accepted on behalf of  the  appellant
    that she could not dispute the grounds put forward by the Secretary  of
    State in relation to paragraph 50.  She accepted that  the  appellant's
    application for permission to appeal has already been  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, albeit she noted  that  the
    appellant's representatives had not received the refusal by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 8th December  2016  as  contended  by  the  Tribunal.   She
    submitted that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Astle  may  not  have  been
    correct in the permission to appeal decision when  she  said  that  the
    decision in Katsonga ("Slip Rule"; FtT's general  powers)  [2016]  UKUT
    00228 (IAC) meant that the slip rule could not be used to  reverse  the
    decision.  She submitted that  the  Tribunal  may  have  been  able  to
    correct the decision.  However, she accepted that  as  the  matter  was
    before me that it was appropriate that I decide that there is an  error
    of law in this decision and  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
    appeal.

 8. It is clear from reading the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Turquet that paragraph 50, which purports to allow the appeal on  human
    rights grounds is inconsistent with their findings at paragraphs 44  to
    46 of the decision.  In these circumstances I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge has given insufficient reasons for the conclusion at paragraph 50
    that the human rights appeal is allowed.  In these circumstances I  set
    aside  the  decision  at  paragraph  50  and  remake  the  decision  by
    dismissing the appeal on all grounds for the reasons  set  out  in  the
    body of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.  I set aside that decision and remake it by dismissing the  appeal
    on all grounds.

10. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 3rd May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable, therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 3rd May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
