
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02826/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th June, 2016                            |On 11th August 2016           |
|Dictated 24th June 2016                       |                              |
|Signed 28th June 2016                         |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                        MISS PATRICIA ESTHER MURUNGU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Muzenda, Longfellow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born on 8th October, 1979 in Harare, Zimbabwe and  is
    a citizen  of  Zimbabwe.   She  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  21st
    December, 1999 with entry clearance as a visitor valid for  six  months
    until 23rd June, 2000.  On 26th July, 2000 she applied for an extension
    of her leave to remain as a student.  This was granted on  9th  August,
    2000 until 30th September, 2001.  On 25th July, 2001  she  applied  for
    leave to remain as a student. This was granted on 17th August, 2001 and
    gave her leave to remain until 28th July, 2002.  On 15th July, 2002 she
    applied for an extension of leave to remain as a student and  that  was
    granted on 2nd August, 2002 giving her leave until 31st August, 2003.

2.   On 11th August, 2003 she  again  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student and this was granted on the same date and she was  given  leave
    until 31st October, 2004.  On 20th October, 2004  she  applied  for  an
    extension of leave as a student.  The application was rejected on  18th
    November, 2004, because the required documents had not been  submitted.
    She was issued with a letter in which she was told that she had 28 days
    to reply and that if she did not return her application within 28  days
    in a manner that complies with the requirements her  application  would
    be invalidated and the fee if any would be  refunded.   In  that  event
    should she wish to apply for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  she
    would have to make a new application.

3.   The appellant reapplied on 14th December, 2004,  but  this  application
    was also rejected on  23rd  December,  2004,  because  the  information
    required was still not provided.  On 18th January,  2005,  she  made  a
    valid application for leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student and this was granted on 3rd March, 2005.  She was  given  leave
    until 31st December, 2006.  On 22nd December,  2006,  she  applied  for
    leave to remain as a student and this application was granted  on  24th
    January, 2007, giving  her  leave  until  30th  June,  2007.   On  26th
    February, 2007, the appellant applied for leave as a dependent  spouse.
    This application was granted on 14th March, 2007 and  she  was  granted
    leave until 14th March,  2012.   On  10th  January,  2009,  her  spouse
    contacted the Home Office and informed them that their relationship had
    ended and that the appellant and he were no longer living together.

4.   The appellant's leave was curtailed on  11th  March,  2009  and  notice
    sent to her address twice, first on 11th March, 2009 and then again  on
    26th March, 2009.  The appellant then applied  for  settlement  on  the
    basis of her long residence.  Her son who had been born to her on  11th
    November, 2007, was included  as  a  dependant.   The  application  was
    refused on 26th June, 2011.

5.   The appellant claimed asylum  on  11th  June,  2015.   The  appellant's
    application was refused and she appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

6.    In  a  determination  promulgated  on  26th  April,  2016,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Petherbridge dismissed her asylum appeal and  her  human
    rights appeal.

7.   The judge noted that the appellant had been a supporter of the MDC  but
    only since 2009, despite having arrived in the United Kingdom in  1999.
    Having spent a considerable amount of time in the United Kingdom  as  a
    student and married a Zimbabwean national  by  whom  she  had  had  one
    child, she then claimed asylum.   The appellant told the judge that her
    marriage broke up on account of his support for ZANU-PF.

8.   The appellant maintained that she had  received  threatening  telephone
    calls, which she assumed were from members of ZANU-PF, during which she
    was threatened if she continued to support the MDC.  She told the judge
    that she thought she had received  three  such  calls.   The  appellant
    explained that the leader of her MDC branch was going  to  provide  her
    with a letter confirming that she had complained to him about receiving
    threatening telephone calls, but no letter had  been  produced  to  the
    judge. The judge thought that it  was  simply  not  credible  that  the
    appellant would not have pursued the letter with more vigour, since  it
    would have provided her  with  corroborative  evidence  of  her  claim.
    There appeared to be no reason why her confirmatory  letter  could  not
    have been obtained, given that one had been offered.

9.   The judge rejected the  appellant's  evidence  that  she  had  received
    threatening telephone calls.  She had only been involved with  the  MDC
    since 2009, some ten years after she arrived in the United Kingdom, and
    the level of her involvement could not be regarded  as  being  anything
    other than at low level and hardly likely to be of any interest to  the
    authorities, were she to be retuned to Zimbabwe.  He  reminded  himself
    of the country guidance in EM & Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]
    UKUT 98 and noted her evidence that she came from  the  rural  area  of
    Rusape.  He suggested that that evidence was at  issue  with  what  the
    appellant had said at her initial  interview  recorded  at  B4  of  the
    respondent's bundle, when the appellant claimed to have  been  born  in
    Harare.  That was the only place mentioned in her documents in  support
    of her application and an address in  Harare  was  given  as  her  last
    address in Zimbabwe during the appellant's interview.

10.  The judge did not believe that if returned to Zimbabwe,  the  appellant
    would be returning to a family in a  rural  area  and  neither  did  he
    believe that if returned to  Harare  she  would  face  any  significant
    difficulties, he having found that she had no significant MDC  profile.
    He concluded that the appellant's home was in Harare and could find  no
    objective evidence  to  support  a  finding  that  there  would  be  no
    employment prospects were she to be returned.  He noted that she had  a
    diploma in nursing and had considerable experience as a care worker.

11.  The judge rejected her  evidence  that  she  had  been  the  victim  of
    threatening phone calls made against her by members  of  ZANU-PF  as  a
    result of her MDC activities and described her MDC  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom as not placing her beyond the having a low profile.   He
    found that she would not be at any risk on  return  and  dismissed  her
    claim. The appellant sought and obtained permission  to  challenge  the
    determination.

12.  Addressing me, the appellant's solicitor expanded upon the  grounds  of
    challenge.  He suggested that the judge was wrong to suggest  that  the
    appellant would return to Harare, because her home was not  in  Harare,
    it was in Rusape.  That was the area that she would go to but  it  was,
    he suggested, an area of serious risk.

13.  I asked him what evidence he had that it was an area  of  serious  risk
    and he referred me to an article starting at paragraph 20 of his bundle
    published by the Guardian  dated  18th  June,  2008  referring  to  the
    herding of people from Rusape into an open field by soldiers  from  the
    ruling party and telling the crowd that "your vote is your bullet".  Mr
    Muzenda confirmed that he had no evidence today that there was any risk
    in Rusape now.

14.  Mr Muzenda  suggested  that  the  judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim to have  been  threatened  by  ZANU-PF  members  were
    inadequate.  He went on to explain that it was necessary for a judge to
    indicate precisely where in Harare the appellant would go.  This he had
    failed to do.  The appellant would  in  fact  return  to  her  home  in
    Rusape.  I asked him whether she had family members there and  he  told
    me that she did.  I pointed out to him that in her  interview  she  had
    claimed that her last address in Zimbabwe was in Harare and had given a
    full address for the property she had lived in.

15.  Mr Muzenda continued  by  suggesting  that  the  judge  had  based  his
    findings on the record  of  interview,  but  the  statement  which  the
    appellant had made and which had been  prepare pared in  readiness  for
    the hearing made it quite clear that the appellant  comes  from  Rusape
    and not the home area.  Finally, he suggested that the judge  had  made
    no finding as to the appellant's declared intention  to  continue  with
    her activities on her return.

16.  Mr Duffy referred me to what the judge had said at paragraph 48 of  his
    determination.  The  judge  clearly  found  the  appellant  not  to  be
    credible, because he rejected her claim that she had been the victim of
    threatening phone calls made against her by members of ZANU-PF.

17.  In relation to the appellant's home in Zimbabwe,  the  Tribunal  in  CM
    (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 make it
    clear that the issue of what is a person's home  for  the  purposes  of
    internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of  fact  and  is  not
    necessarily to be determined by reference to  a  place  a  person  from
    Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As a general matter, it
    is likely that a person with a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  a
    major urban conurbation such as Harare  will  have  a  viable  internal
    relocation alternative to  a  rural  area  in  the  Eastern  Provinces.
    Relocation to Matabeleland  (including  Bulawayo)  may  be  negated  by
    discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.  Mr Duffy said  that  this
    appellant had said in her statement that she was from  Rusape,  as  the
    judge had noted, but he had also noted that elsewhere she claimed  that
    she been  born in Harare and had given as her last address in  Zimbabwe
    an address at 7941 Seventeen Avenue, Glen View 8,  Harare.   The  judge
    was entitled to say what he did and to consider her return to Harare.

18.  Mr Duffy urged me to find that there was no risk to  the  appellant  on
    the basis of the judge's findings. She has  contented  herself  in  the
    United Kingdom with low level activity for  the  MDC  and  if  she  was
    determined on her return to Zimbabwe to continue  with  her  low  level
    activity that was not likely to cause her to be at any risk.  So far as
    obtaining a letter from the MDC local leader to confirm  that  she  had
    complained to him about receiving threats  from  ZANU-PF  members,  the
    judge was entitled to note that she had failed to do that (TK (Burundi)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 40).

19.  Mr Muzenda suggested that paragraph 43 of the determination was  wrong.
     It would be wrong to return the appellant to Harare, because,  she  is
    not from Harare but from Rusape, he repeated.  The statement which  she
    prepared in response to the Secretary of State's refusal  letter  makes
    it clear that she is from Rusape and the judge had simply ignored this.
     As to credibility, the  judge  rejects  her  claim  to  have  received
    threats but nonetheless the judge does accept  that  she  was  a  lowly
    level member of the MDC.

20.  I reserved my determination.

21.  In the statement prepared by the appellant for her  asylum  appeal  and
    dated 22nd March, 2016, the appellant does make it clear that  she  has
    no accommodation anywhere other than Rusape which is  her  rural  home.
    However, the judge was entirely correct  to  point  out  that  she  had
    claimed to have been born in Harare and that  it  was  the  only  place
    mentioned  in  the  documents  in  support  of  her  application   that
    identified where she lived immediately before she came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  When she was asked at  her  asylum  interview  for  the  last
    address in her country of origin she gave it as being 7941  Seventeenth
    Avenue, Glen View 8, Harare.  Mr Muzenda suggested to me that this  was
    a  temporary  address  where  she  had  gone  before  making  her  visa
    application to come to  the  United  Kingdom.   I  wholly  reject  that
    suggestion.  If someone is  asked  for  their  last  address  in  their
    country of origin they would hardly give a temporary address that  they
    had only  spent  a  short  time  in  while  they  were  making  a  visa
    application.  I believe that it was much more likely than not that they
    would give their last residential address.

22.  I believe that the judge was perfectly  entitled  to  assume  that  the
    Glen View 8 address had been her  last  permanent  residential  address
    before she came to the United Kingdom.  If  it  had  been  a  temporary
    address I would have expected her to say that "I was only there a short
    while and my permanent address in Zimbabwe was in Rusape" but  she  did
    not.

23.  I do not accept that the judge has erred. He was clearly aware  of  her
    claim to come from Rusape, because he referred to it.  He  had  clearly
    read the appellant's statement.  On the  evidence  before  him  he  was
    perfectly entitled to reject her assertion that  Rusape  was  her  last
    address in Zimbabwe.

24.  Turning to the first  challenge,  I  note  that  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant was that she assumed that these threatening  telephone  calls
    were from members of ZANU-PF.   The  appellant's  evidence  about  this
    appears to be vague. At paragraph 14 of her statement she said this:

         "However a few months down the line Wolverhampton Branch  ran  into
         problems as it was discovered that some in the  leadership  of  the
         branch were on the ZANU-PF payroll, they were informers.   A  trend
         had  emerged  whereby  members  were  receiving,  as  I  also  did,
         threatening  anonymous  calls.   It  turned  out   that   all   the
         information relating to the branch had appasnretly been relayed  to
         the CIO in  Harare.   The  branch  was  immediately  disbanded.  My
         biggest concern is that the regime in  Zimbabwe  is  obsessed  with
         record keeping on its targets."

25.  The appellant's evidence is vague and does not describe what  was  said
    to her in these telephone calls and the judge recorded  that  when  she
    gave evidence she thought she had received three such calls.

26.  The appellant told the judge that she had mentioned the  calls  to  the
    MDC branch leader who had promised to provide a confirmation  of  that.
    The appellant's explanation as to why no  letter  was  forthcoming  was
    that the leader was out of the country.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    suggest that bearing in mind the importance of  the  evidence  and  the
    importance of her asylum application, it was simply not  credible  that
    the appellant would not have pursued with more vigour the obtaining  of
    such a letter.

27.  The  judge  was  not  calling  for  corroboration  of  the  appellant's
    account; the appellant was simply implying that she could have obtained
    evidence but had failed to do so.  That he was entitled to do  (See  TK
    (Burundi) [1999] EWCA Civ. 40).

28.  In the circumstances I believe that the judge was  entitled  to  reject
    the  appellant's  account  that  she  had  ever  received   threatening
    telephone calls and I believe also that he was  perfectly  entitled  to
    find that her level of involvement  could  not  be  regarded  as  being
    anything other than low  level  and  hardly  of  any  interest  to  the
    authorities were she to be returned to  Zimbabwe.   I  believe  he  was
    entitled to find that she could be returned to Harare without being  at
    any risk from ZANU-PF.

29.  Finally it was suggested by Mr Muzenda that the judge erred by  failing
    to  make  material  findings  as  to  risk  assessment  concerning  her
    professed intention to carry on with her political activities were  she
    to be returned to Zimbabwe.  Given that her activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom were found by the judge to be at a low level,  I do not  accept
    that he did err.  Were the appellant to be  returned  to  Zimbabwe  and
    choose to remain in Harare there would be no  reason  at  all  why  she
    could not engage in similar low level MDC activities, if she  chose  to
    do so.





Notice of Decision

30.  For all these reasons I find that the determination of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not contain any error on a point of law.   I  uphold
    his decision.

31.  No anonymity direction is made.

32.  I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

