
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02369/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 1 March 2017                       |On 10 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway

                                   Between

                                     NHA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hawkin
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born in 1999.  He arrived in  the
    UK in April 2015 and claimed asylum in May 2015.  He  was  reunited  in
    the UK with his mother who is settled here.

 2. His claim for asylum was refused by the Respondent on 26 February  2016
    on the grounds that his account that he was a member of  the  Bantu  or
    Jareer clan was not credible  and  that  he  faced  no  risk  of  being
    targeted by Al-Shabaab.  Reliance was placed on  the  country  guidance
    case of MOJ and Others (return to Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]  UKUT
    00442.  At the date of the refusal letter the Appellant's  grandmother,
    aunt and two siblings were living in Mogadishu and it was  argued  that
    it would be reasonable for him to return to Somalia.

Background

 3. The background to be taken into account was that in 2004  following  an
    appeal against refusal to  grant  refugee  status  to  the  Appellant's
    mother, the FTT  (Judge  Turquet)  found  the  Appellant's  mother  was
    lacking in credibility in terms of her clan  membership.   One  of  the
    issues in the current appeal was whether or not the FTT should take  as
    its starting point the 2004 determination pursuant to the  guidance  in
    Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1.

 4. The FTT (Judge Cockrill) at a hearing at Taylor House  on  21  December
    2016 heard oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant,  his  mother  and  his
    brother, who  both  have  refugee  status.   The  FTT  found  that  the
    Appellant was  a  member  of  the  Jareer  clan.   It  found  that  the
    Appellant's account of an incident when his  madrassa  had  been  under
    attack from Al-Shabaab was credible and that he had been the victim  of
    ill-treatment at the hands of Al-Shabaab.  The  FTT  then  went  on  to
    consider risk on return with reference  to  background  material  which
    named the Jareer clan as a marginalised group and which referred to the
    risks of ill-treatment from Al-Shabaab.  The FTT also found that  there
    was no-one in Somalia who could help the Appellant, who is a minor, and
    he would be vulnerable because of his clan membership.  On  that  basis
    the FTT allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.

 5. The Secretary of State  sought permission to appeal which  was  granted
    by a judge on 11 November 2016 for the following reasons:

      a) In making a finding that the Appellant was a member  of  the  Bantu
         clan the judge ignored the fact that his mother in  her  appeal  in
         2004 had not told the truth about her clan membership.   The  judge
         did not consider whether he  should  rely  on  Devaseelan  in  this
         regard.

      b) In making his finding as to the risk on return the  judge  took  no
         note of the CG cases in relation to the Bantu:  see  DJ  (Bantu-not
         generally at risk) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00089.

      c) The judge did not take note and make findings  in  respect  of  the
         Appellant's claimed history  whilst  he  was  in  Somalia  and,  in
         particular,  the  claimed  return   of   the   family   to   rented
         accommodation in Mogadishu.

      d) The judge  did  not  engage  with  the  CG  case  of  MOJ  and  the
         Appellant's claim of specific targeting from Al-Shabaab.

      e) The judge made no finding as to the Appellant's return to Mogadishu
         (or an area of that city) in line with the  guidance  contained  in
         MOJ.

 6. Following the error of law hearing on 21 December  2016,  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge G A Black issued the  following  decision  -  (to  avoid
    repetition it is necessary to note only the later paragraphs):

         "...

         Discussion and decision

         15.  I decided that there was a material error in the decision  and
             reasons.  The FTT failed to make the findings  with  reference
             to risks based on clan membership and risks  from  Al-Shabaab,
             and took no account of country  guidance  cases  dealing  with
             these issues.  It is clear from MOJ and DJ  that  the  current
             country guidance shows that there is no real  risk  of  forced
             recruitment  to  Al-Shabaab  for   civilians   of   Mogadishu,
             including  recent  returnees  from  the  west,  and  that  the
             significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
             There are no clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence  and
             no clan based discriminatory treatment, even  for  minor  clan
             members.   Accordingly,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision
             reached by the FTT to  allow  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds
             cannot stand.

         16.  In respect  of  the  Devaseelan  issue  I  conclude  that  the
             Secretary of State failed to make  out  her  grounds  in  this
             regard.  The 2004 determination was that of a family member of
             this claimant and it was therefore of relevance to the current
             proceedings.  The  FTT  made  reference  to  the  guidance  in
             Devaseelan and indicated that  the  findings  in  the  earlier
             determination were a starting point.  It may be that  the  FTT
             ought to have gone into greater detail and  engaged  with  the
             findings made in 2004.  However, having regard to the evidence
             that  was  before  the  FTT,  which  included  the  claimant's
             evidence, his mother's evidence and his brother's evidence,  I
             am satisfied that there was sufficient evidence before the FTT
             to justify reaching a  conclusion  that  the  claimant  was  a
             member of the Bantu.

         17.  Accordingly, in  consideration  of  the  future  disposal  and
             remaking of this appeal, I direct that the  matter  be  listed
             for  oral  submissions  on  Article  3   and/or   humanitarian
             protection focusing on any risks to the claimant on return  to
             Somalia and/or Mogadishu in line with the  guidance  contained
             in MOJ.

         Notice of Decision

         18.  The Secretary of State appeal is  allowed.   The  decision  to
             allow the appeal on asylum grounds is set aside.

         19.  The matter is to be remade by the Upper  Tribunal  and  listed
             for oral submissions (as set out in paragraph 17 above) before
             the Upper Tribunal.  The findings of fact from the  First-tier
             Tribunal are preserved."

 7. Thus, the matter came before me at the resumed hearing.

Submissions

 8. In his submissions Mr Kotas said he was constrained by the findings  of
    fact.  On that basis the Appellant would be returning as a child,  from
    a minority clan, and with no family there.  His mother  would  also  be
    unable to send remittances.  Nonetheless although the general situation
    in Mogadishu is fluid, the country guidance in MOJ is still  good  law.
    There is not an Article 15(c) risk.

 9. Further, even though he is a child he is approaching  majority  and  he
    could get work.  He is fluent in his native language.  Also, he is  not
    necessarily at risk of finding himself living in an IDP camp.

10. In reply, Mr Hawkin submitted that as a minor, from a minority clan who
    had suffered at the hands of Al-Shabaab and who has no  family  members
    there and who would get no  financial  support  from  family  here  the
    Appellant's case should succeed.  It was a paradigm MOJ case.

11. Mr  Hawkin,  referring  to  recent  news  reports  submitted  that  the
    situation generally in Somalia had got worse.  The number of people  in
    IDP camps has increased.  Such enhanced the Appellant's claim.

Consideration

12. In considering this matter I apply, as required, the facts as found and
    preserved, in light of the  country  guidance  in  MOJ,  in  particular
    paragraph 407(h) (reflected in the headnote at (ix)).

13. It reads:

         "If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu after
         a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the
         city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will
         need to be a careful assessment of all of the circumstances.  These
         considerations will include, but are not limited to ..."  [it  then
         lists eight such considerations].

14. The first consideration is  the  person's  circumstances  in  Mogadishu
    before departure: in this case the Appellant has suffered at the  hands
    of Al-Shabaab, namely, an incident  when  the  madrassa  was  attacked.
    Also, an incident when he was beaten because he was playing football an
    activity seen as un-Islamic and Western.

15. Second, length of absence from Mogadishu: he  has  been  away  for  two
    years, a relatively short time, but  such  needs  to  be  seen  in  the
    context of his being a minor.

16. Third, family or clan associations to call upon  in  Mogadishu:  he  is
    from a minority clan.  Further, he has no family members there.

17. Fourth, access to financial resources: the Appellant has no  access  to
    such resources.

18. Fifth, prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that  be  employment
    or self-employment: again, it must be observed that the Appellant is  a
    minor and he must be dealt with as such.  He has no history of work and
    no record of working on his own.

19. Sixth, availability of remittances from abroad: again such would not be
    available.   His  mother  is  in   receipt   of   benefits,   and   has
    responsibility for her children here as well as herself.

20. Seventh, means of support during the time spent in  the  UK:  he  lives
    with and is dependent on his mother.

21. Eighth, why his ability to fund the  journey  to  the  West  no  longer
    enables an  Appellant  to  secure  financial  support  on  return:  his
    departure was arranged by adult relatives who are no longer there.

22. The guidance (at [407(h)]) continues:

         "Put another way, it will  be  for  the  person  facing  return  to
         Mogadishu to explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the
         economic opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  "economic
         boom", especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees
         are taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away."

23. And (at [408]):

         "It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or  family  support
         who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who  have
         no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on  return  who
         will face the prospect of living  in  circumstances  falling  below
         that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms."

24. Going on (at [409]ff) to consider the circumstances of those living  in
    IDP camps (in Mogadishu), the Tribunal concluded (at  [424,  425])  and
    reflected in headnote (xii):

         "The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those  who
         originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live  in
         the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or facing
         a real risk of destitution.   On  the  other  hand,  relocation  in
         Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with no former  links  to
         the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or
         social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in  conditions  that  will  fall
         below acceptable humanitarian standards."

25. In my judgement in considering the particular, individual circumstances
    of this Appellant I find it to be reasonably likely that as a minor who
    is vulnerable and who because of his youth is unlikely to  be  able  to
    get work sufficient to support himself, who is from  a  minority  clan,
    who has no family there, and no financial support  from  elsewhere,  he
    will be at real risk of having no alternative but to live in  makeshift
    accommodation within an IDP camp.

26. I conclude that on the facts of this case the appeal succeeds.

27. As to whether such should be under Article 15 (b) and/or Article 3 ECHR
    Mr Kotas made brief reference to SSHD v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442.

28. In that case it  was  noted  that  paragraph  408  of  MOJ  raised  the
    possibility  of  a  person's  circumstances  falling  below  "what   is
    acceptable in humanitarian protection  terms."  However,  if  a  Somali
    national brought himself within the rubric of [408], it did not  follow
    that he had established that removal would breach Article  3  of  ECHR.
    Such an approach would be inconsistent with jurisprudence. The position
    was accurately stated at paragraph 422 of  MOJ,  which  drew  a  proper
    distinction  between  humanitarian  protection  and   Article   3   and
    recognised that the individual circumstances of  the  person  concerned
    must be considered (at[31]).

29. Having sought to consider the Appellant's individual circumstances  and
    laying particular emphasis that on return  to  Mogadishu  he  would  be
    vulnerable as a child, I conclude that substantial  grounds  have  been
    shown for believing that if returned he  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm. He succeeds under Article 15 (b). For the  same
    reasons and taking into account the standard applicable to it  he  also
    succeeds under Article 3.

30. Mr Hawkin briefly raised Article 15(c) referring me to several  reports
    indicating a number of deadly attacks in Mogadishu in  2016  and  2017.
    Also, to the Amnesty International Report  2016/17  and  the  US  State
    Department Report on Human Rights Practices for 2015.

31. In MOJ it was concluded (headnote (iv and v) that:

         "The  level  of   civilian   casualties,   excluding   non-military
         casualties that clearly fall within Al-Shabaab target  groups  such
         as politicians, police officers,  government  officials  and  those
         associated with NGOs and  international  organisations,  cannot  be
         precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence   which   is
         incomplete and unreliable.   However,  it  is  established  by  the
         evidence considered as a whole that there has been a  reduction  in
         the level of civilian casualties since 2011,  largely  due  to  the
         cessation of  confrontational  warfare  within  the  city  and  Al-
         Shabaab's resort to  asymmetrical  warfare  on  carefully  selected
         targets.  The present level of casualties  does  not  amount  to  a
         sufficient risk to ordinary  civilians  such  as  to  represent  an
         Article 15(c) risk."

32. Further,

         "It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu to  reduce  further
         still his personal exposure to the risk of 'collateral  damage'  in
         being caught in an Al-Shabaab attack that was not targeted  at  him
         by avoiding areas and establishments that are clearly  identifiable
         as likely Al-Shabaab targets, and it is not unreasonable for him to
         do so."

33. In the news reports to which  I  was  referred,  there  is  mention  of
    attacks against  army  and  police  checkpoints,  against  a  lawmaker,
    against a hotel near the parliament in Mogadishu. These are the type of
    targets referred to above as "clearly identifiable as likely Al-Shabaab
    targets."

34. Such tactics by Al-Shabaab are confirmed by the more general reports.

35. Mr Hawkin did not press his Article 15(c) submission strongly.   In  my
    judgement he was right not to do so.

36. On the limited, more recent evidence before  me,  while  the  situation
    clearly remains fluid, I see no reason  to  divert  from  the  guidance
    given in MOJ.  The Appellant does  not  succeed  under  Article  15(c).
    However, as indicated he succeeds under Article 15(b)/Article 3.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on Humanitarian Protection grounds (Article 15(b)).

The appeal is allowed on Article 3 ECHR grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 6 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway





