


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: PA/02617/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at North Shields                                Decision & Reasons
Promulgated
On 7 September 2018                                   On 25 September 2018
Prepared on 13 September 2018


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. R.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, entered the United Kingdom
           by air with his  family,  and  claimed  asylum  at  port  on  26
           November 2013. The Respondent refused that claim on  4  December
           2014 and in consequence made a decision  of  the  same  date  to
           remove him, and his family, to Pakistan.
        2. An appeal against that removal decision was heard and  dismissed
           by First Tier Tribunal Judge Duff in a Decision promulgated on 4
           February  2014.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
           generally given a truthful account of his experiences in Karachi
           as a Shia businessman, although some details  were  rejected  by
           the Judge as an exaggeration of the original account, and untrue
           [22].
        3. Thus the  Judge  accepted,  as  had  the  Respondent,  that  the
           Appellant had been a volunteer for both the MQM political party,
           and for the MWM religious group,  and  a  member  of  a  workers
           union. The Judge  also  accepted  that  the  Appellant  and  his
           partner in business (who was also his  cousin)  had  received  a
           blackmail demand, and threats to the life  of  himself  and  his
           family in the event of non-payment. The Judge also accepted that
           the Appellant, frustrated at the  inability  of  the  police  to
           simply resolve the problem, and believing that a number  of  the
           members of the union had been similarly targeted, spoke publicly
           about the threats, and the extortion demands, and that  he  gave
           his name to the press in the course of that conference.  Shortly
           thereafter, without awaiting the outcome of the  police  enquiry
           into his complaint, and using family visit visas that  had  been
           obtained in July 2013, the Appellant and his family travelled to
           the UK on 26 November 2013.
        4. In February 2014, and whilst the family  were  in  the  UK,  the
           Judge accepted that the Appellant's cousin and business  partner
           was murdered.
        5. The murder of another cousin, an Inspector of police  (and  thus
           an officer of some rank), on 15  April  2013  had  preceded  the
           Appellant's own  difficulties.  This  murder  was  said  by  the
           Appellant to have resulted from his cousin's refusal  to  accede
           to demands that he release some prisoners. Save that his  cousin
           was necessarily a member of the Appellant's family, and  also  a
           Shia Muslim, it was not suggested  by  the  Appellant  that  the
           circumstances of this cousin's murder had any relevance  to  the
           Appellant's own position other than  to  demonstrate  that  Shia
           Muslims do hold positions of rank within  the  police  force  in
           Pakistan.
        6. Judge Duff concluded that the Appellant did face a real risk  of
           harm in his home area, but that there was no lack of sufficiency
           of state protection  for  the  general  population  of  Pakistan
           against criminal acts, including blackmail and extortion threats
           made by non state agents [27]. He also rejected the  claim  that
           the state of Pakistan systematically failed  to  offer  adequate
           state protection to those who are Shia Muslims.
        7. Permission to appeal was granted against the decision  of  Judge
           Duff by First Tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly  on  25  February  2015
           solely on the basis that it was arguable the Judge had  confused
           the issues of the sufficiency of state protection  and  internal
           relocation.
        8. The matter came before me on 13 May 2015 when I  dismissed  that
           complaint as disclosing no arguable material error of  law.  The
           Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal  my  decision.  When
           the Appellant renewed his application to the  Court  of  Appeal,
           Davis LJ rejected it and  certified  the  complaint  as  totally
           without merit on 30 November 2015.
        9. The Appellant then commissioned a report from Dr Gil Daryn of 13
           July 2016 upon the issues of the sufficiency of state protection
           and internal relocation.  That  prompted  a  series  of  further
           submissions to the Respondent that were  rejected  initially  on
           the basis they did not amount to a fresh claim,  however,  on  8
           February 2018 the Respondent accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
           made out a fresh protection claim, although he went on to reject
           it.
       10. An appeal against this decision to refuse a protection claim was
           then heard and dismissed by First Tier Tribunal Judge Cope in  a
           Decision promulgated on 4 May 2018. The findings of primary fact
           made by Judge Duff in the Appellant's favour were not challenged
           by the Respondent, and in addition Judge Cope accepted  that  in
           the meantime;
           i) The Appellant's cousin had been murdered in 2015,
          ii) The Appellant's brother had received threats in January  2016
              directed against the Appellant
         iii) the Appellant's brother in law had been murdered on  21  June
              2016,
          iv) the suspects in the murder of the Appellant's cousin had been
              released from detention without conviction on bail,  and  had
              since disappeared, and,
           v) that there was a pattern of  events  that  demonstrated  that
              despite the passage of time the Appellant continued to  be  a
              person if interest to the Taleban/LeJ and faced a  real  risk
              of harm from them were he to seek to return to his home  area
              of Karachi.
       11. Judge Cope accepted that Dr Daryn was an expert, and that he had
           given opinion evidence upon the sufficiency of state  protection
           available to the  Appellant,  and,  his  inability  to  relocate
           within Pakistan to avoid the risk  that  he  faced  in  Karachi.
           Judge Cope concluded that there was a  lack  of  sufficiency  of
           state protection for the Appellant [86], but went on to conclude
           that he and his immediate family could avoid the risk of serious
           harm that they faced by relocating within Pakistan [104].
       12. Permission to appeal was granted against the decision  of  Judge
           Cope by First Tier Tribunal Judge Bird on 12 June  2018  on  the
           basis it was arguable  that  he  had  failed  to  give  adequate
           reasons for his rejection of the conclusions of  Dr  Daryn  upon
           the issue of internal relocation.
       13. The Respondent lodged no cross-appeal against  the  decision  of
           Judge Cope, and the Rule 24 Notice of 25  July  2018  lodged  in
           response to the grant of permission  to  appeal  simply  asserts
           that  his  findings  were  open  to  him  on  the  evidence  and
           adequately reasoned, without offering any  particulars.  Neither
           party applied pursuant to Rule 15(2A)  for  permission  to  rely
           upon further evidence. Thus the matter came before me.


      The hearing
       14. When the appeal was called on for hearing Ms Brakaj  invited  me
           to recuse myself, even though she  accepted  that  my  doing  so
           would inevitably lead to an adjournment of the hearing. She  was
           unable to articulate any reason  why  I  should  do  so,  beyond
           pointing to my decision of 1 June 2015, which she  accepted  had
           been upheld by the Court of Appeal. She accepted that there  had
           been no issue of the Appellant's credibility before me, and that
           I had heard no evidence from him. In the circumstances I refused
           her invitation, as one that would serve no purpose other than to
           delay the disposal of the appeal, and waste public funds.


      Internal relocation
       15. Although much of Ms Brakaj's argument turned upon  the  approach
           of Judge Cope to the  issue  of  whether  or  not  there  was  a
           sufficiency of state protection available to the Appellant  upon
           return, the fact remains that, as  set  out  below,  Judge  Cope
           determined  this  issue  in  the  Appellant's  favour,  and  the
           Respondent has not sought to challenge that conclusion [86].
       16. Nevertheless, to the extent that I understood her arguments,  Ms
           Brakaj advanced two challenges; first that Judge Cope's  overall
           approach to the expert's evidence was to belittle it so that the
           expert's opinions upon the issue of internal relocation were not
           afforded adequate weight, and, second that adequate reasons were
           not given for reaching a conclusion upon the issue  of  internal
           relocation that differed from the expert's opinion.
       17. Whilst Judge Cope accepted Dr Daryn as an expert, he did express
           criticism of the expert's report, because the author had made no
           reference to any of the jurisprudence of the Upper Tribunal that
           was relevant to the issues upon which he  was  offering  opinion
           evidence. Thus,  as  I  understand  his  evidence,  Dr  Darryn's
           opinion was that there existed a systemic insufficiency of state
           protection in Pakistan; a position that finds no support in  the
           jurisprudence. Otherwise, Judge Cope accepted  that  Dr  Daryn's
           observations were appropriately sourced [75].
       18. Ms Brakaj's starting point was to argue  before  me  that  Judge
           Cope had materially erred in law by making any criticism  of  Dr
           Darryn once he had  accepted  him  as  an  expert.  That  is  an
           argument that is in my judgement quite untenable.
       19. Ms Brakaj was obliged to accept that the  Judge's  criticism  of
           the  failure  to  engage  with  the  jurisprudence  relating  to
           Pakistan was factually accurate - Dr Daryn did not  seek  to  do
           so. Since it was a factually accurate criticism, it was one that
           it was  perfectly  open  to  Judge  Cope  to  make.  It  is  not
           unreasonable to expect an individual  offering  expert  evidence
           upon such issues as arise in the Tribunal  to  engage  with  the
           Tribunal's previous views, and to explain why, if that be  their
           opinion,  the  position   within   the   country   has   altered
           sufficiently significantly to require a different approach.  The
           failure to do so goes to the weight that a Judge can  afford  to
           that opinion evidence, and in my judgement  that  is  the  point
           that Judge Cope was quite properly and fairly making.
       20. Ms Brakaj also argued that Judge Cope in making reference to the
           decision of AW (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011]  UKUT
           31 had failed to refer himself to a country  guidance  decision,
           since AW did not enjoy that status. I understood her argument to
           be that if AW did not enjoy that status, then Judge  Cope  could
           not properly have relied upon its  content  in  order  to  reach
           different conclusions to those of Dr Daryn  upon  the  issue  of
           internal relocation.
       21. Ms Brakaj did  not  produce  a  copy  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
           decision in AW, or, the decision  of  KA  and  Others  (domestic
           violence risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 to which AW
           refers. Nor did she produce, or  make  reference  to,  AK  &  SK
           (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 569. Both KA and AK &
           SK remain current country guidance. As she was forced to  accept
           when I produced the decision for her, and directed her attention
           to the passage, the difficulty with the argument that Judge Cope
           erred in failing to make reference to current  country  guidance
           is that the Upper Tribunal in AW  specifically  relied  upon  KA
           [34] in reaching  the  conclusion  that  the  claimant  had  not
           established that there was a  systemic  insufficiency  of  state
           protection.
       22. Moreover, as noted above, Judge Cope followed the reiteration to
           be found in AW  of  the  guidance  of  the  House  of  Lords  in
           Bagdanavicus [2005] UKHL 38 upon  the  proper  approach  to  the
           issue of sufficiency of protection.  Thus  he  directed  himself
           (quite properly) to  consider  not  just  whether  there  was  a
           systemic failure by  the  Pakistani  authorities,  but  to  have
           regard to the individual circumstances of the Appellant in order
           to address the sixth and fifteenth propositions  of  AuldLJ,  as
           one whose family members had already suffered the  most  serious
           persecution. Having done so  he  concluded  in  the  appellant's
           favour that the authorities in Karachi were unable to provide  a
           sufficient level of protection to him, and as Ms Brakaj accepts,
           the Appellant can make no complaint about that.
       23. Accordingly I reject Ms Brakaj's first  challenge,  namely  that
           Judge Cope's overall approach to the expert's  evidence  was  to
           belittle it so that the expert's  opinions  upon  the  issue  of
           internal relocation were not afforded adequate weight.
       24. I turn then  to  the  second  challenge,  namely  that  adequate
           reasons were not given for reaching a conclusion upon the  issue
           of internal relocation that differed from the expert's  opinion.
           I note that it is not suggested that no reasons were given,  and
           I also note that the Court of Appeal have recently revisited the
           guidance upon the  issue  of  the  adequacy  of  reasons  in  MD
           (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958.
       25. Judge Cope noted  Dr  Daryn's  opinion  that  relocation  within
           Pakistan would provide at best only short term relief  from  the
           risk faced in Karachi, and the example he  had  relied  upon  of
           families frequently being able to trace  those  individuals  who
           had run away in order to punish them [Daryn #25 ff53] [89].
       26. As Mr Diwnycz pointed out however, Dr Daryn did not identify how
           any of the families who had traced individual members  had  been
           able to do so. He did not for example suggest that there was any
           evidence to suggest that any of them had been able to do  so  by
           corruptly accessing the computerised data relating  to  national
           identity cards, or indeed any other source of computerised  data
           held by the Pakistani authorities. The mechanism  by  which  the
           tracing  of  any  individual  had  occurred  was  left  entirely
           unexplained.
       27. Nevertheless Dr Daryn's conclusion was that  powerful  terrorist
           groups such  as  the  Taleban/LeJ  would  probably  be  able  to
           exercise their influence in order to trace an individual if they
           wished, perhaps  through  use  of  the  computerised  system  of
           national identity cards. Dr  Daryn  advised  that  the  national
           authority would soon be  able  to  identify  the  entry  of  any
           individual into Pakistan, and  their  whereabouts  (even  if  it
           could not yet do so, and even if he offered  no  firm  timescale
           for  the  acquisition  of  that  ability).  If  and   when   the
           authorities could do so, then it was his opinion that  since  no
           state institution was  free  from  corruption,  the  data  would
           become available to those who were interested in it,  and  in  a
           position to  use  their  influence  and  financial  strength  to
           acquire  it.  Thus  it  was  plausible  that  a  group  such  as
           Taleban/LeJ that was continuing to persecute the  Appellant  and
           his family would sooner or later be able to locate him.
       28. It is not disputed before me that Judge Cope faithfully set  out
           Dr Daryn's opinion evidence in this regard. Nor is  it  disputed
           that Dr Daryn's opinion was  heavily  qualified,  or,  that  the
           Judge was required to make an assessment of whether in  all  the
           circumstances of the case the risk of tracing that Dr Daryn  had
           identified was a real one, or, no more than a theoretical future
           possibility. If it were the latter,  then  since  the  Appellant
           faced a risk of harm from individuals based in Karachi,  it  was
           reasonable to expect the Appellant to avoid the  risk  that  did
           exist in Karachi by way of relocation.
       29. Ms Brakaj accepted that Dr Daryn had  never  been  requested  to
           update his opinion evidence since  July  2016.  Thus  if,  as  a
           result of the passage of the intervening  two  years,  the  risk
           that an individual could be traced  through  corrupt  access  to
           data, has become more  concrete  as  a  result  of  advances  in
           technology, without adequate safeguards against the  data  being
           obtained corruptly, then neither I, nor the Judge, were provided
           with evidence of that change. In my judgement it is not open  to
           the Appellant to argue that since a significant period  of  time
           has passed since that opinion evidence  was  delivered  in  July
           2016,  the  risk  must  necessarily  have  increased,  and  must
           necessarily have become concrete rather than theoretical.
       30. As a generic argument that it was unreasonable to expect him  to
           relocate, the Appellant argued  that  his  religion  and  wealth
           would attract adverse interest anywhere in Pakistan. That  is  a
           novel approach, because relative wealth is usually considered to
           facilitate relocation. Thus the Appellant argued that as one who
           would be perceived to be a wealthy Shia he would be at  risk  of
           harm across the whole of Pakistan  from  non  state  agents.  Dr
           Daryn supported this argument  on  the  basis  he  would  be  an
           "obvious target" for terrorist and  extremist  anti-Shia  groups
           throughout Pakistan. The Shia minority  form  some  25%  of  the
           population of Pakistan, and as the  Judge  noted,  the  evidence
           before him did not support the suggestion that they all faced  a
           real risk of persecution on account of their  faith.  The  Judge
           recognised that there had been sectarian attacks,  but  that  is
           not the same thing [102]. There was in my judgement no error  in
           his approach to this generic argument.
       31. The Judge set out the relevant evidence upon the ability of  the
           Taleban/LeJ to trace the Appellant within Pakistan [89-100], and
           his assessment was that whilst the risk of being traced anywhere
           in Pakistan by those currently targeting his family  in  Karachi
           was indeed a theoretical future possibility, it was not  a  real
           current risk [100]. In my judgement it cannot properly be argued
           that the reader of the decision is unable to see  or  understand
           the Judge's reasoning, and therefore the complaint that he  gave
           inadequate reasons must fail.
       32. I note that although neither Dr Daryn, nor Ms Brakaj  sought  to
           engage with it, Judge Cope's decision was also  consistent  with
           the guidance to be found upon internal relocation within AK & SK
           (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 569. No  argument  is
           raised to the contrary before me.
       33. The reality of course is that the argument Ms Brakaj  sought  to
           pursue is that  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence  was
           perverse, because it was not open to him to  disagree  with  the
           opinion evidence of Dr Daryn. The problem with that approach  is
           that permission was  neither  sought  nor  granted  for  such  a
           challenge.
       34. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  4
   May 2018 contained no error of law in the dismissal of  the  Appellant's
   appeal which requires that decision to be set aside and remade,  and  it
   is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 14 September 2018

