
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/02437/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Determination and Reasons       |
|                                |Promulgated                     |
|On 3 October 2016               |On 4 October 2016               |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. C.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mendoza, Counsel, instructed by Ison Harrison
                       Ltd, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor, and  then
           claimed asylum on  8  November  2013.  In  the  course  of  that
           application she said that she had left her two  young  daughters
           in the care of her mother. The eldest was now  studying  in  one
           city, but the youngest lived with her mother in another city, at
           a location that was  unknown  to  the  Appellant's  husband  and
           brother. The lifestyles of her mother and daughters were said to
           be financed  from  the  financial  resources  available  to  her
           mother, and without the need for support from third parties.
        2. The Appellant's application for asylum was refused  on  31  July
           2014, and certified as clearly unfounded. She then made a series
           of further submissions, which  culminated  in  the  Respondent's
           further decision of 27 October 2015 to  refuse  her  application
           once again. This decision is not certified. A decision to remove
           her which was made in consequence, and a s120 notice was served.
        3. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal against those immigration
           decisions was heard and dismissed by decision of  Judge  Hillis,
           promulgated on 13 July 2016. The Appellant's appeal rights  were
           exhausted on 17 October 2011.
        4. The Appellant's application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal was refused on  10  August  2016  by  Judge
           Keane. The Appellant's renewed application to the Upper Tribunal
           was granted on all grounds, by Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington on
           2 September 2016.
        5. Thus the matter comes before me.
        6. When the appeal was called on for  hearing  it  transpired  that
           neither representative had a complete copy of the grounds to the
           application that was made to the Upper Tribunal  for  permission
           to appeal, dated 19 August 2016. A copy, and time to digest  it,
           was provided.


      Error of Law?
        7. It was accepted before me that prior to the  hearing  before  me
           neither party had considered the application to this  appeal  of
           the content of the current country guidance decision in  AR  and
           NH (lesbians) India CG [2016] UKUT 66. Thus neither  party  drew
           the existence of this decision to the attention of Judge Hillis,
           although I note that it was promulgated on 1 February 2016, some
           six months before  the  hearing  of  this  appeal.  Nor  was  it
           considered when the grounds of the application for permission to
           appeal were prepared.
        8. Neither of the representatives at  the  hearing  before  me  had
           appeared at the hearing below. Both accept that aspects  of  the
           guidance to be  found  in  AR  &  NH  upon  the  issues  of  the
           sufficiency of state protection against a  risk  of  harm  to  a
           woman from members of her own  family,  and  the  ability  of  a
           single woman to relocate internally, were relevant to the issues
           raised by this appeal, although the  Appellant's  sexuality  was
           never an issue in the appeal.
        9. The Judge's starting  point,  correctly,  was  to  identify  the
           matters that were  not  disputed  before  him;  the  Appellant's
           identity, her religious upbringing,  her  family  circumstances,
           and the abuse that she had experienced in India in the  past  at
           the  hands  of  members  of  her  family   circle   [23].   Both
           representatives were agreed before him that in the light of that
           background the appeal turned upon the issues of  sufficiency  of
           state protection, and the viability of internal relocation.
       10.  Despite  the  length,  and  breadth,  of  the  grounds  to  the
           application for permission to appeal, it is plain that  they  do
           not challenge the accuracy of the Judge's grasp of the following
           key features of the  Appellant's  case.  She  was  a  woman  who
           presented herself to the Tribunal as fearing a risk of harm upon
           return to India only at the hands of her husband (albeit that he
           might be tipped off as to her return, and her location,  by  her
           own brother). She did not claim a general risk of harm from  the
           authorities, or, from members of  the  population  at  large  on
           account of her race, religion, or political beliefs.
       11. The Judge's conclusion was that, whether or not her fear of  her
           husband was objectively justified, her fear of her  husband  was
           genuinely held [27].
       12. The Appellant presented herself to the Tribunal as a woman of no
           religious faith [13 & 41]. Thus she did not advance her case  on
           the basis that she was unable to practice her faith  because  of
           the fear of the consequence of  doing  so.  Accordingly,  as  Ms
           Mendoza candidly accepted, the assertion in ground two that  the
           Judge overlooked an HJ (Iran) claim, is  without  the  necessary
           evidential foundation.
       13. The Judge accepted, on the basis of the evidence  placed  before
           him, that there was endemic gender based discrimination in India
           towards women, which was particularly  prevalent  in  the  rural
           areas. The Appellant did not claim to  originate  from  a  rural
           area, and the Judge did not conclude that she did. There  is  no
           complaint raised in the grounds to the effect that he  ought  to
           have done so.
       14. Whilst ground one complains baldly that the  Judge  should  have
           allowed the appeal outright because he ought to  have  concluded
           that women formed a particular social group in India, Ms Mendoza
           accepted that mere membership of such a group was not enough  of
           itself to allow the Appellant's  appeal  to  succeed.  Thus  she
           accepted that the approach advocated in ground one would itself,
           if it had been followed, have led the Judge astray.
       15. Ground two has been drafted on the premise  that  the  Appellant
           could only secure a place of safety upon return to India  within
           a community formed predominantly of the members of her  religion
           of birth, and that despite the loss of her own religious  faith,
           the Appellant would feel obliged to live within such a community
           for the welfare of her own daughters. These propositions do  not
           properly engage with either the Appellant's  own  case,  or  the
           guidance to be found in AR & NH. The Appellant's  own  case  was
           that her eldest daughter had already left her mother's home, and
           was now studying for a degree in another city as a single woman,
           having won a  University  scholarship  to  do  so.  Taking  this
           evidence at face value it  indicated  strongly  (when  taken  in
           conjunction with the  evidence  about  her  mother's  access  to
           finance) that the Appellant and her family were members  of  the
           educated and moneyed class in  India.  Furthermore  it  was  the
           Appellant's own case that her mother and daughters were able  to
           live in safety using  their  own  financial  resources,  without
           contact with either the Appellant's husband, or  brother.  There
           was no proper basis for any suggestion that the Appellant  would
           be unable to live in safety outside a religious community.
       16. Moreover although the Appellant's  case  was  that  her  husband
           would be able to trace her if she  returned  to  live  within  a
           community predominantly made up of members of  her  religion  of
           birth, it was plain that either her husband  had  not  yet  been
           able to trace either her mother, or, either of their  daughters,
           or, he had never tried to do so. The Appellant's case  was  that
           her mother had established a home within such a  community,  but
           as the Judge concluded [40], if her husband had not been able to
           trace them when they lived within that community,  then  it  was
           not possible to see how he would be able to do so either if they
           ceased to do so, or,  if  they  continued  to  do  so  with  the
           addition  of  the  Appellant  to  their  household.  I  conclude
           therefore that the finding that the Appellant's husband had made
           no effort to trace her, or, was unable to do so,  was  one  that
           was well open to the Judge to make.
       17. Grounds three and four complain of the Judge's approach  to  the
           issue of internal relocation, and of his approach to  the  issue
           of  the  sufficiency  of  state  protection  available  to   the
           Appellant. The Judge's finding was that  in  the  light  of  the
           expert evidence before him the authorities in India did  provide
           sufficient state protection [44-47]. Although he was unaware  of
           it, that conclusion was entirely consistent with the  conclusion
           reached in AR & NH  that  there  is  normally  sufficient  state
           protection for women whose families seek to harm them  in  their
           place of internal relocation. Ms Mendoza accepted that.
       18. Whilst the grounds complain that internal relocation to join her
           mother and daughters was an  entirely  unrealistic  proposition,
           the Judge's conclusion that it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
           Appellant to be able to internally relocate to join her mother's
           household [48] was properly reasoned when the decision  is  read
           as a whole, and, in my judgement it was one that was  well  open
           to him on the evidence. Moreover it was one  that  was  entirely
           consistent with the conclusions reached in AR & NH, even if,  as
           the Judge accepted, as  a  result  of  her  mental  health,  the
           Appellant would be unable to secure and hold employment  in  the
           event of her return to India [26].
       19. Ground five complains that the Judge "was simply wrong"  in  his
           finding that Article 8 was not engaged, which I take  to  be  an
           assertion that his conclusion in this respect was perverse.
       20. Ms Mendoza accepted that the Article  8  appeal  was  only  ever
           presented on the basis that  the  Appellant  had  established  a
           "private life" in the UK sufficient to engage  Article  8:  this
           appeal was never presented as a "family life" case.  Ms  Mendoza
           also  accepted  that  the  Appellant  did  not  rely  upon   any
           friendships formed in the  UK,  and  that  she  had  denied  the
           formation or existence of any relationship with  anyone  in  the
           UK. The Appellant had never worked in the  UK,  and  indeed  was
           assessed as unfit for work. Thus on her own case she had  gained
           no social contacts, or network, through employment. She had also
           denied the presence in the UK of any family member (of  whatever
           degree of relationship).
       21. Accordingly, as Ms Mendoza frankly conceded, it was difficult to
           see any evidence that was placed before the  Judge  to  indicate
           how she had spent the three years that she had lived in the  UK,
           or, who she had spent it with. The  evidence  fell  a  long  way
           short of providing an explanation of the nature and strength  of
           the "private life" relied upon, beyond identifying relationships
           established by the Appellant with the  counsellors  and  medical
           staff with whom she had had contact since  arrival  in  the  UK.
           Whilst the diagnosis of the  Appellant  as  suffering  PTSD  and
           moderate depression was not in  issue  [26],  this  was  not  an
           Article 3 health case, as indeed the parties agreed  before  the
           Judge [25].
       22. In my judgement it was well open to the Judge on  this  evidence
           to conclude that Article 8 was not engaged by  the  decision  to
           remove the Appellant from the UK, and  his  conclusion  to  that
           effect was adequately reasoned. Even if, given the low threshold
           of engagement, he ought to have concluded  otherwise,  he  would
           have been bound  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  derived  no
           assistance from s117A-D of the 2002 Act; Deelah (section 117B  -
           ambit) [2015] UKUT 515, AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260.  Thus
           given her ability to return to live in  safety  in  India  in  a
           household where she would be  supported  and  care  for  by  her
           mother and two daughters, the public  interest  in  her  removal
           very significantly outweighed any "private life" that  it  could
           be said she had established in the UK, so  that  her  Article  8
           appeal should be dismissed.
       23. In the circumstances the Judge did not make any  material  error
           of law in his decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds. The
           Appellant's appeal is dismissed.





   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  13
      July 2016 did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 4 October 2016


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 4 October 2016



