
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02158/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 September 2016                 |On 28 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     as
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, counsel instructed by DJ Webb & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Both the appellant and the respondent appeal against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M B Hussain who, in a decision promulgated on
    25  July  2016  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal   on   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection grounds and  allowed  it  on  Article  8  human
    rights grounds, under the Immigration Rules.




Background

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom clandestinely during 1997  and
    applied for asylum. That claim was refused and his appeal against  that
    decision   dismissed   on   25   January   1999.   Following    further
    representations and an application for leave  outside  the  Rules,  the
    appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain outside the  Rules  on
    28 June 2010.

 3. On 19 March 2013, the appellant  was  convicted  of  causing  death  by
    dangerous driving and driving a motor vehicle with excess  alcohol.  He
    was sentenced to 45 months' imprisonment for the first offence  and  no
    separate penalty for the second offence.  He  was  subsequently  served
    with notice of liability to deportation and responded by raising a fear
    of persecution in Sri Lanka and his family life in the United  Kingdom.
    In brief, the substance of the asylum claim was  that  the  appellant's
    younger sister was a member of the LTTE;  the  appellant  assisted  the
    LTTE; his elder  sister  was  tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan  army  and
    subsequently took her own life; the appellant has protested against the
    Sri Lankan government since 2007; he  is  related  to  well-known  LTTE
    personnel; would be at risk from the Sri Lankan authorities as well  as
    paramilitary Tamil groups and also experienced  mental  health  issues.
    With regard to family life, the appellant relied on  his  relationships
    with his partner and minor British citizen child.

 4. The deportation order was signed on 19 October  2015.  An  accompanying
    notice of decision dated 20 October 2015 made  reference  to  the  1999
    determination of the appellant's asylum appeal and the finding that his
    claim lacked credibility. No weight  was  given  to  a  medical  report
    obtained in 2002 which referred to scarring on the appellant's  person.
    The respondent did not accept that the events concerning his  relatives
    enhanced the appellant's claim to be at risk of harm on return  to  Sri
    Lanka. It was said that no evidence of the appellant's  involvement  in
    protest marches had been submitted and that the panel in GJ (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) did not accept  that
    low level membership or participation at demonstrations was  sufficient
    to create a real risk on return. The appellant was said not to be on  a
    stop list. The respondent decided that the appellant was excluded  from
    Humanitarian Protection on  account  of  his  criminal  conviction.  In
    relation to Article 8, the respondent accepted that the  appellant  had
    genuine and subsisting  relationships  with  his  wife  and  child  but
    concluded that it was not unduly harsh for them to live  in  Sri  Lanka
    with the  appellant  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    appellant and with regard to the child, establish a  relationship  with
    the appellant by way of modern means of communication and visits.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing

 5. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Hussain on 9  May  2016.   The
    appellant and five other witness gave evidence. The  judge  notes  that
    there was no challenge by the respondent to the credibility of  any  of
    the witnesses, that the respondent was not applying section 72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  that  the  respondent
    accepted that the risk of the appellant reoffending was low.

 6. The judge rejected the asylum claim  with  reference  to  the  previous
    determination and GJ and Others, finding  that  there  was  no  adverse
    interest in those whose political activities amounted to no  more  than
    simple participation in demonstrations.

 7. The appellant was found by  the  judge  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399(a) of the Rules, in that the  judge  concluded  that  the
    impact on the appellant's child, whether or not she accompanied him  to
    Sri Lanka or remained in the  United  Kingdom  without  him,  would  be
    unduly harsh.

Error of Law

 8. The respondent's grounds of  appeal  implied  that  the  judge  made  a
    material error of law in  his  interpretation  of  the  phrase  "unduly
    harsh."

 9. In the appellant's grounds of appeal, it was argued that he should have
    succeeded on asylum grounds in view of his  actual  political  opinions
    and attendance at demonstrations. There was said to be no reference  in
    the decision  to  the  skeleton  argument,  which  submitted  that  the
    appellant would be at risk of persecution were  he  to  openly  profess
    separatist views; those genuinely held views were corroborated  by  his
    witnesses and the judge had accepted that the  appellant  had  attended
    demonstrations. Nor was there  said  to  be  any  anxious  scrutiny  in
    relation the medical report  produced  after  the  1999  determination.
    Reference was made to an annexed counsel's statement of  truth  and  an
    application for Judge Hussain's record of proceedings to be  served  on
    all parties.

10. Permission to appeal was granted to both parties by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Chambers. Permission was granted to the respondent on account  of
    the interpretation of unduly  harsh  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM
    (Uganda) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 450. With  regard  to  the  appellant's
    application, Judge Chambers remarked as follows; "Having considered the
    cross appeal grounds and the  signed  statement  of  truth  by  counsel
    exhibiting pages of evidence from  a  notebook;  permission  to  cross-
    appeal is granted to the Appellant on the basis of the judge's  failure
    to engage with the evidence and make findings on the sur place point."

11. The Secretary of State's Rule 24 response was received on  7  September
    2016 and indicated that the appellant's  appeal  was  opposed.  It  was
    argued that the appellant did  not  fall  within  the  risk  categories
    established in GJ and thus he would not be at risk on  return.  It  was
    further argued  that  the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated  that  the
    sophisticated intelligence-led operations of the Sri Lankan  government
    would consider him to be a person with a significant role  in  relation
    to Tamil separatism. The mere holding of pro-Tamil views was  said  not
    of itself to bring an appellant with a risk category delineated in  GJ.
     Nor was there  said  to  be  adequate  evidence  suggesting  that  the
    appellant would face a real risk  of  persecution  resulting  from  his
    views or that he would be obliged to conceal them to such a degree that
    would amount to persecution.

12. The appellant's Rule 24 response argued that the judge made no material
    error of law, in that he took account of the very high public  interest
    in deportation and the seriousness of the appellant's offence.  It  was
    said that the judge properly applied MM(Uganda) and in addition went on
    to identify  exceptional  circumstances  which  outweighed  the  public
    interest in deportation.

Error of law hearing

13. When this matter came before me, I  initially  heard  the  respondent's
    appeal relating to the judge's findings in relation to paragraph 399(a)
    of the Rules. Ms  Ahmad  submitted  that  the  judge's  assessment  was
    inadequate. She made three main points.

14. Firstly, she argued that the judge had shown no appreciation  that  the
    more serious an offence, the higher the public interest. There had been
    only a brief reference to the offence in question which was  flawed  by
    the absence of mention that it was a very serious offence.

15. Secondly, with reference to [24] of MM (Uganda), there needed to  be  a
    consideration of the appellant's immigration and criminal  history  and
    this consideration, which focused only on the impact on the appellant's
    partner and child, was absent. Thirdly, the judge made no reference  to
    section 117C of the 2002 Act in relation  to  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence, as endorsed in MM (Uganda) at [23] and [26].

16. In reply, Mr Sharma berated  the  respondent  for  the  poorly  drafted
    grounds. He referred me to various passages of the judge's decision and
    reasons, arguing that it was not the case  that  the  judge  showed  no
    appreciation of the offence and its seriousness. He emphasised what the
    judge said at [61] about the appellant's case being unusual, in that  a
    close relative of the deceased victim  and  another  passenger  in  the
    vehicle had given evidence in support of the appellant, with particular
    reference to his genuine remorse. There had been no  challenge  to  the
    credibility of any of the witnesses. Mr Sharma argued  that  the  judge
    had set out the appellant's immigration and  criminal  history  in  the
    decision. The judge correctly noted that  the  appellant  was  of  good
    character prior  to  this  offence.  With  regard  to  the  immigration
    history, the judge recorded that the appellant applied for asylum  soon
    after arriving in the United Kingdom  in  1997,  that  his  appeal  had
    failed and that he had eventually been granted settlement.   There  had
    been no failure to consider section 117C, which was set  out  identical
    terms in paragraph 399a of the Rules and replicated by the judge in his
    decision. Mr Sharma also drew my attention to the judge's  findings  as
    to why it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's child to  accompany
    him to Sri Lanka or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  him.  Of
    particular note was the fact that the grant of leave to remain  to  the
    appellant's partner was  based  on  the  appellant  being  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom and were he to be removed, his  partner's
    status would become uncertain and by extension,  that  would  adversely
    affect the ability of the appellant's British  child  to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom.

17. Ms Ahmad replied, reiterating that the judge  did  not  appreciate,  in
    making  the  assessment,  that  he  had  to  consider  the  appellant's
    immigration and criminal history and if he had he could have come to  a
    different conclusion.

18. I set out the most relevant  passages,  for  these  purposes,  from  MM
    (Uganda) below.

         "23. The context in these cases invites emphasis  on  two  factors,
             (1) the public interest in the removal  of  foreign  criminals
             and (2)  the  need  for  a  proportionate  assessment  of  any
             interference with Article  8  rights.  In  my  judgment,  with
             respect, the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MAB  ignores
             this combination of factors. The first  of  them,  the  public
             interest in the removal of  foreign  criminals,  is  expressly
             vouched by Parliament in section 117C(1). Section 117C(2) then
             provides (I repeat the provision for convenience):

                  "The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal."

         24.   This  steers  the  tribunals  and   the   court   towards   a
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case. Accordingly the more pressing the public  interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect
             on his child or  partner  will  be  unduly  harsh.  Any  other
             approach  in  my  judgment  dislocates  the   "unduly   harsh"
             provisions from their context. It would mean that the question
             of undue hardship would be decided wholly  without  regard  to
             the force  of  the  public  interest  in  deportation  in  the
             particular case.  But  in  that  case  the  term  "unduly"  is
             mistaken for "excessive" which imports a different idea.  What
             is due or undue depends on all the circumstances,  not  merely
             the impact on the child or partner in the given case.  In  the
             present context relevant circumstances certainly  include  the
             criminal's immigration and criminal history."

19. The judge considered all aspects  of  the  appellant's  case  prior  to
    reaching his findings that the effect of the appellant's removal on his
    child would be unduly harsh in either of the two scenarios set  out  in
    paragraph 399a of the Rules.

20. At [57] of the decision,  the  judge  directed  himself  appropriately,
    stating; "It is in the public interest to deport foreign criminals  and
    in any assessment of the deportees family/private life claim has to  be
    a holistic one taking account of all the circumstances."

21. In the following paragraph [58], he acknowledges the  severity  of  the
    offending, notwithstanding the fact that he has already provided a full
    description of the offence at [2] of his decision as well  as  well  as
    the respondent's concerns between [3] and [24]. What the judge said  at
    [58] was as follows, "I begin by reminding myself  that  the  appellant
    was convicted of a very serious offence which resulted in the death  of
    an individual." While the judge did not  refer  explicitly  to  section
    117C(2) in his decision, his recognition  that  the  offence  was  very
    serious is more than sufficient to show that he applied this section in
    practice.

22. The submissions on behalf of the respondent concentrated on [67] of the
    decision and reasons where it was said that the  judge  had  considered
    only the impact of the appellant's removal on his  child  and  partner.
    Yet, even in this paragraph; which  was  immediately  preceded  by  the
    judge's recognition, as part of his findings, of  the  public  interest
    concerns and the seriousness of the offence;  the  judge  continued  to
    have regard to those concerns; "I must also bear in  mind  that  whilst
    the public interest favours the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  in
    this particular case the appellant has been assessed as  posing  a  low
    risk  of  future  offending."  The  judge  proceeded  to  consider  the
    deterrent effect of deportation prior to concluding that in this  case,
    society would be no better off by the appellant's absence, in  view  of
    his remorse and low risk  of  offending.  The  appellant's  immigration
    history was unremarkable and could not be said to be a factor deserving
    of weight one way or the other. In any event the judge records  at  the
    outset, [1], that the appellant was  lawfully  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom long before the offence in question.

23. The judge made no error of law in his assessment of paragraph  399a  of
    the Rules and his decision is upheld in this respect.

24. I now turn to the appellant's appeal against the  judge's  findings  on
    the asylum and related Article 3 aspects of his claim.

25. Mr Sharma adopted the grounds of appeal and reminded me that there  had
    been no challenge to the credibility of the witnesses before the First-
    tier Tribunal. Two of these witnesses had given evidence in relation to
    the appellant's involvement with sur place activities. While the  judge
    had recited the written evidence of those witnesses at [42] and [43] of
    the decision, there was no reference to their oral evidence as  to  the
    genuine nature of the appellant's attendance at demonstrations and  the
    nature of his support for Tamil separatism. On this  point,  Mr  Sharma
    referred to the  witness  statement  and  handwritten  notes  of  Mr  S
    Chelvan, who represented the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    He argued that the judge's findings were inadequate, in that at [52] he
    stately merely  that  there  was  nothing  to  justify  departing  from
    previous determination, a claim determined  in  1999.  Since  then  the
    legal position had moved on, with reference  to  the  judgement  in  HJ
    (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2010] UKSC 31.

26. Mr Sharma asked me to note that the judge accepted that  the  appellant
    sympathised with Tamil separatists took part in demonstrations, however
    he had not engaged  with  the  argument  advanced  on  the  appellant's
    behalf, that he would have  to  modify  his  genuinely  held  political
    opinion to avoid persecution if returned to Sri Lanka.

27. For her part, Ms Ahmad, simply referred me the judge's findings at [52]
    in relation to his unwillingness to depart from  the  findings  of  the
    judge who dismissed the appellant's asylum appeal in 1999.

28. I found there to be a material error of law with regard to the  judge's
    conclusions on the asylum aspect of the appeal.  It  is  apparent  from
    paragraph 29 of Mr Chelvan's skeleton argument dated 8 May  2016,  that
    HJ(Iran) was being relied upon in relation  to  the  appellant's  post-
    flight activities. Furthermore, there are indications in counsel's note
    that relevant questions were put to two of the appellant's witnesses in
    this regard and it is the case that their evidence  went  unchallenged.
    In these circumstances, there ought to have been a finding in  relation
    to whether the appellant would openly  demonstrate  his  views  in  Sri
    Lanka and if he would not, whether this would be owing  to  a  fear  of
    persecution. In finding at [52] that the appellant would not be at risk
    of persecution for simply participating in demonstrations, the  judge's
    reference to GJ  and  Others,  where  HJ  (Iran)  principles  were  not
    considered, was insufficient.

29. I was unable to proceed  to  remake  the  decision  because  Mr  Sharma
    indicated that the  appellant  wished  to  give  evidence,  however  no
    interpreter had been booked. Furthermore, there were question marks  as
    to the precise content of the oral evidence of witnesses five  and  six
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   in   that   counsel's   note   had
    unintelligible passages and the judge's note was not legible. In  these
    circumstances, evidence might need to be  taken  from  these  witnesses
    again. I therefore decided to remit the  asylum  aspect  alone  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.



Decision on error of law

30. The First-tier Tribunal made no material error of law  in  relation  to
    the findings in respect of Article 8 ECHR and the decision of the judge
    is upheld. His decision, in relation to the asylum aspect of the appeal
    is set aside to be considered afresh.



Directions

      1. The asylum appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Hatton
         Cross)

      2.  The appeal is to be heard by any judge except Judge MB Hussain

      3. A Sri Lankan Tamil interpreter is required

      4. Time estimate is 3 hours



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 27 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

