
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02527/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th October 2016                         |On 12th October 2016          |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                   [A R O]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, instructed by Birnberg Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 6th November  1986.  He
       arrived in the UK on 2nd November 1993  accompanied  by  his  mother,
       when he was six years old. Initially his  mother  claimed  asylum  as
       Kenyan nationals for  herself  and  her  son.  This  application  was
       refused. She  then  made  an  application  in  their  correct  Somali
       nationality  and  they  were  granted  exceptional  leave  from  21st
       December 1994 to 28th November 2002, at which point the appellant and
       his mother were granted indefinite leave to remain. On 20th  February
       2003 the appellant was convicted of murder and sentenced to  serve  a
       minimum term of nine years and four months. A deportation  order  was
       made pursuant to s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007.  The  appellant
       then  appealed  against  this  decision   on   asylum,   humanitarian
       protection and human rights grounds.  The  respondent  certified  the
       appellant's claim under s.72(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 on the basis that the appellant posed a danger to the
       community as someone convicted of a particularly serious offence. His
       appeal against the decision to deport was dismissed  on  all  grounds
       (although the s.72 certificate was not upheld) by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Chambers in a determination promulgated on the 31st May 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in  law  in  failing  to
       make a finding on the oral evidence of Mrs Hodgkinson as  to  whether
       the appellant had converted to Christianity. The grant of  permission
       raised the question however as to whether this was a  material  error
       given that it was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal that  a  number
       of people believed the appellant had converted  to  Christianity  but
       nevertheless found that this had not taken place.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal and submissions on behalf of the appellant are,
       in summary, as follows.

    5. The respondent accepted that if the appellant had genuinely converted
       to Christianity that he would be  at  real  risk  of  persecution  in
       Somalia. They key finding of the Tribunal is therefore  at  paragraph
       37  of  the  decision:  that  the  appellant  had  not  converted  to
       Christianity and would not be perceived as a Christian and  therefore
       would not be persecuted. It is also accepted by  the  respondent  and
       the First-tier  Tribunal  that  it  is  possible  to  have  deficient
       knowledge of Christianity whilst having been a genuine  convert,  see
       paragraphs 28 and 29 of the decision.

    6. There were a number of sources of evidence which were put forward  to
       the First-tier Tribunal as supporting the appellant having  converted
       to Christianity: the evidence of Peter Egginton a family  friend  and
       practising Christian; the evidence of Bishop Dr Joseph  Roberts;  the
       evidence of Colin Hudson Chaplain  at  HMP  Mount;  the  evidence  of
       Harold Afflu who is a minister of religion; and the  evidence  of  Ms
       Faye Hodgkinson a probation hostel worker. It would appear  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal did not take on board  that  Ms  Hodgkinson  gave
       oral evidence, only indicating that there was oral evidence from  one
       source (when in fact both she and Mr Egginton gave oral evidence)  at
       paragraph 21 of the decision and only summarising the evidence of  Mr
       Egginton. It is argued that overlooking this evidence, which  assists
       the appellant on this key issue, was highly significant  because  she
       provided evidence from the point of view of  someone  who  is  not  a
       minister of religion or a member of a Christian congregation  but  is
       someone who knew the appellant for professional reasons as  a  hostel
       keyworker who had a background as a police officer and who was tasked
       with assessing the appellant's character and actions. Her  assessment
       that he is a genuine Christian was capable  of  being  of  particular
       significance therefore.

    7. It is also argued that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
       unlawful due to a lack of reasons as  to  why  it  was  believed  the
       appellant was able to dupe all of the  witnesses  who  supported  his
       contention he is a Christian convert. (It  is  also  clear  that  the
       evidence of the Harold Afflu was not just of the  appellant  being  a
       good worker but that  he  a  Christian.)  There  needed  to  be  some
       reasoning as to why the appellant was able to do this in the  context
       of the witnesses, which might go to his ability to deceive  or  their
       credulity. Mr Egginton had known the appellant since  2001  and  seen
       him regularly in prison. This was a very long and regular association
       over 14 years. The appellant clearly had not  tried  to  put  forward
       that he wished  to  rely  upon  her  Christianity  at  his  Screening
       Interview, and thus there was no evidence of a consistent thought out
       plan to deceive witnesses and build such a case. It  was  clear  that
       the appellant had not successful lied about the murder  weapon  being
       brought to the scene by the victim as this was not  believed  by  the
       jury that convicted him. So whilst the appellant was clearly  capable
       of telling lies, as he did at his criminal trial and later  admitted,
       there was no evidence that he was good at  this  or  had  managed  to
       trick others into believing falsehoods. There was no  reason  in  the
       evidence to  think  the  witnesses  were  all  particularly  gullible
       either.

    8. Further it is argued that the conclusion that the appellant is not  a
       credible witness himself is not well or lawfully founded as it relies
       upon saying he had told two significant  untruths:  firstly  to  have
       seen his father killed in Mogadishu when he was  six  years  old  and
       secondly to have committed the murder with a  knife  the  victim  had
       brought to the scene of the crime. Whilst both of these  things  were
       said by the applicant it is said on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that
       there is evidence from a forensic psychiatrist,  Dr  Puri,  that  the
       first falsehood could have come about as a  false  memory  given  the
       influence of his mother and her  account  to  the  appellant  of  his
       father's death. The evidence of Dr Puri was drawn to the attention of
       the First-tier Tribunal and needed to be addressed by  them.  Further
       it had been accepted by the  Parole  Board  that  the  appellant  had
       admitted in 2013 that he had brought the knife to  the  murder  scene
       and killed the victim. It is arguable that this behaviour  of  owning
       up to his full guilt was to the credit  of  the  appellant's  current
       credibility and thus not against it.

    9. Ms Ahmad argued, in summary, that the error in apparently overlooking
       the evidence of Ms Hodgkinson was  not  material  as  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had given a number of reasons for disbelieving the appellant
       and even if this evidence had been believed then it  could  not  have
       made a difference to the outcome of the hearing.

   10. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties that  I  found  that
       the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law but that I would put my full
       reasons for that decision in writing. I  also  informed  the  parties
       that I would preserve  the  finding  that  the  s.72(2)  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  certificate  was  discharged  as  no
       error of law had been pointed to in that discrete issue, but that the
       rest of the decision was set aside. Both parties felt it  appropriate
       that the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in  Manchester
       for rehearing as there would need to be  a  substantial  fact-finding
       hearing to remake the appeal on the refugee claim, and I agreed  that
       this was appropriate in all of the circumstances.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   11. It is certain that Mrs Hodgkinson  and  Mr  Egginton  did  give  oral
       evidence to the First-tier Tribunal, and clear that this is  recorded
       at paragraph 7 of the decision. However it is also clear that by  the
       time that Christianity is considered (paragraphs  18  to  37  of  the
       decision) that Mr Egginton is referred to as  the  only  witness  who
       gave oral evidence (see paragraph 21 of the decision) and  absolutely
       no reference is made to Ms Hodgkinson's evidence of  the  appellant's
       conversion or faith. I find that  material  evidence  was  not  given
       anxious scrutiny in coming to the conclusion that was reached by  the
       First-tier Tribunal.

   12. I am also satisfied that if this evidence had  been  considered  this
       could have potentially led to a different conclusion on the key issue
       of whether the  appellant  had  converted  to  Christianity,  in  the
       context of the other evidence that had not satisfied  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. This was evidence from a very different type of person with
       a different role and relationship to the appellant,  who  might  well
       have been seen as coming at the issue of the  appellant's  conversion
       from a more professional and critical angle.

   13. It is also  correctly  argued  for  the  appellant  that  it  is  not
       considered at all by the First-tier Tribunal how  the  appellant  was
       able to dupe his  five  witnesses,  or  why  they  were  particularly
       credulous, and I consider in the context of there being  no  evidence
       that the appellant had successfully managed to convince  anyone  else
       of a significant falsehood at any point that this was also a  legally
       erroneous deficiency in the reasoning.

   14. I also find that the assessment of  the  appellant's  credibility  is
       legally deficient for lack of consideration of evidence  of  Dr  Puri
       (at page 47 of the bundle) which  raises  the  possibility  that  the
       appellant has a "false memory" regarding his presence when his father
       was killed through accounts given by his  traumatised  mother  rather
       than his having told a deliberate falsehood when he wrongly said that
       this had happened in his asylum interview.

   15. Whilst it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to place  the  evidence
       from the screening interview and full asylum  interviews  from  2015,
       his lack of basic Christian knowledge and his general ability to tell
       falsehoods (as he did at his criminal trial) in the  balance  I  find
       that it was a material error on a matter  of  crucial  importance  in
       determination of this asylum claim to have omitted the above  matters
       from scrutiny in reaching a conclusion that  the  appellant  did  not
       face a real risk of persecution for reason of his religion on  return
       to Somalia.

       Decision:

        1. The making of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
           involve the making of an error on a point of law.

        2. I set aside the decision with the exception of paragraphs 13  to
           16 of the  decision  concerning  the  discharging  of  the  s.72
           certificate.

        3. The remaking of  this  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.


Signed:   Fiona   Lindsley                                     Date:    11th
October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







