
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02662/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 January 2020                             |On 20 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     RF
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nadeem
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born in 1978 and  is  a  male  citizen  of  Iraq.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State refusing his application  for  international  protection.  The
    First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on  20  September  2019,
    dismissed his appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mr Tarlow,  who  appeared
    for the Secretary of State,  told  me  that  the  respondent  does  not
    contest this appeal. Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal. None of the findings of fact  shall  stand.  There  will
    need to be a new fact-finding exercise which is better conducted in the
    First-tier Tribunal. Both parties may rely  on  new  evidence  provided
    copies of any documentary evidence, including witness  statements,  are
    filed at the First-tier Tribunal and served on the other party no later
    than 10 days prior to the next hearing.





    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to rehear the appeal de novo and remake  the
    decision. The attention of the  parties  is  drawn  to  the  directions
    contained in paragraph 2 above.






Signed                              Date 15 January 2020


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
