

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/02928/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |    Decision Promulgated          |
|on 3 May 2017                            |on 16 May 2017                    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr Jafferji instructed by Birmingham
Solicitors
For the Respondent:           Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Asjad ('the Judge') promulgated on 18 October  2016  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the rejection of his
        asylum claim.
     2. The Judge notes at [7] that 'what must be decided  is  whether  the
        appellant is indeed gay or whether he  has  fabricated  his  entire
        claim'. The Judge noted what is described  as  "a  vast  number  of
        inconsistencies in his evidence all of  which  went  to  this  core
        issue".
     3. The Judge sets out findings from [7] to [19] which were  challenged
        by the appellant resulting in a grant of permission  to  appeal  to
        the Upper Tribunal by another judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  on
        the basis that "permission must be granted because, whilst the FtTJ
        has marshalled some cogent reasons for disbelieving the  appellants
        core claim to be gay, she has not shown that she  has  applied  the
        lower standard of proof applicable. The grounds may be argued."



Error of law


     4. Mr Jafferji referred to the lack of any reference in  the  decision
        to the standard of proof, submitting that there was nothing to show
        that the Judge had applied the correct standard. It  was  submitted
        that in the determination the Judge refers to the  benefit  of  the
        doubt at [14] as  well  as  making  reference  to  the  balance  of
        probabilities, both of which it is suggested are the wrong test.
     5. I find no arguable legal error in  such  assertion  as  it  is  not
        necessary for the Judge to set out chapter and verse in relation to
        the burden and standard of proof which  is  well  known  to  judges
        within this jurisdiction and that protection claims are assessed by
        reference to the 'lower standard'. A reading of  the  determination
        does not make out any specific examples of the Judge  applying  too
        high a standard or of making a material misdirection in relating to
        the standard to be applied when  considering  those  parts  of  the
        evidence that were adequately considered.
     6. The Judge considered the evidence at [8  -  12]  of  the  decision,
        referring to a number of alleged inconsistencies in the appellant's
        account.  These  include,  for  example,  evidence  regarding   the
        appellant's  feelings  for  boys  when  five  years   of   age,   a
        relationship with other named individuals in Pakistan, and  alleged
        inconsistency concerning events at the police station in  Pakistan.
        Mr Jafferji makes the point that all  these  events  occurred  some
        time ago before the appellant left Pakistan and entered the  United
        Kingdom.
     7. The appellant's immigration history shows he was born in  Pakistani
        1989 where he was  educated  before  attending  a  polytechnic  and
        obtaining a Diploma in Civil Engineering. He obtained  work  before
        attending a university in Islamabad before applying for  a  student
        visa to study in the UK in 2011 which was  issued,  valid  from  18
        September 2011 to 3 November 2012 to study at the British School of
        Management Sciences.
     8. Even if the events identified  by  the  Judge  all  took  place  in
        Pakistan it was necessary to  consider  the  evidence  relating  to
        events that had taken place  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  assess
        whether the appellant's claimed actions in relation to  what  would
        amount to sur place activities are credible. It  is  also  arguable
        that  the  Judge,  having  made  findings  relating  to  events  in
        Pakistan, transferred those findings regarding the truthfulness  or
        lack of credibility  of  the  appellant's  accounts  to  the  later
        accounts, which affected consideration  of  events  in  the  United
        Kingdom.
     9. The appellant mentioned rape which was accepted  by  the  Judge  in
        [13] but in relation to which the Judge  found  the  appellant  had
        been inconsistent about so many things the  Judge  felt  unable  to
        give him the benefit of the doubt even though the appellant claimed
        he had been referred to the Rape and Sexual Violence  Project.  The
        Judge states that the appellant has only done this to  bolster  his
        asylum claim and that there was no truth in the events  he  claims,
        yet such a conclusion can only be reached once all the evidence has
        been considered with the required degree of anxious  scrutiny.   It
        should not be a case of rejecting  evidence  from  those  providing
        support for an individual asylum seeker based on  a  pre-conception
        of the credibility of what is being claimed.
    10. There also appears little reference to the cultural context in that
        the appellant is  a  Muslim  male  from  Pakistan  which  could  be
        relevant to his ability to disclose events, in  addition  to  other
        reasons why a victim of rape may not wish to  openly  discuss  what
        had occurred to them.
    11. At  [14]  the  Judge  refers  to  a  letter  from  Birmingham  LGBT
        confirming the appellant attended a group  session  from  September
        2015 only, which the Judge states "coinciding  with  the  time  the
        Appellant put in this asylum claim.  There is nothing to  say  that
        he was attending any such group since his arrival in the UK in 2011
        or that he accessed any kind of  help  from  potentially  traumatic
        experiences that would have been very fresh in his mind". The Judge
        also finds "Indeed, it is only after the Appellant has put  in  his
        asylum claim that the experiences have surfaced and  he  has  asked
        for help. The LGBT note in their letter that the Appellant attended
        a one-off support session with Anna Rowbottom in September 2015".
    12. The issue that arises from the Judge finding that the timing of the
        appellant's involvement  with  Birmingham  LGBT  was  found  to  be
        opportunistic is that there is no specific mention or  analysis  of
        the  appellant's  evidence  in  his  witness  statement   that   he
        approached LGBT prior to claiming asylum and it was because of  his
        approach to this organisation that he claimed asylum. A letter from
        LGBT dated 16 October 2015 details exactly what  happened  and  the
        relevant chronology, which was a document available to the Judge at
        page 126 of the appellant's appeal bundle.
    13. On 20 April 2016, a second letter was written, the second paragraph
        of which confirms the appellant contacted LGBT  in  September  2015
        and visited them on the 25 September 2015 and  that  they  informed
        him that the asylum process existed and referred him.  This  letter
        is, again, available to the Judge at page 128  of  the  appellant's
        appeal bundle. There is no  reference  to  either  these  items  of
        correspondence or their related content by the Judge in [14] of the
        decision.
    14. Similarly, at [15] the Judge mentions a letter from the appellant's
        GP which it  is  claimed  demonstrates  that  the  first  time  the
        appellant was seen by the GP was after his asylum claim was refused
        and that the GP can only comment upon what the  appellant  reported
        in  relation  to  feelings.  The  Judge  noted  the  GP  prescribed
        medication and referred the appellant to a  psychiatrist  and  that
        the appellant had self-inflicted lacerations  to  his  wrists,  but
        claims there was nothing to say how serious  the  injury  was.  The
        Judge refers to a report from a Mr Mason which  is  commented  upon
        below. The Judge felt it important the GP made no  mention  of  the
        appellant having disclosed rapes that occurred in Pakistan nor  did
        he request that any STD tests be carried out for HIV or AIDS.  What
        is of more concern is the specific comment recorded  by  the  Judge
        towards the  end  of  that  paragraph  of  "Given  the  credibility
        findings that I have made  and  the  timing  (and  lack)  of  these
        disclosures I find that I can place  only  limited  weight  on  the
        medical evidence as being supportive of the Appellants claims." The
        reason that statement is of concern is that it is suggestive of  an
        artificial separation in the mind of the Judge of the assessment of
        the credibility of the account and the medical evidence. A decision
        on the former has been used to support a finding that little weight
        should be attached to the latter,  when  the  obligation  upon  the
        Judge was to consider all  the  evidence  together  in  the  round,
        including the medical evidence, before assessing the credibility of
        the claim.
    15. The letter from the GP does not  only  record  what  the  appellant
        reported by way of symptoms, although it is unclear how  the  Judge
        thinks the GP would know how the appellant was feeling  other  than
        to ask him and to record the answers. The GP would  no  doubt  have
        asked the appellant about how he was feeling and what  the  problem
        was and has recorded within the  letter  the  response  given.  The
        letter from the GP also contains much more. It  is  dated  28  July
        2016 and sets out in  considerable  detail  the  GP's  observations
        which are not based solely upon what the appellant  has  said.  The
        letter also sets out the extent of further enquiries  and  is  not,
        arguably,  no  more  than  a  self-reporting  diagnosis.  There  is
        arguable merit in the assertion that the appellant  has  failed  to
        give proper or adequate consideration to the medical evidence.
    16. The Judge also appears to attach significance to the  lack  of  any
        STD tests but fails to explain how that is  relevant  to  assessing
        the core issue in  the  claim.  The  importance  of  the  fact  the
        appellant may not have disclosed the rape to the GP  and  no  tests
        may have been undertaken to the issue of the appellant's  sexuality
        is not adequately explained.
    17. The report of Mr  Mason  is  a  scarring  report  which  the  Judge
        mentions at both [15] and [16]. Mr Mason  refers  to  the  Istanbul
        Protocol and uses appropriate terminology when assessing the  issue
        of causation. The Judge concludes at [16] that, notwithstanding  Mr
        Mason  confirming  that  the  injuries  are  consistent  with   the
        explanation as to causation, they  could  have  resulted  from  any
        argument and not necessarily from  an  incident  arising  from  his
        sexuality. Mr Jafferji submits  the  Judges  consideration  of  the
        report from Mr Mason is  "poor"  and  submits  the  Judge  has  not
        engaged with the evidence and scarring on the wrist, which are said
        to be self-inflicted injuries by a  person  who  is  said  to  have
        mental health issues and to be suicidal, and which form part of the
        overall picture presented to the Judge. The submission has arguable
        merit.
    18. At [17] the Judge deals with the witness  evidence  including  that
        from Mr IT. The Judge  describes  IT  within  the  group  of  those
        described as "friends who are  gay"  but  states  that  it  is  not
        accepted that the appellant is himself gay  or  in  a  relationship
        with IT as he has been shown to have given inconsistent evidence on
        almost every aspect of his claim  and  demonstrated  he  is  not  a
        credible or reliable witness. To the  extent  there  is  artificial
        separation in the assessment of the evidence legal  error  is  made
        out. The rejection of the evidence of IT in the manner set  out  in
        the determination does not indicate  a  proper  assessment  of  the
        evidence, suggestive of a conclusion  without  adequate  reasoning.
        The evidence referred to in this paragraph is  also  not  the  only
        source of evidence as there are several letters at pages 130,  132,
        149 and 153 of the appellant's appeal bundle, amongst others, which
        do not appear to have been adequately considered.
    19. The appellant  refers  to  difficulties  he  experienced  in  self-
        expressing because of cultural aspects in the witness statement  of
        9 August 2016. As stated,  the  LGBT  letter  shows  the  appellant
        joined the organisation before  claiming  asylum  contrary  to  the
        Judges specific finding on this point.
    20. Even if the Judge is correct  in  relation  to  the  assessment  of
        events in Pakistan this does not detract  from  the  obligation  to
        properly assess the evidence of events in the United  Kingdom.  Had
        this occurred the Judge may have been entitled to come to the  same
        conclusion  but  until  there  has  been  a  proper  and   adequate
        examination of the evidence relating to  UK  based  activities  and
        relevant evidence it cannot be said that that will  be  the  likely
        outcome.
    21. At  [17]  the  comment  by  the  Judge  that  the  appellant  gives
        inconsistent evidence for all aspects of the claim cannot stand  as
        the  Judge  only  appears  to  have  examined  events  relating  to
        Pakistan. The assessment of the core issue identified  in  HJ(Iran)
        can only be determined with a proper and  adequate  examination  of
        all the evidence. The submission by Mr Jafferji that there  are  no
        inconsistencies in relation to  IT,  no  inconsistencies  regarding
        LGBT, no inconsistencies in  relation  to  the  appellant's  mental
        health problems, and no recorded inconsistencies in relation to the
        appellant's evidence regarding events in the United  Kingdom  where
        he has lived for a  period  of  five  years,  requires  proper  and
        detailed examination and for appropriate findings to be made.
    22. I find that for the  above  reasons  the  determination  cannot  be
        maintained and must be set aside. As there has been  a  failure  by
        the Judge to adequately assess the evidence made available  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal  and  further  detailed  factual  findings  are
        required, this is a matter in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  no
        option other than to remit the matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        for it to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Asjad.
    23. As the matter is being remitted no specific direction  is  made  in
        relation to preserved findings although both  parties  accept  that
        the inconsistencies noted by the Judge in relation to the  evidence
        of events in Pakistan are matters of record that may well form  the
        starting point for any further  assessment  of  the  evidence,  the
        focus of which is more likely than not to be in relation to  events
        in the UK and the evidence provided in support  of  the  appellants
        claim.
    24. The test set out by the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) of:


        (i) Is the applicant gay, or someone who would be treated as gay by
        potential persecutors in his country of origin? If  no,  the  claim
        should be refused. If yes:


        (ii) Do openly gay people have a well-founded fear  of  persecution
        in the country of origin? If no, the claim should  be  refused.  If
        yes:


        (iii) In respect of his sexual orientation, on his return, will the
        applicant be open? If yes, he is a refugee and his claim should  be
        allowed. If no:


        (iv) If he would not be open, but  rather  live  discreetly,  is  a
        material reason for living discreetly that he fears persecution? If
        yes, he is a refugee and his claim should be allowed. If  no,  then
        his claim should be refused.


        has been held to still represent good law in LC  (Albania)  v  SSHD
        [2017] EWCA Civ 351, and is to be followed.

Decision

    25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original  Judge.  I  remit  the  appeal  to  be
        reheard by the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham by a judge
        other than Judge Asjad, on a date to be fixed per  the  operational
        requirements of the Hearing Centre and availability of Mr Jafferji.


   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16th of May 2017












