
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02976/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2018                           |On 22 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     NS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Colman, Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is a remade  decision  following  the  setting  aside  of  the
        decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Malcolm  (the  judge)
        promulgated on 24 May 2018, in which he allowed, in accordance with
        Article 3 ECHR, the appeal of NS against the respondent's  refusal,
        dated 19 February 2018, of NS's protection and human rights  claim.
        In my 'error of law' decision  promulgated  on  30  August  2018  I
        described how the judge's decision involved the making of  material
        errors on points of law. In very brief summary, the judge failed to
        apply the principles established in J v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  629
        and Y & Anor (Sri Lanka Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362  in
        determining  whether  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of  committing
        suicide, the judge failed to adequately consider  the  medical  and
        background country evidence relevant to  the  appellant's  risk  of
        suicide, the judge failed to make necessary findings of  fact,  and
        the judge failed to give adequate reasons for  accepting  that  the
        appellant had no family remaining in Sri Lanka.


     2. Having set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision I adjourned the
        appeal to be remade at a further hearing and gave permission to the
        parties to adduce further  evidence  relating  to  the  applicant's
        Article 3 claim.  Following  the  hearing  on  26  October  2018  I
        directed  that  any  further  evidence  of  the  presence  of   the
        appellant's mother in India was to be filed with the Upper Tribunal
        by 9 November 2018, and  that  any  further  submissions  that  the
        respondent considered appropriate to make in respect of  the  filed
        documents  were  to  be  served  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the
        appellant's representatives no later than 14 November  2018.  On  7
        November 2018 the Upper  Tribunal  received  a  further  bundle  of
        documents from  the  appellant's  representatives  pursuant  to  my
        directions. The Upper Tribunal received no further submissions from
        the respondent.

   Background


     3. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born in 1981. He  arrived
        in the UK on 13 April 2009 and claimed asylum on 16 April 2009. His
        asylum claim was refused on 7 February 2011 and an appeal dismissed
        by judge of the First-tier Tribunal Baldwin on 31 March 2011.


     4. I summarise the asylum claim advanced by the appellant.  He  feared
        the Sri Lankan authorities because of his involvement with the LTTE
        as a musician and because of  his  family's  involvement  with  the
        LTTE. His father had been killed after having  spoken  out  against
        the Sri Lankan government. One of his brothers was abducted and two
        other brothers, who were involved with the LTTE, went  missing.  He
        was arrested on 11 September 2008 at his home following  an  attack
        by the LTTE on an aircraft base. He was arrested because he did not
        register his name with the local police. He was placed in  a  small
        cell and beaten. After approximately 15 days he  admitted  that  he
        had a brother in the LTTE. He was tortured for  two  days.  He  was
        released after his uncle paid a bribe.  The  appellant  used  false
        documents and an agent to leave Sri Lanka by  air.  After  entering
        the UK he resided with his brother, J, who  was  a  failed  asylum-
        seeker. He also had a French national brother, Y, who was  at  that
        stage residing in France. He claimed his  mother,  another  brother
        and a sister resided in India.

     5. Judge Baldwin noted that the Adjudicator who dismissed  J's  asylum
        appeal found that J had worked for the LTTE on largely manual tasks
        but that J's claim to have more involvement with  the  organisation
        was not credible. Judge Baldwin doubted  the  appellant's  evidence
        concerning his three siblings who were said to be  missing  in  Sri
        Lanka. Judge  Baldwin  expressed  concern  that  a  scaring  report
        detailing scars on the appellant's body did not refer to the age of
        the scars. Judge Baldwin noted that the  scars  were  found  to  be
        consistent or highly consistent with  the  claimed  causation,  but
        that they were "scars which may not have been caused at the time of
        his claimed detention." Judge Baldwin found that, if the  appellant
        was arrested, it was not for  his  LTTE  activity  but  because  he
        failed to register with the police as required. Judge Baldwin found
        that, even if the appellant had been detained and  ill-treated,  he
        was released on payment of a bribe. It was unlikely that  a  record
        would have been maintained indicating anything untoward  about  the
        appellant's release from detention. If there was a  record  of  the
        appellant's detention, Judge Baldwin found it likely that it  would
        record that the  authorities'  concerns  had  been  allayed.  Judge
        Baldwin found the death of the appellant's father was  unlikely  to
        make the appellant of interest to the  authorities,  and  that  any
        such work as the appellant undertook in Sri Lanka for the LTTE  was
        at an 'extremely low level'. Judge Baldwin was not  satisfied  that
        the appellant had proved that  his  brothers'  whereabouts  in  Sri
        Lanka remained unknown, and that he had not proved that there was a
        real risk that he would be persecuted or seriously  ill-treated  in
        Sri Lanka.


     6. It is apparent from my summary of Judge Baldwin's decision that the
        judge did not expressly reject the  appellant's  account  of  being
        arrested, detained and ill-treated by the Sri  Lankan  authorities.
        Indeed, there is no clear finding in  respect  of  the  appellant's
        claimed detention  and  torture.  Mr  Kotas,  who  represented  the
        respondent at the 'error of law' hearing accepted this  to  be  the
        case, a point lost on the author of the Reasons For Refusal  Letter
        who inaccurately stated that Judge Baldwin found the  appellant  to
        be 'wholly incredible'.

     7. After he became appeal rights exhausted the appellant applied for a
        residence card as the extended family member of his French national
        brother, NY, who was by then residing  in  the  UK  and  exercising
        Treaty rights. The application was refused on 18 October 2013. In a
        decision promulgated on 2 October  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Napthine dismissed his appeal against this refusal.  Judge
        Napthine rejected the appellant's claim that he was dependent on  Y
        while he resided in  Sri  Lanka.  There  was  no  evidence  of  any
        financial support, and there was a discrepancy in the  evidence  in
        respect of the person with whom the appellant had been living  when
        the financial support was said to have been sent.  Judge  Naphthine
        was not satisfied there was evidence that the appellant needed  the
        assistance of his brother to  undertake  everyday  tasks.  Although
        there was a psychiatric report from  Professor  Lingham  indicating
        that the appellant was suffering from PTSD, there  was  no  mention
        that he was dependent on his brother and there were no records from
        his GP or local mental health services. While Judge Napthine  found
        that the appellant may be suffering PTSD but that did not  mean  he
        needed his brother's daily care.  Judge  Napthine  found  that  the
        appellant "... has family in Sri Lanka who  helped  him  before  he
        left and no doubt they would support him upon his return."


     8. Although the appellant was granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
        Upper Tribunal his appeal was ultimately  dismissed  by  the  Upper
        Tribunal on 23 February 2015 and he became appeal rights  exhausted
        in March 2015.

     9. The appellant made  further  submissions  in  support  of  a  fresh
        asylum/human  rights  claim  which,  following  the  initiation  of
        judicial review proceedings,  led  to  a  refusal  of  his  further
        protection/human rights claim,  but  which  attracted  a  right  of
        appeal which he exercised, and which is the subject of the  present
        appeal.

Documentary evidence

    10. I had before me the decision of Judge Baldwin,  promulgated  on  31
        March 2011, and the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Napthine, promulgated on 2 October 2014.

    11. The bundle  of  documents  prepared  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        hearing included, inter alia, a statement from the appellant  dated
        16 March 2011 (prepared  for  the  appeal  before  Judge  Baldwin),
        photographs of the appellant playing musical instruments at several
        events, photographs of scarring on the appellant's  body,  an  ICRC
        letter dated 20 April 2009 confirming that a  tracing  request  had
        been made in respect of one of the appellant's brothers  before  he
        was detained, documents confirming that NY is a French national,  a
        death certificate stating that  the  appellant's  father  was  shot
        dead,  a psychiatric report by Dr Raj Persaud dated 18 May 2016,  a
        Medico-Legal report prepared  by  Dr  John  Joyce  of  the  Medical
        Foundation dated 27 August 2009, a letter from Dr Navaratnam of the
        Sangam Surgery, dated 30 January 2018 and supporting medical notes,
        several earlier letters written by the surgery, a letter  dated  10
        March 2016 from the Institute of Psychotrauma indicating  that  the
        appellant was being seen by Dr Katy Price  and was attending weekly
        appointments,  letters  from  Dr  Price   of   the   Institute   of
        Psychotrauma dated 11 and 12 April 2016, letters dated 27  November
        2014 and January 2015 from Dr Timothy  White  of  the  East  London
        Community Mental Health Team, a  letter  from  the  Waltham  Forest
        Access and Assessment Team dated 22 August  2014,  several  medical
        notes dating from 2011,  and  several  documents  relating  to  the
        appellant's gastro-oesophageal problems.

    12. A further bundle of documents prepared for the First-tier  Tribunal
        hearing included a supplementary statement from the appellant dated
        4 April 2018, a statement from NY also dated 4 April  2018,  and  a
        psychiatric report by Dr Saleh Dhumad dated 31 March 2018.

    13. Prior to the remade decision I  received  an  Addendum  Psychiatric
        Report from Dr Dhumad dated 23  October  2018,  a  letter  from  Dr
        rajarathnam of the Sangam Surgery, a letter from  the  East  London
        NHS Foundation Trust Assessment &  brief  Treatment  Team  dated  9
        October 2018, a Discharge Summary from the Whipps Cross  University
        Hospital dated 13 September 2018, and a letter from  a  Psychiatric
        Liaison Nurse of the Whipps Cross  Psychiatric  Liaison  Team  also
        dated 13 September 2018. The  documents  provided  pursuant  to  my
        directions at the end of the remade hearing  included  a  copy  and
        translation of the Unique Identification Authority  of  India  card
        issued to RN, the appellant's mother, and outpatient cards relating
        to RN issued by the Tagore Medical College  in  Chennai,  India,  a
        letter from Dr R Raja confirming that RN  is  his  patient  at  the
        Tagore Medical College, an affidavit from RN, and confirmation from
        DHL that RN sent a package from India to the appellant.

Oral evidence and submissions

    14. The appellant did not give oral evidence. This was based on medical
        advice from Dr Dhumad, a Consultant Psychiatrist, in  both  of  his
        Psychiatric Reports.


    15. In his statement NY confirmed that the appellant  had  been  living
        with him since 2011 and that he had moved to the UK to  look  after
        the appellant because of his state. NY explained that the appellant
        would become tearful and "close of completely" whenever required as
        to what happened in Sri Lanka. The appellant was described as being
        often withdrawn and distant and that most of the time  he  sat  and
        stared  like  he  was  daydreaming.  Whenever  they  discussed  the
        appellant's immigration case started crying and  became  even  more
        distant. The appellant said it would be better to die here than  to
        die in the hands of the authorities  in  Sri  Lanka.  In  his  oral
        evidence before the First-tier Tribunal NY maintained that  he  was
        not in contact with his paternal uncle and his family  and  he  had
        not been in contact since he tried unsuccessfully to call  them  in
        May 2009. Although the appellant stayed with J he 1st came  to  the
        UK, J's wife was not keen on caring  for  the  appellant  and  this
        created ill feeling in the family. NY stated that his  mother,  his
        youngest brother and sister all lived  in  India.  He  produced  an
        envelope said to originate from India which contained  a  photocopy
        of an Election Commission of India Identity Card  relating  to  the
        appellant's mother and which was dated 19 April 2006.

    16. In his oral evidence at the remade hearing NY  confirmed  that  his
        mother's sister and younger brother India. He believed that one  of
        the brothers who joined the LTTE had died, that the  other  brother
        who joined the LTTE was still missing, and that there was still  no
        word on the brother who had been abducted. NY came  to  the  UK  in
        order to look  after  the  appellant  because  J's  wife  found  it
        difficult to look after him. NY  described  how,  on  13  September
        2018, the appellant attempted to kill himself by taking an overdose
        of pills. Although NY did not witness this himself, it was directly
        witnessed by J who telephoned NY when it  happened.  The  appellant
        was immediately taken to hospital. In 2013 NY had directly observed
        the appellant put a number of pills in  his  hand  and  attempt  to
        swallow them. The appellant mentioned wanting to self-harm  or  die
        almost every day. At this point  NY  became  quite  distressed  and
        tearful.

    17. In cross-examination NY confirmed that he went to visit his  family
        in India the beginning of 2018 and this was confirmed by stamps  in
        his passport. His sister was  married  and  lived  close  to  their
        mother. NY confirmed he had no relatives in Sri Lanka with whom  he
        was in contact. NY again became very  emotional  when  asked  about
        enquiries he made with the appellant about what happened to him  in
        Sri Lanka. In response to questions from me NY confirmed  that  his
        wife remained in France and that he had no criminal convictions and
        had never been in trouble with the  police  in  either  the  UK  or
        France.

    18. Both parties made submissions focusing  on  the  issue  of  suicide
        risk. I reserved my decision.

Findings of fact and conclusions

    19. Judge Baldwin did not reject the appellant's claim to have  been  a
        musician who played liberation songs for  the  LTTE,  or  that  the
        appellant's father had been shot and killed, or that the  appellant
        had two brothers who were involved in the LTTE. Judge  Baldwin  did
        not however accept that the appellant was detained because of these
        factors, or that these factors were capable of establishing a  real
        risk that the Sri Lankan authorities would have an adverse interest
        in him if he were returned. Nor did Judge  Baldwin  find  that  the
        appellant had proved that the whereabouts of his  brothers  in  Sri
        Lanka remained unknown. I approach Judge Balwdin's findings of fact
        as my starting point in line with Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.


    20. There has been no appeal against judge Malcolm's finding  that  the
        appellant has no objective risk of ill-treatment by the Sri  Lankan
        authorities. I adopt the judge's  assessment  and  proceed  on  the
        basis that the appellant does  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
        persecution.

    21. The appellant's diagnosis of PTSD and his assessed risk of  suicide
        arise from his claimed fear of ill-treatment from  the  Sri  Lankan
        authorities and the ill-treatment he claimed to  have  suffered  in
        the past. It  is  therefore  necessary  to  establish  whether  the
        appellant was indeed detained and  ill-treated  in  the  past,  and
        whether he now holds a genuine subjective fear of torture, even  if
        that fear is not well-founded.

    22. The appellant's account of being detained and  ill-treated  at  the
        end of 2008 and the beginning of 2009 is both inherently  plausible
        and consistent with the then Country Guidance case of TK (Tamils  -
        LP updated) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00049.  The  appellant's
        account of being detained because he had not  registered  with  the
        police is measured and un-embellished, and  his  account  of  being
        tortured is consistent with  the  background  material  before  the
        Tribunal  in  TK.  I  additionally  note  that  the  appellant  has
        consistently maintained his account over the years.

    23. The Medico-Legal report prepared by Dr John Joyce on behalf of  the
        Medical Foundation was considered  by  Judge  Baldwin.  The  report
        contains a description given by the appellant of his detention  and
        ill-treatment, including being burned with cigarettes, punched  and
        struck with rifle butts, being beaten with a  piece  of  wood,  and
        burned with a metal bar causing a scar in the shape of  the  number
        '56'.  The  report  then  described  22  different  scars  on   the
        appellant's  body  which  were  assessed  in  accordance  with  the
        Istanbul Protocol.

    24. Judge Baldwin noted that some of  the  scarring  was  described  as
        'consistent' and 'very consistent' with the manner described by the
        appellant for their  causation.  In  fact,  8  of  the  scars  were
        described as being 'typical' of cigarette burns, and one  scar,  in
        the shape of a '56', was 'diagnostic' in that it  could  only  have
        been caused by being deliberately  inflicted.  Under  the  Istanbul
        Protocol a classification of a scar  being  'diagnostic  of'  means
        that the appearance could not have been caused  in  any  way  other
        than that described. It is the  highest  level  in  the  assessment
        hierarchy. A scar that is 'typical of' means that  it's  appearance
        is usually found with the type of trauma described, but  there  are
        other possible causes. This is a higher level in the hierarchy than
        a finding that a scar is 'very consistent' with the manner  of  its
        claimed causation. I must express my surprise  that  Judge  Baldwin
        made no mention of these findings by Dr Joyce. Judge Baldwin  found
        that the age of the scars was of "no small importance"  and  stated
        that Dr Joyce should have addressed this issue.  Mr  Tufan  however
        accepted that it is generally very difficult to determine  the  age
        of a scar, a point that will be familiar to those  with  experience
        of scarring reports in this jurisdiction (and a point  accepted  in
        KV (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]
        EWCA Civ 119). In his conclusion Dr Joyce stated that the appellant
        had a number of typical cigarette burns, and that  the  distinctive
        '56' scar could only  have  been  deliberately  inflicted  and  was
        consistent with recent patterns of torture for  those  coming  from
        Sri Lanka. Dr Joyce stated, "With the above clinical findings I  do
        not doubt that this man has been  tortured  as  he  describes."  Mr
        Tufan did not challenge the standing of Dr Joyce as an  expert  and
        indicated that he did accept Dr Joyce's statement. Mr Tufan did not
        suggest that the scars were caused in  a  manner  other  than  that
        described by the appellant.


    25. In his Reasons for Refusal Letter the respondent accepted that  the
        appellant was suffering from depression, PTSD, anxiety and suicidal
        ideation, and accepted that the condition of his mental health  was
        'fragile'. The respondent additionally  noted  that  the  appellant
        previously attempted to  commit  suicide  resulting  in  his  being
        admitted to hospital, and that he  was  previously  detained  under
        Section 3 of the Mental Health Act  on  an  in-patient  psychiatric
        ward. The large number of medical documents and  reports,  which  I
        will soon  consider  in  detail,  confirm  that  the  appellant  is
        suffering from a  serious  mental  health  condition  that  can  be
        attributed to the trauma he  claims  to  have  experienced  in  Sri
        Lanka. This further supports the appellant's  claim  to  have  been
        tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities. Dr  Persaud,  a  Consultant
        Psychiatrist who wrote a psychiatric report  on  the  appellant  in
        2016, stated that the essential feature of PTSD is the  development
        of characteristic symptoms following exposure to an extreme trauma.
        I am satisfied that the unchallenged and  persistent  diagnosis  of
        PTSD supports the appellant's  claim  to  have  been  detained  and
        tortured, events that  would,  on  any  rational  view,  constitute
        extreme trauma.

    26. I found NY to  be  a  compellingly  candid  witness.  He  gave  his
        evidence in a forthright and direct manner with  little  hesitation
        and no  perceptible  attempt  at  exaggeration.  His  evidence  was
        measured and generally consistent with the appellant's evidence and
        with the documentary evidence before me, in  respect  of  both  the
        appellant's mental health issues and his account  of  his  family's
        whereabouts. He became very emotional  when  questioned  about  his
        missing family in Sri Lanka and about his own attempts to probe the
        appellant's past, and there was nothing to  indicate  that  he  was
        feigning his emotions. There was nothing to indicate  that  he  was
        anything other than a person of good character. I find I can attach
        weight to his evidence. I accept NY's evidence that he entered  the
        UK to care for  the  appellant,  leaving  his  wife  in  France.  I
        additionally accept NY's  description  of  the  appellant's  mental
        health and his care requirements.

    27. Having  cumulative  regard  to  the  aforementioned  factors  I  am
        persuaded that the appellant was  seriously  tortured  by  the  Sri
        Lankan authorities in the manner described. I am satisfied there is
        a sufficient basis for the appellant to hold a  genuine  subjective
        fear. I am satisfied,  based  on  the  appellant's  statement,  his
        brother's  evidence  and  the  photographs  before  me,  that   the
        appellant was a musician who played liberation songs for the  LTTE.
        As such, he may  genuinely  believe  that  this,  albeit  low-level
        involvement with the LTTE, together with his previous detention and
        ill-treatment, could manifest an adverse interest  in  him  by  the
        authorities that would result in detention and ill-treatment. I  am
        further satisfied, having found NY to be a credible  witness,  that
        two of the appellant's brothers were involved with  the  LTTE,  and
        that his father was shot dead (supported by the unchallenged  death
        certificate, which confirms the cause of death). I  reiterate  that
        these  findings  are  not   inconsistent   with   Judge   Baldwin's
        conclusions, such as they were. I am satisfied that the combination
        of all these factors  can  establish  a  subjective  fear  of  ill-
        treatment by the Sri Lankan authorities,  and  that  the  appellant
        does genuinely believe he will be tortured if he is removed to  Sri
        Lanka.


    28. The test for establishing a breach of Article 3 in the context of a
        suicide risk is a high one. In J v Secretary of State for the  Home
        Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629 the Court of Appeal held, at [25]

             "25. In our judgment, there is no doubt that in foreign  cases
             the relevant test is, as Lord Bingham said in  Ullah,  whether
             there are strong grounds for believing  that  the  person,  if
             returned, faces a real risk of torture, inhuman  or  degrading
             treatment or punishment. Mr Middleton submits that a different
             test is required in cases where the article 3 breach relied on
             is a risk of suicide or other self-harm. But  this  submission
             is  at  odds  with  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence:  see,  for
             example, para [40] in Bensaid and the suicide cases  to  which
             we refer at para 30 below. Mr Middleton makes  two  complaints
             about the real risk test. First, he says that it leaves out of
             account the need for a causal link between the act of  removal
             and the ill-treatment relied on. Secondly,  the  test  is  too
             vague to be of any practical utility. But  as  we  explain  at
             para 27 below, a causal link is  inherent  in  the  real  risk
             test. As regards the second complaint, it is possible  to  see
             what it entails from the  way  in  which  the  test  has  been
             applied by the ECtHR in different circumstances. It should  be
             stated at the outset that the phrase  "real  risk"  imposes  a
             more stringent test than merely that the  risk  must  be  more
             than "not fanciful". The cases show that  it  is  possible  to
             amplify the test at least to the following extent.


             26.  First, the test requires an assessment to be made of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed. This must attain a minimum  level  of
             severity. The court has said on a number of occasions that the
             assessment of its severity depends on all the circumstances of
             the case. But the ill-treatment must "necessarily be  serious"
             such that  it  is  "an  affront  to  fundamental  humanitarian
             principles to remove an individual to a country where he is at
             risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].


             27.  Secondly, a causal link must be shown  to  exist  between
             the act or threatened act of  removal  or  expulsion  and  the
             inhuman treatment  relied  on  as  violating  the  applicant's
             article 3 rights. Thus in Soering  at  para  [91],  the  court
             said:


                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).


             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka..."


             28.  Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.


             29.  Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed  in
             a suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).


             30.  Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real  risk  of  a
             breach  of  article  3  in  a  suicide  case,  a  question  of
             importance is whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in
             the receiving state upon which the risk of suicide is said  to
             be based is objectively well-founded. If the fear is not well-
             founded, that will tend to weigh against there  being  a  real
             risk that the removal will be in breach of article 3.


             31.  Sixthly, a further question of considerable relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights."

    29. Those tests were developed in Y & Anor (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of
        State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 in this way:

             "15. There is no necessary tension between the two things. The
             corollary of the final sentence of �30 of J  is  that  in  the
             absence  of  an  objective  foundation  for  the   fear   some
             independent basis for it must be established if weight  is  to
             be given to it. Such an independent basis may  lie  in  trauma
             inflicted in the past on the appellant in (or,  as  here,  by)
             the receiving state: someone who has been tortured  and  raped
             by his or her captors may be terrified  of  returning  to  the
             place where it happened, especially if  the  same  authorities
             are in charge, notwithstanding  that  the  objective  risk  of
             recurrence has gone.


             16.  One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in J  that
             what may nevertheless be of equal importance  is  whether  any
             genuine fear which the appellant may establish, albeit without
             an objective foundation, is  such  as  to  create  a  risk  of
             suicide if there is an enforced return."

    30. I must now consider whether the totality of the evidence before me,
        including the medical evidence and the background evidence relating
        to Sri Lanka, reaches the high test as set out in J and Y.

    31. There is a substantial amount  of  evidence  that  the  appellant's
        ongoing mental health problems extend over several years. A  number
        of medical  notes  from  2011  indicated  that  the  appellant  has
        suffered from stress and  anxiety  since  2008  and  that  he  also
        suffered panic attacks, with some Statement  of  Fitness  for  Work
        documents  specifically  referring  to  PTSD.  A  letter  dated  27
        November 2014 from Dr Timothy White of the  East  London  Community
        Mental  Health  Team  and  SHO  to  Dr  Wildgrube,   a   Consultant
        Psychiatrist, described a near overdose earlier in the  year  which
        was prevented by his brother,  and  that  in  August  2014  he  was
        diagnosed by the Mental Health Team as suffering PTSD and placed on
        medication. A further letter from Dr White dated  22  January  2015
        contained  much  the  same  information  and  indicted   that   the
        appellant's  symptoms  worsened  when  he  had  to  report  to   an
        Immigration Officer or when he had a court case. A letter from  the
        Waltham Forest Access and Assessment Team dated 22 August 2014 also
        referred  to  the  attempted  overdose  that  was  stopped  by  the
        appellant's brother and noted that the appellant continued to  have
        fleeting suicidal thoughts with no intent or plan.

    32. Dr R Persaud is a  Consultant  Psychiatrist  whose  experience  and
        expertise were specifically  accepted  by  the  respondent  in  the
        Reasons for Refusal Letter. In his May 2016 report Dr Persaud noted
        the lengthy  history  of  the  appellant's  mental  health  issues,
        commenting  that  the  maintenance  of  symptoms  over  this   time
        indicated  that  the  appellant's   condition   was   "particularly
        serious." Dr Persaud noted, inter alia, the appellant's  admittance
        to the Homerton Hospital following a suicide overdose attempt,  and
        that he had been referred to  the  Institute  of  Psychotrauma  for
        further counselling. He noted that the appellant received  a  "high
        dose" of Sertraline, which was also a measure of  severity  of  his
        illness, and that he was also prescribed  medication  for  sedation
        and to help him sleep. Dr Persaud noted that, at the  time  of  the
        Psychiatric Report, the appellant was detained under Section  3  of
        the Mental Health Act and  was  being  diagnosed  and  treated  for
        psychosis,  which  rendered  him  unpredictable  and  a  danger  to
        himself. Dr Persaud diagnosed the appellant as suffering from  both
        PTSD and depressive illness at the sever end. His symptoms included
        flashbacks, nightmares, low mood, tearfulness, agitation,  anxiety,
        insomnia, suicide ideation, the inability to  concentrate,  startle
        reactions and disassociation, and anhedonia. Dr Persaud  noted  the
        appellant's fear that, if  returned  to  Sri  Lanka,  he  would  be
        detained, tortured and  killed.  The  Consultant  Psychiatrist  was
        impressed with the vividness of descriptions of  past  traumas  and
        the intensity of the appellant's emotional reactions and  found  it
        highly unlikely that the core parts of his account were  fabricated
        or exaggerated.

    33. Dr Persaud placed the appellant's risk of suicide  as  moderate  to
        high, with the risk increasing if the  appellant  fears  he  is  at
        imminent risk of  being  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.  The  Consultant
        Psychiatrist noted that the appellant was  "plotting  in  terms  of
        means", and that "...  forced  removal  to  Sri  Lanka  could  have
        terrible consequences for the [appellant's] mental health."

    34. In his conclusions Dr Persaud found  that  the  appellant  suffered
        from  serious  psychiatric  disorders  including  Psychosis,  Major
        Depression and PTSD, which was most likely secondary to his claimed
        past trauma. The appellant required  proper  PTSD  counselling  and
        therapy  and  anti-depressant  medication   and   monitoring.   The
        appellant's risk of suicide was already elevated and  would  become
        more elevated should he find himself facing removal, and that there
        were likely to be further suicide attempts. He also found that  the
        appellant was not fit to give evidence.

    35. The March 2016 letter from the Institute of Psychotrauma  explained
        that the Institute is a specialist psychological therapies  service
        for people with complex and sever PTSD, and that the appellant  was
        being seen by Dr Katy Price and was attending weekly  appointments.
        In her letters  dated  11  and  12  April  2016  Dr  Price,  Highly
        Specialist Clinical Psychologist, agreed with a diagnosis  of  PTSD
        previously made, and  that  the  appellant  exhibited  symptoms  of
        depression, including suicidal thoughts. The  appellant's  symptoms
        were supported by scores of psychometric measures. She  found  that
        the appellant's symptoms  and  presentation  were  consistent  with
        someone who experienced multiple and severe trauma  and  that  they
        were continuous with the genuine distress of  PTSD  and  depression
        and in line with other  of  her  clients  who  were  assessed  with
        similar experiences. According to the psychiatrist's report seen by
        Dr Price the appellant's presentation has been  consistent  over  a
        number of years. Dr Price recorded a description of an  attempt  by
        the appellant to take an overdose around 2015 which was thwarted by
        NY.

    36.  A letter from the Sangam Surgery, dated 30 January 2018, indicated
        that the appellant had registered with  the  surgery  in  September
        2014 and, since then, had been diagnosed with  PTSD  and  Recurrent
        Depression. The letter confirmed that the appellant was still being
        prescribed the same dosage  of  Sertraline  and  Propranolol  as  a
        sedative for anxiety attacks. The  appellant  was  also  prescribed
        medication for acid  reflux  caused  by  stress  and  anxiety.  The
        appellant was initially seen by psychiatrists in Walthamstow  where
        he previously lived and that, on moving to East Ham,  he  has  been
        under the care of the East London Mental Health Team. The appellant
        was seen by the Institute of Psychotrauma in 2015 and 2016 and  was
        under the care of Dr Christine Wildgrube, Consultant  Psychiatrist,
        with Newham CMHT North East. The GP  described  how  the  appellant
        found it difficult to cope with his trauma and  that  he  also  got
        disorientated. The GP believed the appellant  would  be  unable  to
        cope without his medication and suspected that he would need to  be
        on them lifelong. Although his medication gave the  appellant  some
        relief he still had persistent low moods and  thoughts  of  suicide
        which were indicative of moderate to  severe  depressive  episodes.
        The appellant's mental state was described as being "very  fragile"
        and the GP was concerned that any changes might tip  the  appellant
        "over the edge  and  it  is  highly  likely  that  he  will  commit
        suicide."

    37. A further letter from the same  surgery,  dated  19  October  2018,
        confirmed that the appellant had continuous suicidal  thoughts  and
        had attempted to overdose  in  September  2018  and  in  2017.  The
        appellant was currently waiting  for  specialist  counselling  from
        Waterloo Multi-Ethnic Counselling, and had been seen by  the  local
        community Assessment and Brief Treatment Team (ABTT) who  had  also
        agreed with further psychotrauma therapy. A letter dated 9  October
        2018 from the ABTT referred to the suicide attempt thwarted by  the
        appellant's brother in September 2018, and  the  appellant's  claim
        that he would rather kill himself than face any further torture  in
        Sri Lanka, although he did not at that time  present  any  risk  to
        self or others. An  Emergency  Department  Discharge  Summary  from
        Whipps Cross University Hospital  indicated  that  the  appellant's
        diagnosis was 'suicidal', and a letter from the Psychiatric Liaison
        Team indicated that he was currently struggling with his sleep  and
        that he felt someone was going to stab him and that,  if  returned,
        he would be arrested and possibly killed. The  appellant  continued
        to have fleeting suicidal thoughts with no intent or plan.

    38. In his Psychiatric Report dated 31  March  2018,  Dr  Saleh  Dhumad
        considered  the  previous  medical  documents  and  diagnosed   the
        appellant as suffering a Severe Depressive Episode  and  PTSD,  and
        that the most likely cause of his PTSD was the incident of  torture
        in Sri Lanka. Dr Dhumad was of the  opinion  that  the  appellant's
        risk of suicide was currently "significant" and that  it  was  very
        likely to increase in the context of removal to Sri Lanka. The main
        risk factors in his condition were severe depression, hopelessness,
        and PTSD. Hopelessness had a serious  and  significant  association
        with suicide risk, and the risk would be greater when the appellant
        felt that removal  was  close.  The  psychiatrist  found  that  the
        appellant was not currently fit to give evidence. He  was  severely
        depressed, hopeless, and his concentration was poor.  He  was  very
        anxious and scared  of  facing  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.  The
        psychiatrist  specifically  considered  the  possibility  that  the
        appellant might be feigning or exaggerating his mental illness. The
        psychiatrist indicated that he had not taken the appellant's  story
        at face value but  carefully  examined  his  symptomology  and  his
        emotional reactions during the interview. In his  clinical  opinion
        the  appellant's  clinical  presentation  was  consistent  with   a
        diagnosis of severe depression and PTSD. Dr Dhumad did not  believe
        that the appellant was fit to fly given the  state  of  his  mental
        health and the risk of ending his life.

    39. In his Addendum Report dated 23 October 2018, the  most  up-to-date
        of all the medical notes and reports,  Dr  Dhumad  found  that  the
        appellant's presentation remained consistent with  a  diagnosis  of
        severe Depressive Episode without psychotic symptoms, and PTSD.  In
        the Consultant Psychiatrist's opinion,  the  appellant's  condition
        had deteriorated since March 2018. The appellant was  more  anxious
        and hopeless and the risk of suicide, although currently  moderate,
        would be significant in the event of removal  to  Sri  Lanka.  Once
        again Dr Dhumad was of the opinion that the appellant was unfit  to
        attend court hearings or give evidence and  he  lacked  the  mental
        capacity to participate meaningfully in court proceedings.

    40. Distilling the common  elements  from  the  above  summary  of  the
        medical evidence leads me to conclude that the appellant  has  been
        highly traumatised by his torture in Sri Lanka and,  based  on  the
        expert views of two separate Consultant Psychiatrists, he is likely
        to be at significant risk of suicide if he is returned to Sri Lanka
        because of his genuine subjective belief that he will  be  detained
        and tortured. I note the unchallenged evidence that  the  appellant
        has, on several occasions, attempted to overdose and  that  he  has
        been admitted to hospital on  two  occasions  after  attempting  to
        overdose. I find, applying the guidance established in both J and Y
        that the potential consequences for the  appellant  do  attain  the
        minimum level of severity and that the causal link  exists  between
        the act or threat of his removal and the commission of  suicide.  I
        bear in mind that the threshold is  particularly  high  given  that
        this is a foreign case, and that the appellant's fear is  not  well
        founded, but I have found that the appellant has a genuine fear  of
        torture and that this fear was based on the intentional  infliction
        of harm on the appellant by the authorities in Sri Lanka.

    41. I must consider whether  Sri  Lanka  has  effective  mechanisms  to
        reduce the risk of suicide, and to determine the  circumstances  in
        which the appellant will find himself if returned.

    42. Judge Baldwin was not satisfied that the appellant had proved  that
        the whereabouts of his brothers were not  known,  noting  that  the
        appellant had not approached the Red Cross for an update in respect
        of his brother who was abducted, and that there were no attempts to
        trace his two brothers who were with the LTTE. Judge  Napthine,  in
        the  short  decision  dated  2  October  2014  arising   from   the
        appellant's application for an EEA residence card  as  an  extended
        family member, made brief reference to the  appellant  having  "...
        family in Sri Lanka who helped him before he left and no doubt they
        would support him upon his return." There was however  no  evidence
        given as to the whereabouts of the appellant's brothers, and  Judge
        Napthine was not asked to determine whether the appellant  had  any
        family in Sri Lanka. I approach the factual findings of both  judge
        Baldwin and Judge Napthine as my starting point.

    43. Judge Baldwin did not have the benefit of hearing evidence from NY.
        The evidence from NY post-dates Judge Baldwin's  decision.  I  have
        found NY to be generally credible. NY explained that he has not had
        any contact with family in Sri Lanka since 2009 as a consequence of
        the  dispersal  of  his  family  as  the  conflict  escalated   and
        concluded. NY's mother was an only child and NY has been unable  to
        contact any family on his father's  side,  including  his  paternal
        uncle. I bear in mind the difficulties of proving a negative, and I
        note what appeared to be  a  genuine  and  spontaneous  display  of
        emotion by NY when asked  questions  about  his  missing  brothers.
        Given the large number of people displaced and killed at the end of
        the conflict, it is inherently possible that the whereabouts of the
        appellant's siblings remains unknown. NY's evidence in  respect  of
        the presence of his mother, sister and younger brother in India  is
        supported by the envelope containing the photocopy of his  mother's
        Election Commission of India Identity Card  (which  has  a  barcode
        sticker from an Indian courier company), the Unique  Identification
        Authority of India card issued  to  the  appellant's  mother  (RN),
        outpatient cards relating to  her  issued  by  the  Tagore  Medical
        College in Chennai, India, a letter from Dr R Raja confirming  that
        RN is his patient at the Tagore Medical College, an affidavit  from
        RN, and confirmation from DHL that RN sent a package from India  to
        the appellant. Having carefully considered the oral  evidence  from
        NY and having found  NY  to  be  a  credible  witness,  and  having
        cumulative regard to the totality of the evidence before me,  I  am
        satisfied that the appellant does not have any family in Sri  Lanka
        with whom he or his brothers in the UK are in contact, and that, if
        returned, there would no supportive family network.


    44. In GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319
        (IAC), in the context of an appellant who had also  been  tortured,
        whose fear was not well-founded but who genuinely believed he would
        be targeted, and who was at high risk of  committing  suicide,  the
        Upper Tribunal considered the evidence relating to  the  mechanisms
        for mental health treatment.

             "454.    The evidence  is  that  there  are  only  25  working
             psychiatrists in the whole of Sri Lanka.  Although  there  are
             some mental health facilities in Sri Lanka, at paragraph 4  of
             the April 2012 UKBA Operational Guidance Note on Sri Lanka, it
             records an observation by Basic  Needs  that  "money  that  is
             spent on mental health only really goes to  the  large  mental
             health institutions in capital cities, which are  inaccessible
             and do not provide appropriate care for mentally ill people"


             455. In the UKBA Country of  Origin  Report  issued  in  March
             2012, at paragraph 23.28-23.29, the following  information  is
             recorded from a BHC letter written on 31 January 2012:


                  "23.28 The BHC letter of 31 January  2012  observed  that:
                  "There are no  psychologists  working  within  the  public
                  sector  although  there  are  [sic]  1  teaching  at   the
                  University of Colombo. There are no numbers available  for
                  psychologists working within the private sector. There are
                  currently 55 psychiatrists attached  to  the  Ministry  of
                  Health and working across the country."


                  Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)


                  23.29 The BHC letter of 31 January 2012468 observed that:


                  "Post  Traumatic  Stress   Disorder   (PTSD)   was   first
                  recognised in Sri Lanka in patients affected by  the  2004
                  tsunami. Many of the psychiatrists and  support  staff  in
                  Sri Lanka have received training in Australia and  the  UK
                  for  the  treatment  of   the   disorder.   A   Consultant
                  Psychiatrist from  NIMH  said  that  many  patients  often
                  sought ayurvedic or traditional treatment for the  illness
                  long before approaching public hospitals, adding that this
                  often   resulted   in   patients   then   suffering   from
                  psychosis."""

    45. The Upper Tribunal then concluded,

             "456.    We note that the third appellant is considered by his
             experienced Consultant Psychiatrist to  have  clear  plans  to
             commit suicide if returned and that he is mentally  very  ill,
             too ill to give reliable evidence. We approach  assessment  of
             his circumstances on the basis that it would be  possible  for
             the respondent to return the  third  appellant  to  Sri  Lanka
             without his coming to harm, but once there, he would be in the
             hands of the Sri Lankan mental health services. The  resources
             in Sri Lanka are sparse and are limited to the cities. In  the
             light of the respondent's own evidence that in  her  OGN  that
             there are facilities only in the cities and that they "do  not
             provide appropriate care for mentally ill people" and  of  the
             severity of  this  appellant's  mental  illness,  we  are  not
             satisfied  on  the  particular  facts  of  this  appeal,  that
             returning him to Sri Lanka  today  complies  with  the  United
             Kingdom's international obligations under Article 3 ECHR."

    46. The Reasons for Refusal Letter provided extracts from "Sri Lanka  -
        medical issues - mental  healthcare  (18  Aug  2016)"  noted,  with
        reference to a bulletin published  in  2013,  that  there  were  60
        consultant psychiatrists (amounting to 0.3 psychiatrist for 100,000
        inhabitants), that there were 90 medical officers with a diploma in
        psychiatry and 150 medical officers in mental health, that  private
        healthcare services offer mostly ambulatory  services,  private  GP
        practitioners,   specialist   centres   and   hospitals   providing
        outpatient  services.  There  were  some  NGOs  working  with   the
        government services in mental healthcare, and reference was made to
        a WHO Atlas from 2010 outlining a mental health plan. The WHO Atlas
        noted that prescription regulations authorised  primary  healthcare
        doctors to prescribe  psychotherapeutic  medicines  but  with  some
        restrictions, but that the department of health did  not  authorise
        primary healthcare nurses prescribing such medicines,  and  primary
        healthcare nurses were not permitted to independently diagnose  and
        treat mental disorders within the primary  care  system.  The  same
        2010 report indicated  that  the  majority  of  primary  healthcare
        doctors and nurses had received  official  in-service  training  on
        mental health within the previous 5 years. A  MedCOI*  report  from
        May  2016  noted  that  inpatient  and  outpatient  treatment   was
        available in  Jaffna  from  a  psychiatrist,  and  that  there  was
        psychiatric  treatment  in  the  form   of   daycare,   psychiatric
        counselling, psychiatric crisis intervention  in  case  of  suicide
        attempt, and psychiatric treatment of PTSD. Some of this  treatment
        was available in Vavuniya, but  the  crisis  intervention  was  not
        mentioned. There were  no  additional  details  of  the  number  of
        psychiatrists, and no details or assessment was provided as to  the
        efficacy of such treatment.

    47. Much of the background evidence relied on by the respondent to show
        the availability of mental health treatment pre-dates the  decision
        in GJ and suggests that the resources available are  very  limited.
        The May 2016 report describes treatment in Vavuniya  but  does  not
        indicate that there is any psychiatric crisis  intervention.  There
        is  no  reference  in  the  more  recent  information   about   the
        restrictions  on  psychiatric  nurses  prescribing  medication.   I
        additionally note that the appellant will be  returned  to  Colombo
        and not Vavuniya, and would presumably have to make his own way  to
        his home area, having to first confront Sri Lankan officials at the
        airport. The appellant will be returning to a place where he has  a
        strong fear of the authorities and  would  be  without  any  family
        support. The information provided by the respondent post-dating  GJ
        is limited and suggests, given the limited number  of  professional
        qualified in  mental  health  services,  that  there  will  not  be
        appropriate care for someone  such  as  the  appellant  who  is  an
        extremely vulnerable individual, who  suffers  from  severe  mental
        health  issues,  who  has  already  attempted  suicide  on  several
        occasions, and who has a strong  fear  of  the  authorities.  I  am
        satisfied that Sri Lanka does  not  have  effective  mechanisms  to
        reduce the risk of suicide for this particular appellant given  the
        nature and  seriousness  of  his  mental  health  condition.  I  am
        therefore satisfied that the appellant's removal would  render  him
        at  high  risk  of  suicide  and,  in  the  absence  of   effective
        mechanisms, his removal will breach Article 3.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds under Article 3


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               15 November 2018

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



