

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02163/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC             |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 July 2019                     |        On 08 August 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                     l K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Semega-Janneh, Counsel, instructed by R&A
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Malawi, appeals against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Thorne dated 8 May 2019 in  which  the
    judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the   Respondent's
    decision of 21 February 2019 refusing the  Appellant's  protection  and
    human rights claim.

2.   The Appellant, born in May 2000,  was  aged  18  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the judge on 15 April 2019.  He asserted  that  in  2008
    when he would have been aged around 8 he had been brought to the UK  by
    a maternal uncle, CK, with whom he had been  living  in  Malawi  for  a
    period of time, due to the Appellant having witnessed domestic violence
    in his own family's home between his mother and biological father.  The
    reasons for CK bringing the Appellant to the UK are not  wholly  clear.
    The Appellant asserted that he remained living with CK in  the  UK  for
    about a year before CK returned to Malawi leaving  the  Appellant  with
    CK's friend, 'uncle' PM (see eg SEF, q93).  That situation was said  to
    have pertained until approximately  2015.   PM  thereafter  disappeared
    from the home, allegedly leaving  the  Appellant  in  a  house  in  the
    Manchester area for up to  four  weeks.   The  Appellant  feared  being
    evicted by a landlord who was enquiring about what was going on  within
    the household and decided to leave the house.   It  is  said  that  the
    Appellant thereafter spent a prolonged period of time homeless  on  the
    streets of Manchester, and developed a drink problem.  It was also said
    that in or around 2017 the Appellant met with  his  biological  mother,
    GK, by happenstance in the Manchester area.  The  Appellant  thereafter
    resumed living with GK, who has leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    on the basis of being a spouse of a British national, LE.

3.   The Appellant claimed asylum on or around February 2018,  when  he  was
    still a minor.  Screening and SEF interviews took place. The  Appellant
    did not give a clear reason as to why he feared serious harm in Malawi.
     Indeed, he appeared to accept that  there  was  no-one  from  whom  he
    feared serious harm. However he stated that he wished to remain in  the
    United Kingdom with CK and her husband LE (the Appellant's stepfather);
    that he had little or no contact with any person in Malawi; and that he
    would have no means of supporting himself if he were to be returned  to
    Malawi.

4.   The Respondent refused the protection and human  rights  claim  in  the
    decision of 21 February 2019, at which time the Appellant was  18.  The
    Respondent found that no properly articulated  claim  to  fear  serious
    harm in Malawi had been expressed by the Appellant. In considering  the
    Appellant's  private  life,   the   Respondent   considered   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules, and noted  that  the  Appellant
    was by then over 18, but that there were no very significant  obstacles
    to his integration into Malawi (paragraphs  100-101).   The  Respondent
    also considered at paragraphs 95 to 99 whether the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of  the  rules;  the  Respondent
    finding that whilst the Appellant was by then aged 18 and under 25,  he
    had  failed  to  provide  sufficient  evidence  that   he   had   lived
    continuously in the UK for half his life.

5.   The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision  and  the  appeal  came
    before the judge on 15 April 2019.  The Appellant was represented by Mr
    Semega-Janneh who also appears before  me  today.  The  Appellant  gave
    evidence before the judge as did his mother and stepfather.  The  judge
    found, taking his evidence at  its  highest  at  paragraph  44  of  the
    decision, that: " ...the only reasons that he had says he does not want
    to return to Malawi is that he prefers to  stay  in  the  UK  with  his
    mother and study and work here.  Also he  had  heard  that  there  were
    floods in Malawi.  He does not claim to fear anyone or anything in  his
    home country".

6.   In relation to  the  Appellant's  private  life  the  judge  stated  as
    follows at paragraph 58 of the decision:

     "I conclude that A does not  succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Rules because he has not been resident in the UK for 20  years  and
         is over the age of 18 years of age.  I also  conclude  (bearing  in
         mind my above findings) that he  has  not  established  that  there
         would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration  into  his
         country of origin.  There is inadequate evidence  that  he  suffers
         from ill-health now and he speaks  the  languages  of  Malawi,  has
         family there who I do not accept would not be able  to  accommodate
         and assist him in the short term before he finds employment".

7.   The judge then also proceeded to consider  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    rights outside of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He  directed  himself  at
    paragraph 79 as to the application  of  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and found at paragraphs 80 and 81  that
    the Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would not amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference in his Article 8 private and family  life
    rights.

8.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    grounds dated 17 May 2019. The grounds of appeal do  not  with  respect
    identify with sufficient clarity what alleged errors of law  were  said
    to be contained within the judge's decision. It  was  argued  that  the
    judge had erred in law in failing to consider that  the  Appellant  had
    mental  health  problems  and  other  associated  problems  during  the
    hearing.  It was said that the judge had failed to take proper  account
    of a report from a social worker.   It also appears to be  argued  that
    the judge erred procedurally in failing to take steps  to  ensure  that
    the Appellant could properly participate in  the  proceedings,  as  the
    social worker's report disclosed that he  ought  to  be  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness.

9.   Paragraph 2 of the grounds of appeal also appears  to  argue  that  the
    judge had erred in law in failing to take into account  the  extent  of
    the bond between the Appellant and his mother and had  failed  to  give
    adequate weight to the extent of the family life which existed  between
    them, notwithstanding the fact that the Appellant was now an adult.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Loke on 5 June 2019 saying briefly that the  Appellant's  grounds  were
    arguable and that permission was granted on all grounds.

11.  I have heard from  Mr  Semega-Janneh  today  regarding  the  procedural
    error point and the weight that should have been attached to the social
    work report.  The report is in fact a 'Children & Families  Assessment'
    prepared by Arike Sanni of Salford City Council and is dated  14  March
    2018. It sets out that the Appellant's circumstances  were  brought  to
    the attention of the Social Services by the  Respondent  following  the
    screening interview, the referral being made on the basis that  it  was
    alleged that the Appellant had stated that he had been present  in  the
    UK since 2008 but had never been in education or been registered with a
    GP.

12.  With respect, my attention was not brought to any  passage  within  the
    social work report  which  demonstrated  that  the  Appellant  was,  as
    alleged by Mr Semega-Janneh, potentially unable to participate  in  the
    proceedings.  It was argued on the Appellant's behalf  that  the  judge
    had erred procedurally in failing to undertake at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing an assessment as to whether the  Appellant  was  able  to  give
    evidence.  I have read the social work  report  and  I  cannot  discern
    anything within  in  which  would  support  the  proposition  that  the
    Appellant might be unable to give evidence.  Mr Semega-Janneh  was  not
    able to state clearly what specific steps the judge ought to have taken
    in order to have  facilitated  the  Appellant's  participation  in  the
    proceedings.  There is nothing  on  the  face  of  the  decision  which
    suggested that the Appellant, who was recorded  as  having  given  oral
    evidence in the appeal, was at any disadvantage or under  any  distress
    during the proceedings. I reject the Appellant's proposition  that  the
    judge erred in law either procedurally or substantively in  failing  to
    have regard to the social work report,  which  the  judge  referred  to
    clearly in any event at paragraph 18 in his decision.

13.  Further, the Appellant's other ground, that the judge erred in  law  in
    his assessment of the weight to be attached to  the  bond  between  the
    Appellant and his mother merely has the appearance  of  a  disagreement
    with the judge's decision.

14.  However, I raised with the parties a separate matter not raised in  the
    Appellant's grounds of appeal, that being that the judge  at  paragraph
    58 of the decision appears to direct himself in  law  only  as  to  the
    provisions under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  rules,  that  being
    whether an applicant aged 18 or over  and  may  face  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into his country of origin.  The Appellant
    is of course 18, but he is also under 25.  On his own  account  he  had
    also spent half his life in the  United  Kingdom,  thus,  although  the
    Respondent had directed  his  mind  to  the  question  of  whether  the
    Appellant had satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v), the
    judge did not.  This seems to me to be an error of law.

15.   Mr  Tan  initially  argued  that   the   requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(v) could not apply to the Appellant, as the  requirements  of
    subparagraph (v), including the requirement to be aged 18 or over, must
    be  satisfied,  according  to  subparagraph  (1),  at  that   date   of
    application.   However,  there  was  never  any  requirement  for   the
    Appellant to have made a valid application under  paragraph  276ADE(1),
    as he had made a protection claim (see paragraph  276AO(i)).  Thus,  in
    the absence of any  requirement  to  make  a  valid  application  under
    276ADE(1), the Appellant cannot  be  expected  to  have  satisfied  the
    requirements of the rule at the date of application. However,  he  does
    appear to have satisfied the age requirement at the date of decision. I
    further note that the Respondent was not troubled by  the  age  of  the
    Appellant at the date of his  protection  claim  when  considering  the
    Appellant's position under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) at paragraphs  95  to
    99 of the decision.

 16. Given the very specific facts  of  the  case,  that  the  Appellant  is
    alleged to have spent half his life in the United Kingdom, and was aged
    between 18 and 25, and given the fact that that was  a  matter  clearly
    considered by the Respondent, I am of the view that the judge's  error,
    in not considering that issue, was Robinson obvious.

17.  I have considered whether, even if the judge had directed his  mind  to
    the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v), there was any  likelihood  at
    all of the judge having been satisfied on the evidence before him  that
    the Appellant could make out his case that he had been present  in  the
    United  Kingdom  for  half  his  life.   Certainly,  there  was  little
    documentary  evidence  supporting  that   proposition.   However,   the
    Appellant asserted that he had been  present  from  2008,  as  did  his
    mother who also gave oral evidence. There is no finding of fact made by
    the judge as to when the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom, or as
    to whether the Appellant and/or his mother ought to be believed on that
    specific issue, or in  their  evidence  generally.   I  find  that  the
    judge's failure to consider the provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)
    was a material error. Whilst there may be only a slender chance of  the
    Appellant being able to satisfy to the balance of probabilities that he
    had been physically present in the United Kingdom since 2008, I  cannot
    exclude it as  a  possibility  if  that  matter  were  to  be  properly
    adjudicated upon.

18.  There are a number of issues which might speak to  the  credibility  of
    both the Appellant and his mother.  Whether or not  the  Appellant  had
    been registered with a GP in the United Kingdom was  discussed  in  the
    social work report.  Some concern had been expressed by social  workers
    that the Appellant had not since his  alleged  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom been in education or had seen  a  GP,  even  after  he  assumed
    residence with his mother in or around 2017.  His mother  came  in  for
    some criticism by the social services for her failure to  register  the
    Appellant with a GP and to  ensure  that  he  entered  into  education.
    There is a reference at the end of the social work report however  that
    he might have been registered with a GP after all.  There  was  also  a
    copy of an  application  for  entry  clearance  on  the  Tribunal  file
    (seemingly provided by the Respondent at the hearing before the  judge)
    in another person's name, but where the name and date of birth of  that
    applicant's mother appear to be those of GK.  There is no discussion of
    this evidence in the judge's decision. It seems relevant, and  requires
    some scrutiny.

19.  It is therefore uncertain on those facts what the  Appellant's  history
    in the United Kingdom has been.  I am of the view that whether  or  not
    the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of  276ADE(1)(v)  is  a  matter
    requiring determination by the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.   If  he
    does satisfy that Rule then this would be a very significant matter  in
    the assessment of the proportionality of the  decision  to  refuse  his
    human rights claim.

    I find that the judge erred in law in failing to direct his mind as  to
    276ADE(1)(v), and I find that it was a  material  error,  as  I  cannot
    exclude the possibility that the Appellant  might  have  persuaded  the
    judge that he had been present in the United Kingdom since 2008.


    Notice of Decision

    I find that the making  of  the  decision  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.


    I set aside the judge's decision.


    Having set the matter aside  I  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing de novo, on the basis that  the  extent  of  the
    findings on fact that would be necessary in this appeal are  such  that
    the relevant Practice Direction is satisfied.


Signed:                    Date: 1.8.19

Rory O'Ryan

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                     Date: 1.8.19
Rory O'Ryan

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

