
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02664/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 2 January 2020                    |On 13 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     ZM
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Jones, Counsel instructed by NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision of  Judge  Howard  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeal of ZM, a citizen of Iraq, against the decision  of
    the Secretary of State (having made a deportation order) to refuse  the
    Appellant's international protection and human rights claims.

 3. The Secretary of State's decision  was  made  on  4  March  2019.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before Judge Howard on 30 May 2019 and  was  dismissed.
    The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    His application was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  on  8
    August 2019 in the following terms

         "It is argued that the tribunal erred in finding  at  paragraph  46
         that the appellant can be returned on a direct flight to Erbil  and
         Sulamaniyah and can get safely from there to Duhok should he choose
         to do so voluntarily. Should he not do so voluntarily reliance  was
         placed by the tribunal on paragraph  2.7.7  of  the  February  2019
         guidance in which it is stated that responsibility for  immigration
         in the whole of Iraqi has now been  centralised  with  the  Baghdad
         authorities and those who do not  return  voluntarily  returned  to
         Baghdad "from where they will travel to their destination".

         It is arguable that  this  finding  was  contrary  to  the  country
         guidance in the case of  AAH (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)n
         Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC), and that the evidence relied on by
         the tribunal to depart from  that  guidance  did  not  justify  the
         tribunal in departing from it."

Background

 4. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Iraq who  came  to  United  Kingdom  in  2003  and  made  an
    unsuccessful claim for asylum. He left the United Kingdom in  2005  and
    made a new claim for asylum in the  Netherlands  before  moving  on  to
    Germany and from there  being  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom.  His
    repeated claim for asylum was again unsuccessful but  in  2010  he  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain. On 18 July 2018 he was convicted of
    arson and sentenced to  10  months  imprisonment  with  the  additional
    period of two months for a Bail  Act  offence.  As  a  result  of  this
    conviction a deportation order was made against him and  the  Appellant
    responded with a protection and human  rights  claim.  This  claim  was
    refused by the Secretary of State and his appeal against  that  refusal
    was dismissed.

 5. In dismissing the appeal  the  judge  found  that  the  last  place  of
    residence of the  Appellant  in  Iraq  was  in  Dohuk  in  the  Kurdish
    autonomous region (KRI) and that the Appellant did not face persecution
    or a risk of serious  harm  in  the  KRI.  The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant could be returned to the KRI either directly  if  his  return
    was voluntary or via Baghdad if his return was enforced.

 6. The grounds of appeal do not challenge the Judge's findings as  to  the
    credibility of the Appellant's claim or risk on return  asserting  only
    that the Judge's conclusion that the Appellant could return directly to
    Erbil or  Sulamaniyah  was  in  direct  contradiction  of  the  country
    guidance case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018]
    UKUT 00212 (IAC) and it was on this basis that permission to appeal was
    granted.

 7. The new country  guidance  decision  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) was published on 23
    December 2019 and replaces all existing country guidance.

Submissions

 8. For the Appellant Ms Jones said that the grounds  of  appeal  are  very
    narrow dealing only with return to the KRI.  Country  guidance  at  the
    time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing was fairly express  in  stating
    that all flights were via Baghdad. With the new country guidance things
    have changed and this poses a difficulty for the Appellant. The country
    guidance case, SMO, KSP & IM, says direct return to  the  KRI  can  now
    take place. It's a very recent case but at the time grounds were lodged
    the law was supportive.

 9. For the Respondent Mr Howells agreed that the grounds are on  a  narrow
    point. It is said that the Judge erred  at  para  46  in  following  AA
    (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 when the later  case,  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG says there are no international flights to
    the KRI. However, AAH was based on the  situation  existing  in  August
    2018. The hearing was in May 2019 and the CPIN of February 2019  refers
    to flights to Erbil and Sulamanyah. There was no challenge to  risk  on
    return and no challenge to the finding that he is able to  contact  his
    family. The question of direct flights to the KRI was  reconsidered  in
    SMO, KSO & IM.

10. Ms Jones added that the Appellant has instructed that  he  anxious  for
    the Tribunal to know that he runs a barbershop in Plymouth and  employs
    two people. He wants a further chance. At Ms Jones' request I  put  the
    matter back to enable her to seek further instructions.

11. When the hearing resumed Ms Jones applied  to  adjourn.  She  had  been
    unable to contact her instructing solicitors.  She  suggested  that  an
    application for permission to amend  the  grounds  could  be  made.  Mr
    Howells responded to say that he could  not  support  the  application.
    Permission to appeal was given in August more than 4 months ago and  no
    application has been made. I refused  the  application.  There  was  no
    indication prior to the hearing that there would be any application  to
    amend the grounds and indeed the request now being made was speculative
    to the extent that the adjournment request was being made only  on  the
    basis that the  Appellant's  representatives  may  wish  to  amend  the
    grounds with no indication of the basis upon which they would apply  to
    do so.

12. Ms Jones said that in relation to appeal itself the appeal  was  lodged
    prior to recent case of SMO, KSO &  IM.  The  grounds  are  valid.  The
    decision taken was not in accordance with country guidance and this was
    a misdirection in law. The Judge may have had knowledge of the CPIN but
    AAH was not followed.  Country  guidance  now  says  there  are  direct
    flights but there is a lack of information in relation to those.  There
    is a lack of information  on  what  someone  would  face  if  returned.
    Although SMO, KSO & IM says that there is a direct route to the KRI the
    refusal letter does not mention a designated  location.  It  only  says
    return to Iraq. On that basis the  appeal  should  succeed.  The  final
    point relating to flights is that enforced flights  were  via  Baghdad,
    only voluntary returns could go direct. The  Judge  should  have  found
    that going via Baghdad the  Appellant  was  not  safe.   Appeal  should
    succeed.

13. In answer to my question Mr Howells said that in the light of SMO,  KSO
    & IM the return of this Appellant would be to the KRI.

14. I reserved my decision.

Decision

15. Both Ms Jones and Mr Howells agreed that the  grounds  of  appeal  were
    narrow and relate only to returnability  to  the  KRI.  Permission  was
    granted on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge had failed  to
    follow the decision in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  deals  with  the  core  asylum
    claim  between  paragraphs  25  and  32  and  the  Judge  reaches   the
    straightforward conclusion at paragraph 33 that  there  is  nothing  to
    cause him to reach any different  conclusions  to  those  made  by  the
    Tribunal in 2006. The decision in this respect is not challenged.  From
    paragraph  34  onwards  the  Judge  deals  with  the  question  of  the
    Appellant's return in the absence of identity or other  documents.  The
    Judge notes  that  the  Appellant  last  lived  in  the  KRI  and  adds
    (paragraph 35) "the two known  destinations  for  internal  travel  are
    Baghdad and Erbil."

17. The Judge appropriately self directs to AAH  and  thereafter  that  the
    Appellant does not have the appropriate documentation to enable him  to
    travel from Baghdad to the KRI. The decision  clearly  follows  AAH  at
    paragraphs 37 to 40.

18. Paragraph 42 refers to direct flights to the KRI and although the Judge
    does not, at this point, refer to it it  seems  that  this  information
    must come from the February 2019 CPIN. At paragraph 45 the Judge  finds
    that  the  Appellant  cannot  relocate  to  Baghdad.  This  remains  in
    accordance with the country guidance. The finding  that  the  Appellant
    can return directly to the KRI comes at the end of  paragraph  46  and,
    for the first time, the Judge quotes the February 2019 CPIN as follows

         "previously the KRG authorities had responsibility for immigration;
         this is now centralised with the authorities in Baghdad deciding on
         immigration matters for the whole of Iraq. Former residents of  the
         KRI who do not return voluntarily return  to  Baghdad,  from  where
         they will travel to their destination. Those who  are  prepared  to
         obtain a travel document can return  to  the  KRI  voluntarily,  to
         either Erbil or Sulamaniyah, without having to transit Baghdad."

    In my judgement there is no error of law in paragraph 46. Having  self-
    directed earlier to AAH the Judge is now quoting from the CPIN.  It  is
    uncontroversial that those returning voluntarily could travel  directly
    to the KRI.

19. It is the next part of the decision (paragraph 47)  where  there  is  a
    seeming jump of logic. Having quoted from the CPIN the Judge finds

         "there is no evidence from which to conclude that if  requested  he
         would not be given that which would allow his return to the KRI"

    and this leads to the conclusion at paragraph  49  that  the  Appellant
    does not have a real and well-founded fear of persecution "if  returned
    to the KRI".

20. This really leads us back to  the  only  issue  which  is  whether  the
    Appellant can return to the KRI. In my judgement there is no  error  of
    law in  the  Judge's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  does  not  face
    persecution or an Article 3 risk  in  the  KRI.  At  the  time  of  the
    decision the Judge was clearly following the CPIN which noted, and as I
    have said above uncontroversially, that direct voluntary return to  the
    KRI was possible. Equally the finding  that  the  Appellant  could  "if
    requested" obtain the necessary document to enable his  return  is  not
    controversial when read with the clear (and unchallenged) finding  that
    he is in contact with his family.

21. The new country guidance decision of SMO, KSO & IM makes  matters  even
    clearer. There are "regular direct flights from the  UK  to  the  Iraqi
    Kurdish region "and "it is for the  respondent  to  state  whether  she
    intends to remove to Baghdad, Erbil or Sulaymaniyah".  Mr  Howells,  on
    behalf of the Respondent, has said that this Appellant will be returned
    to the Iraqi Kurdish Region. The country guidance adds that once at the
    border of the Iraqi Kurdish Region, subject only to security  screening
    and registering with the local mukhtar entry  and  residence  would  be
    permitted.

22. My conclusion is that on  the  basis  that  this  Appellant  is  to  be
    returned to the Iraqi Kurdish region there was no arguable error of law
    in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  the  time  that  the
    decision was made and the  new  country  guidance  of  SMO,  KSO  &  IM
    emphasises that direct return to the KRI is realistic.  On  that  basis
    the appeal must fail.

Summary of decision

23. Appeal dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   Date: 3 January 2020




J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
