
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02302/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4th October 2016                        |On 5th October 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Miss SHAYMAA [K]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Nicholson (instructed by Immigration Advice
Service)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Secretary of State in relation to a Decision and Reasons of the First-
      tier Tribunal (Judge Williams) promulgated on 1st July 2016  by  which
      he allowed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision to refuse her protection claim.

   2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I will  continue  to  refer  to
      Miss [K] as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent
      in this judgement.

   3. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that the  Judge  materially
      erred in law regarding whether the Appellant needed to obtain  a  CSID
      if she had a passport. Permission to appeal was also granted on  other
      grounds which were that the Judge erred in failing to  find  that  the
      Appellant's deception  to  the  immigration  officer  on  arrival  was
      damaging to her general credibility and in failing to find reasons why
      internal relocation would be unduly harsh.

   4. A reading of the Decision  and  Reasons  reveals  the  grounds  to  be
      without merit. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out  the  Appellant's
      claim. She is an Iraqi national who lived in Mosul, which is under the
      control of IS. For the first 10 months of their  control  she  had  no
      problems. However, on 20th April 2015, 5-6 IS combatants came  to  her
      home and took her husband away saying that he was an informant/spy for
      the Iraqi army. He was not. The Appellant never saw her husband again.

   5. Initially, when this happened the Appellant went to  see  her  mother.
      She could not seek police assistance as they were involved with IS.

   6. After 4-5 days the Appellant returned to her  home  but  IS  returned,
      threatening that she needed to marry and that they would take her with
      them for this purpose. She prevaricated saying she would  agree  later
      and as soon as they left she left to go to stay with  her  mother  and
      she remained in hiding until she left Iraq on 18th June 2015.

   7. It was the Appellant's case before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  she
      could not return to Mosul as it is an area controlled by IS. As a lone
      woman with an infant child (born  November  2015)  she  could  not  be
      expected to relocate to Baghdad  where  she  had  no  support  and  no
      family. She was a minority Sunni Muslim and furthermore she  would  be
      unable to obtain a CSID card because although she had a  passport  she
      would need to go to Mosul to get one and that she could not do.

   8. The Secretary of State did not challenge the  Appellant's  version  of
      events. The Secretary of State's assertion  that  because  she  had  a
      passport she would not require a CSID card is not  borne  out  by  the
      country guidance contained in AA (article 15 (c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT
      00544 (IAC).

   9. Paragraph 12 of the head note to AA states:-

        "Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P should as a
        general matter be able to obtain one from the Civil Status  Affairs
        Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi  passport  (whether
        current or expired), if P has one."


  10. At paragraph 13 of the head note to AA it is stated:-


         "P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered  if
         P is unable to go  to  the  Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is an area where article 15 (c) serious harm
         is occurring. As a result of the violence, alternative CSA  offices
         from Mosul and  Anbar  and  Saluhaddin  have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSID's to those in need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  Court  is,
         however, unclear."


  11. It is clear therefore that a passport is not an alternative to a  CSID
      but is the means by which one can be obtained, providing it is safe to
      go to the  home  Governorate.  It  is  by  no  means  clear  that  the
      alternative in Baghdad is feasible.

  12. In terms of internal relocation within Iraq for this Appellant, as  it
      is clear she cannot return to Mosul, it being the  hands  of  IS.  The
      country guidance case deals with internal relocation in the head  note
      from paragraph 14 where it states:-

        "As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
        for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
        (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts".


  13. At paragraph 15 the head not states:-


        "In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh  for  P
        to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
        to be relevant:


        a. whether P has a CSI D or will be able to obtain one

        b. whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely  to
           find employment);

        c. whether P has family members  or  friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
           accommodate him;

        d. whether P is a lone female (women face greater difficulties than
           men in finding employment);

        e. whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or  rent
           accommodation;

        f. whether p is from a minority community;

        g. whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind  there
           is  some  evidence  that  returned  failed  asylum  seekers  are
           provided with the support generally given to IDP's."

  14. The judge gave consideration to these  matters  in  the  Decision  and
      Reasons. It is clear that the Appellant in this case would not have  a
      CSID nor would she be able to obtain one.

  15. Her ability to obtain employment is severely hampered  by  her  infant
      child. She has no family members or friends in Baghdad and is  a  lone
      female. There was no suggestion that she could find a sponsor and  she
      is a member of a minority community, mainly Sunni Muslims.  For  those
      reasons the judge found  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  this
      Appellant to relocate to Baghdad.

  16. I can find no error in his reasoning nor can I find that he  took  any
      immaterial matters  into  account  or  failed  to  take  into  account
      material matters.

  17. Miss Pattersen was unable to take me to any other potential errors.

  18.  Any  deception  on  arrival,  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
      explained by her circumstances, cannot alter the conclusion.

  19. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
      dismissed as the Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      contains no error of law material or otherwise.

  20. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.




Signed                              Date 4th October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
