
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02670/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool              |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated |
|On December 13, 2016            |On December 15, 2016            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           MR NASER SHOBREM JABER
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Hussain (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Mr Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    2. The appellant is  a  national  of  Kuwait.  On  July  26,  2015  the
       appellant claimed to have entered the  United  Kingdom  and  claimed
       asylum. The respondent refused his application on November  5,  2015
       under paragraphs 336 and 339M./339F HC 395.

    3. The appellant appealed that decision  on  November  13,  2015  under
       Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
       and his appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Herwald
       (hereinafter referred to as "the  Judge"  on  July  7,  2016.  In  a
       decision promulgated on July 28,  2016  he  refused  his  appeal  on
       asylum grounds and human rights grounds.

    4. The appellant appealed the Judge's decision on August 15,  2016  and
       permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Baker on September 1, 2016.  He found that it was arguable that  his
       findings in paragraphs 13(e) and 13(g) may have amounted to an error
       in law.

    5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response  dated  September  28,  2016
       arguing there was no error and the findings were open to the Judge.

    6. The matter came before me on the above date and on that  occasion  I
       heard submissions from both representatives.

SUBMISSIONS

    7. Mr Hussain adopted the grounds of appeal  and  submitted  the  Judge
       erred by failing to take into account that the appellant's  brother-
       in-law was  his  cousin  and  an  undocumented  Bidoon  and  it  was
       reasonably likely that the appellant would also be  one.  The  Judge
       should have addressed this issue in his decision. The second  ground
       argued was that the Judge attached too much weight to the  fact  the
       appellant spoke some English in interview. The Judge failed to  have
       regard he may have learnt some English after arriving in the  United
       Kingdom.

    8. Mr Harrison relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted  the  Judge
       made findings that were open to him.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

    9. The Judge dealt with an undocumented Bidoon claim. He  rejected  the
       respondent's claim that the appellant was not related to the  person
       he said was his sister. The Judge accepted that evidence but  having
       done so he then proceeded  to  give  reasons  why  he  rejected  the
       appellant's claim to be an undocumented Bidoon.

   10. The Judge's decision must be read together. The burden of proof lies
       with the appellant and  the  Judge  found  there  was  no  objective
       evidence that supported his  claim  that  just  because  one  family
       member was an undocumented that meant the remainder  of  the  family
       was.


   11. The Judge's paragraph [13] of his decision set out his  approach  to
       the appellant's claim. At  paragraph  [13(d)]  the  Judge  suggested
       reasons  why  the  appellant  claimed  to  be  undocumented  and  in
       paragraph [13(e)] the Judge discussed the appellant's  relationships
       but the Judge also set out concerns he  had  about  the  appellant's
       claim to be an undocumented Bidoon.


   12. Nothing presented today by Mr Hussain persuades me  that  the  Judge
       made findings that were perverse  or  wrong  in  law.  At  paragraph
       [13(f) and (g)] the  Judge  then  set  out  his  concerns  over  the
       appellant's ability  to  speak  English  despite  his  claim  to  be
       uneducated and unable to speak any other language other than Arabic.
       The Judge made adverse findings and those findings were  again  open
       to the Judge.


   13.  I  am  satisfied  that  Mr  Hussain's  arguments  amount  to   mere
       disagreements with  the  Judge's  decision.  The  Judge  made  those
       findings having considered all the evidence. Nothing advanced by  Mr
       Hussain persuaded me that the Judge erred.

DECISION

   14. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       original decision.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

