
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02810/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 January 2017                             |On 31 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                  MR J L D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss U Dirie, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors    (Stratford)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1.   In this matter the Appellant, a  national  of  Cameroon,  date  of
    birth 13 January 1983, appealed against the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse asylum, dated 16 March 2016.

2.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Walker  (the  Judge)
    who on 5 September 2016 dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal was
    sought and refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert, on 17  October
    2016, but granted on a renewed  application  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McWilliam on 22 November 2016.  She said in granting permission:

         "It is arguable that the judge did not take into account  that  the
         need for a report had arisen  from  the  issue  raised  by  Barbera
         Gehrels in her letter of 10 August 2016.  The hearing date  was  24
         August 2016.  Thus  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  had
         sufficient time to obtain a report and that the issue had not  been
         raised at a CMR is an  arguably  flawed  reason  for  refusing  the
         adjournment.  I cannot discount that had the judge appreciated this
         he would have allowed the adjournment.  Although it may  still  not
         explain why an application was  not  made  until  the  day  of  the
         hearing."

3.   There is familiar case law  illustrated  by  the  decision  in  Mibanga
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367 that the evidence including medical evidence should
    be read as a whole before an assessment in the round  is  made  on  the
    facts.  In this case for no apparent reason other than the  failure  of
    Fadiga & Co (Stratford) {Fadiga} to do their job in preparing the case.
     The fact is that no one prior to  the  hearing  had  raised  with  the
    Tribunal or even the Respondent of a need for an adjournment  in  order
    to obtain  medical  evidence.   Nor  had  there  been  any  preliminary
    examination by an expert as to whether or not there  was  a  case  that
    could potentially be made out on the basis of the  Appellant  suffering
    PTSD as a result of ill-treatment received at the hands of others.

4.   No preparation whatsoever was in train at the time of the  CMR  or  PTR
    at which point plainly directions could have been given about  listing,
    the length of the hearing and all else that sequentially followed  from
    the need for medical evidence, in addition to  that  of  the  Appellant
    himself.  Those failures I am told lie solely at the feet of Fadiga and
    not at the Appellant, who it seems was  further  disadvantaged  by  the
    events of being relocated from London to Swansea as a result of  asylum
    support arrangements in being.  Therefore although Miss  Gehrels  wrote
    her letter of 10 August 2016 it appears someone at Fadiga took the view
    that it only needed to be produced in support of an application on  the
    day of the hearing. Such thinking was misconceived and demonstrably  so
    as any practitioner or representative should have known.   Miss  Dirie,
    who was only instructed a few days before the hearing, was left in  the
    position of making  the  adjournment  application  at  the  hearing  in
    circumstances  where  plainly  it  was  at  odds  with  the  overriding
    objective is contained in Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  Rules  2014
    which identify the overriding objective to deal with cases  fairly  and
    justly.

5.    The  Rule  requires  dealing  with  the  case  in  a  way   which   is
    proportionate to the importance of the  case,  the  complexity  of  the
    issues, the anticipated costs and the resources of the parties  and  of
    the Tribunal, ensuring so far as practical  that  people  are  able  to
    participate fully in the proceedings, avoiding delay and using  special
    expertise which the  Tribunal  possesses  or  has  advantage  of.   The
    overriding objective also notes that parties must  (my  emphasis)  help
    the Tribunal to further the overriding objective and cooperate with the
    Tribunal generally.  It is hard to see how Fadiga, on  behalf  of  this
    asylum seeker, had done anything other than ill service  to  his  case.
    It is no criticism  of  the  judge  that  he  was  faced  with  a  late
    application on an entirely speculative basis as to what ultimately  the
    evidence might come to be concerning the issue of PTSD.  Unsurprisingly
    having considered the matter the judge expressed in  the  way  he  did,
    cogently the reasons why he was not satisfied and more than that  found
    fault in the presentation of the case, not by Miss Dirie,  but  in  its
    preparation.

6.   Miss Dirie has pointed out that the judge has made at  least  an  error
    in arguing that the Appellant's claim had nothing to do  with  politics
    or on this basis  political  persecution:   This  she  says  was  wrong
    because as a fact that was how his case had been put and  the  way  the
    case proceeded on. It seemed to me that there may be some substance  in
    the point but the question is whether or not it materially affects  the
    way the judge ultimately  dealt  with  the  issue  of  the  adjournment
    request.

7.   The judge formed his view that it was in the interests of  justice  for
    the case to proceed.  The interests of justice are as I have  indicated
    a proper consideration as to whether or not  the  case  can  be  justly
    proceeded with but fairness also forms an element to it. It seems to me
    the judge gave cogent reasons why  the  Appellant's  claim  would  fail
    there is an underlying uncertainty which  engages  with  unfairness  in
    having done so in the circumstances of the case when as I  am  told  it
    was put to the judge that the failures to prepare and present the  case
    prior to Miss Dirie's handling of it had been at the  hands  of  Fadiga
    and not at the hands of the Appellant.

8.   I express no view whatsoever on the  underlying  story  or  its  merits
    although if these criticisms stand  it  does  not  bode  well  for  the
    outcome of any further hearing but that is for another day and  I  have
    absolutely no view whatsoever on the merits of the case.   Mr  Whitwell
    has  cogently  argued  that  really  there  was  time  indeed  for  the
    preparation of the case and it is the failures of others and  that  the
    consequence of granting an adjournment would be in effect to leave  the
    position that the person can wait until the  last  moment  to  make  an
    adjournment application and that effectively as he put it "vetoes"  the
    hearing taking place.

9.   I in general terms agree with this substance of his criticism which  is
    that late applications for an adjournment should have  little  prospect
    of success and should not be used to frustrate the  timely  and  proper
    disposal of Tribunal business.  However, in this case  I  am  satisfied
    that there is an element of unfairness which crept into this  which  is
    not derived from or caused by  default  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    whilst Mr Whitwell has  rightly  drawn  my  attention  to  the  general
    proposition of adjournments, which is  not  particularly  stated  in  a
    novel fashion in Nwaige [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC) I am satisfied  that  the
    right course is going to have to be that the matter must be re-made and
    it seems to me it can be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is to be remade  in  the  First-
tier Tribunal

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 20 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



Directions

Re list before First-tier Tribunal Judge, not before 6 weeks of the date  of
    this decision. Not before F-tTJ Walker

2 hours

Interpreter  required  French  (Central  African)  unless   Tribunal   (IAC)
    notified 10 days in advance of the resumed hearing to the contrary.

Two witnesses to be called. Particulars  of  their  names,  nationality  and
    status in the UK to be provided to the Tribunal and Presenting Officers
    Unit 7 clear days before the resumed hearing.

Any further documents, medical evidence, other evidence to be served on  the
    Tribunal and Presenting Officers  Unit  Team  not  less  than  7  clear
    working days before the resumed hearing.



Signed                                  Date 20 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
