
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02870/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th August 2017                           |On 6th September 2017         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                   mr a.a.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Appellant appeared in person assisted by Mr R
                    Taffell (McKenzie friend)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sudan (born [ ]  1994).   He  claims  to
    have arrived in the UK, via Italy and France, on  28th  July  2015.  He
    claimed  asylum  the  same  day.   His  claim  for  asylum/humanitarian
    protection was refused by the Respondent on 15th November 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Watson)  on  24th  January  2017.
    The appeal was dismissed on both  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.  No Article 8 ECHR claim was made.

 3. The Appellant  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The grant of permission appears to
    be wider than the grounds seeking permission and the relevant  part  of
    the grant says as follows:

         "3.  The grounds assert  that  the  issue  was  essentially  as  to
             whether the appellant was from the Bargo tribe and  inadequate
             reasons had been given for  rejecting  the  appellant's  claim
             that he was from that tribe and appropriate weight should have
             been placed on the evidence from Hasan El-Nour.

         4.   The judge considered the evidence before him and  accorded  no
             weight to the letter signed by Mr El-Nour as he did not attend
             the hearing and the appellant stated that he had not met  him.
             It was evident from [10] of the decision that  the  judge  did
             not address his mind  as  to  whether  it  was  possible  that
             another member of the organisation had met the  appellant  and
             that Mr El-Nour was signing in his  capacity  as  director  as
             opposed to his personal capacity.

         5.   The judge considered the appellant's own evidence  as  to  his
             tribal connection.  The  appellant  had  failed  to  establish
             before the respondent that he was from  the  Bargo  tribe  but
             there was no consideration in the body of the decision  as  to
             the evidence given at interview on  his  ethnicity.   Emphasis
             was placed at [12] as to inconsistencies as to the appellant's
             claim without there being a focus  on  the  evidence  produced
             with regard to his ethnicity.

         6.   It is therefore arguable that the decision and reasons display
             an error of law."

     Permission having been granted, the matter comes before  me  to  decide
    initially whether the decision of the FtT discloses  an  error  of  law
    requiring it to be set aside.

Error of Law Hearing

 4. Before me, the Appellant attended unrepresented.  He was assisted by Mr
    Taffell who appeared as a McKenzie friend.  In addition a  letter  from
    BIASAN (Bradford Immigration and Asylum Support and Advice Network) was
    served upon the Tribunal. This set out that the Appellant would not  be
    legally represented at the error of law hearing but that  reliance  was
    placed upon  the  grant  of  permission  given  by  Judge  Scott-Baker,
    together with a submission  that  the  decision  of  Judge  Watson  was
    unsafe. It concluded by stating that it was hoped that the  finding  of
    the Upper Tribunal would be that an error of law was found, which would
    enable the Appellant  to  have  a  re-hearing  and  be  represented  by
    professional legal representation.  It would also enable his  witnesses
    to attend the new hearing.

 5. Mrs Petterson attended on behalf of the Respondent.

 6.  Because  the  Appellant  was  unrepresented,  I  record   that   every
    opportunity was afforded to the Appellant to ensure that  his  McKenzie
    friend was able  to  put  forward  all  points  which  may  assist  the
    Appellant's cause.

 7. I heard submissions from Mrs  Petterson.   She  robustly  defended  the
    FtT's  decision.   She  pointed  out  that  the  Appellant  had   legal
    representation at the original hearing and had presented his witnesses.
     She submitted that the  judge  had,  with  good  reason,  found  those
    witnesses to be discrepant in their evidence. Further, there were  more
    than sufficient  reasons  given  in  the  decision  to  show  that  the
    Appellant's  credibility  was  deficient.  The  judge   had   correctly
    identified that the task before him was to decide the ethnicity of  the
    Appellant.  Not only had all the evidence been taken into account,  but
    the grounds had failed to address the  fundamental  inconsistencies  in
    the Appellant's account.  The witness who attended the hearing and  the
    written evidence that has been submitted did not assist.

 8. She accepted that the decision could be categorised as a brief one  but
    said that there was only one central issue namely whether the Appellant
    was a member of the Bargo tribe or not. The judge had dealt fully  with
    that issue and on a proper reading of the decision it  was  plain  that
    the Appellant could be in no doubt as to why the FtT had found him  not
    credible. The grounds  simply  amounted  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision and the appeal should be dismissed.



Background

 9. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  claims  to  be  a
    member of the Bargo tribe from the  Abuja  district  of  Al-Jazeera  in
    Sudan.  He claims that his brother is an active member of  Justice  and
    Liberation and has been since 2004.  The Appellant's claim is  that  he
    was visited at his home by a group of men and was  asked  to  join  the
    above movement.  He declined to do so, but did give a donation.

10. Around a month later, three members of the  security  services  visited
    him at his home, took him away and detained him  for  five  days  at  a
    police station.  During this  time  he  was  interrogated  and  beaten.
    After denying  any  involvement  in  any  resistance  movement  he  was
    released on condition of reporting and not leaving the area.   He  said
    he remained at the family home for twenty days but did  not  report  as
    set out in his release conditions. Instead he fled to North  Sudan  and
    from there travelled to Libya. From Libya he went by boat to Italy  and
    then by train to France.  He remained in France for one month but  made
    no claim to asylum there.  He entered the UK clandestinely by train.

11. The  Respondent  disbelieved  the  Appellant's  account,  finding  that
    although the Appellant's responses at interview  were  consistent  with
    the  country  information  about  Sudan,  nevertheless  his  level   of
    knowledge of the Bargo tribe was lacking.

12. The grounds seeking permission can be distilled into  saying  that  the
    FtT failed to give adequate reasons for the finding that the  Appellant
    is not from the Bargo tribe.  In expanding on this, the  grounds  state
    that the FtT's assessment that the Appellant was vague  in  his  asylum
    interview was incorrect.  The FtT did not identify which  answers  were
    vague.  A full reading of the interview shows  the  Appellant  answered
    all questions fully.  Additionally the  FtT  was  wrong  to  accord  no
    weight to a  letter  produced  from  Mr  Hasan  El-Nour  of  the  Bargo
    community in the United Kingdom.  Equally the judge was wrong to  place
    no weight upon the evidence of the witness Mr Yaqoob who  attended  the
    hearing to support the Appellant's claimed ethnicity.



Error of Law Consideration

13. The challenges raised to  the  FtT's  decision  essentially  amount  to
    saying that the reasons given for dismissing the appeal were inadequate
    and based on a failure to take into account all the evidence put before
    it.  I do not find this to be the case and I now give  my  reasons  for
    this finding.

14. The FtT has identified that the central issue before it was whether the
    Appellant was a member of the Bargo tribe.  It has always been accepted
    that the Appellant is from Sudan. It is unsurprising therefore that  he
    was able to answer questions consistent with the country information.

15. In coming to its decision the FtT has clearly focused on  the  core  of
    the Appellant's claim.  At [12] the judge points out  discrepancies  in
    the core claim including an inability on the part of the  Appellant  in
    interview to name the police station where he said he was held for five
    days.  The judge  noted  that  by  the  time  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement was produced at the hearing, he was able to recall the  name.
    The Appellant's explanation for his inability to  originally  name  the
    police station where he was held was to say that there were interpreter
    difficulties at the interview.  The judge found, as he was entitled  to
    do, that he did not accept this explanation and that it detracted  from
    the Appellant's overall credibility.

16. The judge took account of the fact that in his interview the details of
    the Appellant's membership of his clan was lacking.  For example he was
    unable to pinpoint that Fur is the tribal language of the  Bargo.   His
    knowledge of Bargo traditions appeared superficial.  It is incorrect to
    say that the judge did not take account of all the  evidence  given  at
    interview with regard to the Appellant's ethnicity.  I accept that  the
    decision focuses on the inconsistencies in the Appellant's claim but  I
    see no evidence that the judge has failed to adequately engage with the
    issue which was before him.  Paragraph [12] of the  decision  sets  out
    fully the judge's reasons for not accepting the Appellant's claim.

17. Criticism is made because the judge failed  to  accord  weight  to  the
    letter produced from Mr El-Nour of the Bargo community.   I  find  that
    criticism unfounded.  The judge was entitled to say that a letter  from
    a signatory who had not met the Appellant and who did  not  attend  the
    hearing to be examined on the content should be afforded little  or  no
    weight. The  letter  claims  that  the  Appellant  was  tested  on  his
    knowledge of the Bargo tribe.  The author of the letter, however,  does
    not even name who it was who "tested" the Appellant. The weight  to  be
    given to each piece of evidence is a matter for the judge  and  I  find
    good reasons have been given as to why he could place no weight on this
    particular piece of evidence.

18. In referring to the letter in the grant  of  permission,  Judge  Scott-
    Baker stated that the FtT judge "did not address his mind as to whether
    it was possible that another member of the  organisation  had  met  the
    appellant and that Mr El-Nour was signing in his capacity  as  director
    as opposed to his personal capacity."  Nowhere in  the  grounds  can  I
    find  that  this  has  been  raised  as  a  point  by  the   Appellant.
    Consequently, I do not consider that this merits further consideration.



19. Likewise so far as the oral evidence of Mr  Yaqoob  is  concerned,  the
    judge noted inconsistencies in his evidence when compared  to  that  of
    the Appellant.  The judge has set out his  reasons  in  [11]  outlining
    those inconsistencies.  The grounds do no  more  that  simply  raise  a
    challenge that the evidence should have  been  accepted.  They  do  not
    however address the discrepant evidence as set out by the judge.

20. Altogether I find I am satisfied that the findings of the FtT were ones
    which were fully open to that tribunal to make. The FtT found  that  on
    the evidence before it, the Appellant had failed to show on  the  lower
    standard of proof, his claimed membership  of  the  Bargo  tribe.   The
    grounds amount to no more than a disagreement with the FtT's  decision.



21. Accordingly I find no  material  error  in  the  FtT's  decision.   The
    decision shall stand and this appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     05 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
