

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA029292016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 June 2017                             |On 7 June 2017                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     SK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Frantzis of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The brevity of this decision is due to the commendable focus of both
       representatives on the issues in the case.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify SK or any of his family members. This  direction
       applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with
       this direction could give rise to Contempt of Court  proceedings.  I
       do so in order to preserve the anonymity of  SK  given  this  was  a
       protection claim.

    3. The Respondent refused SK's  application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
       protection on 9 March 2016. His appeal against this was dismissed by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox ("the Judge") following a  hearing  on
       17 November 2016.

The grant of permission


   4. Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted permission to appeal  (7  March
      2017). She said  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  materially  erred
      (presumably in not adjourning the appeal) as  the  Respondent  changed
      her case at the beginning of the hearing by asserting that Kirkuk  was
      no longer in a contested area and that consequently SK's return  would
      not engage article 15C. It  was  arguable  that  it  was  procedurally
      unfair as SK was not aware  of  the  changed  position  prior  to  the
      hearing.


Respondent's position

    5. It was submitted in the rule 24 notice  (24  March  2017)  that  the
       Respondent's position had changed in August 2016 in a public Country
       Guidance Report that was  written  5  months  before  SK's  expert's
       report (Sheri Laizer) and was a document the Judge was  entitled  to
       rely upon.


Discussion

    6. The Country Guidance report  on  which  the  Respondent  relied  was
       issued in August 2016. It was pointed out by Miss Frantzis that  the
       Respondent issued more  than  one  report  in  August  2016  on  the
       position regarding Iraq. She asserted  that  the  reference  to  the
       August 2016 guidance in Ms Laizer's report from  November  2016  may
       not have been the new guidance issued by the Respondent.  I  do  not
       agree that this is relevant because Ms Laizer is an expert  and  was
       plainly aware of the existence of all the  August  2016  reports  as
       otherwise she would not be an expert. She would clearly be aware  of
       the changed position having been instructed where SK came from.  She
       had the opportunity to comment on the new position  if  she  thought
       that the Respondent's guidance was inaccurate. I  do  not  therefore
       agree that the Judge materially erred in not adjourning the  hearing
       to enable fresh evidence to be adduced, especially as  SK's  Counsel
       made  no  such  application  presumably  as  that  Counsel  saw   no
       unfairness to SK in then proceeding.


    7. I do not agree with Miss Frantzis that the Judge materially erred at
       [59] regarding whether Kirkuk was no longer  under  the  control  of
       Isis either temporarily or permanently. The Judge  was  entitled  to
       note with caution that the change of control may be  temporary,  but
       then go on to find that  the  Respondent  had  provided  cogent  and
       credible evidence that there had been a  significant  change.  There
       was no inconsistency in  the  finding,  merely  appropriate  caution
       prior to make an evidentially sustainable finding  on  the  evidence
       available then.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
6 June 2017
