
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02793/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2019                      |On 15 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    d. J.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jaffar, Counsel instructed by Norton Folgate
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sweet ('the Judge') issued on 2  May  2019  by  which  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  to  grant  him
    international  protection  was  dismissed.  Judge  of  the   First-tier
    Tribunal Bristow granted permission to appeal on all grounds.

 2. The Judge did not issue an anonymity order.  This is a matter in  which
    the appellant has sought asylum.  I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No
    1 concerned with anonymity orders and I observe that the starting point
    for consideration of anonymity orders in  this  chamber  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, as in all courts and Tribunals, is open justice.  However,  I
    note paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is
    the present practice of both the First-tier Tribunal and this  Tribunal
    that an anonymity order is made in all appeals raising asylum or  other
    international protection claims.  Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  I  make  an  anonymity  order.
    Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs  otherwise  no  report  of
    these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant.  This direction applies to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent.  Any failure to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the content of the protection claim.

Background

 3. The appellant is an Albanian national.  He was granted entry  clearance
    to visit family members in this country and arrived with his  wife  and
    child in 2017.  His second child was born in this country.  He  claimed
    asylum soon after his arrival and asserted that  as  a  member  of  the
    Albanian armed services, he  had  been  a  member  of  NATO  forces  in
    Afghanistan and that now both he and  his  family  were  at  risk  from
    Muslim extremists.  He details by way of his claim several threats made
    to him whilst he was in Albania ranging from threats over the telephone
    to a bunch of flowers and a letter being placed on his car.

 4. The hearing came before the Judge at Hatton Cross on 25 April 2019. The
    appellant attended the hearing and gave evidence, as did his  wife  and
    another family member.  The Judge found the appellant and his witnesses
    to be incredible and dismissed both the  international  protection  and
    human rights (article 8) appeals.

Grounds

 5. Several purported errors on points of law  are  identified  within  the
    grounds drafted by Counsel including a failure by  the  judge  to  give
    adequate, if any, findings upon core issues of the appellant's evidence
    or to adequately consider documents issued by the police.  In  granting
    permission to appeal Judge Bristow observed that it is arguable that it
    is difficult to identify the Judge's reasons for determining  that  the
    appellant's account was fabricated and also that it  is  arguable  that
    the Judge failed to adequately consider the background  evidence  filed
    with the Tribunal.

 6. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

The Hearing

 7. Both representatives at the hearing informed me  that  they  considered
    the Judge's decision to be flawed by legal error, such that  it  should
    be set aside. In the circumstances, this was the  appropriate  approach
    to adopt.



Decision on Error of Law

 8. The Judge's findings and decision are identified at paragraphs 32 to 40
    of his Decision and Reasons.  Paragraphs 32 to  36  simply  detail  the
    appellant's history and no assessment as to  credibility  is  made.   I
    note at this juncture that the appellant's asylum interview ran to  114
    questions, his witness statement ran to 11 pages,  his  wife's  witness
    statement ran to 3 pages and his relative's statement to  a  further  3
    pages.   There  were  53  pages   of   personal   documents   including
    translations and 28 pages of objective documentary evidence  was  filed
    with the First-tier Tribunal and relied upon.  In  seeking  to  address
    this wealth of information the Judge's assessment of the  evidence  was
    substantively conducted within only two paragraphs:-

         "37.     The appellant claims that he will face continuing  threats
             of violence to  himself  and  his  family  if  he  returns  to
             Albania.  I wholly reject his claim.  I consider  his  account
             of these threats are fanciful  and  have  been  fabricated  in
             order to enhance an asylum claim.  The documents on  which  he
             relies include two statements from friends, Grised Shimaj  and
             Ermir Dedeli, who give an account of the motor incident on  26
             January 2017.  It  appears  that  these  statements  were  not
             provided to the police authorities but had  been  obtained  by
             the appellant at his request in case they were later required.
              There was a  further  statement  from  Enis  Bajraktari,  who
             stated on 15 September 2017 that while he was having a  coffee
             with the  appellant,  the  appellant  was  approached  by  two
             unknown individuals who threatened him with his life  and  the
             life of members of his family.  There is some written evidence
             that a complaint was made on 31 January 2017 by the  appellant
             to the police authorities about  an  incident  on  26  January
             2017.

         38.      The appellant was wholly unable to explain, either in  his
             own evidence or through his Counsel, why he would be  at  risk
             in respect of activities which he  may  have  carried  out  in
             Afghanistan in the first half of 2012 as late as January 2017.
              There was also inconsistent evidence between what he and  his
             father gave in respect of the number of complaints  that  were
             made and whether reports were made to the police  or  not.   I
             wholly reject his account and consider it to be  fanciful  and
             fabricated in order to enhance a claim  for  asylum.   I  also
             note that his parents have been able  over  many  years  (most
             recently on two occasions in 2019) to live freely  in  Albania
             and travel between Albania and the UK."

 9. Having stated in bold terms that  the  claim  had  been  fabricated  at
    paragraph 37 the  judge  reverted  back  to  the  approach  adopted  in
    previous paragraphs of simply restating the appellant's case. No actual
    findings of fact were made. The only  findings  of  fact  made  in  the
    entirety of this Decision and Reasons are to be found at paragraph  38,
    and whilst there may or may not be inconsistencies in the evidence,  no
    express consideration is given to  the  several  documents  which  were
    issued by the Ministry of the Interior, Directorate  of  State  Police,
    and also by the local prosecution office in Albania which are  said  to
    corroborate the making of reports by the appellant to the police.

10. It is a long established principle that proper adequate reasons must be
    given that deal with the substantial points that have been raised in an
    appeal, and whilst it is unnecessary for a  Tribunal  to  set  out  the
    evidence and arguments before it, or the facts found by it, in  detail,
    the reasons must be proper, adequate and intelligible  and  enable  the
    person affected to know why they have been successful or  unsuccessful.
    The failure to  consider  the  documentary  evidence  relied  upon,  in
    particular the evidence from the local police and  prosecution  office,
    can only mean that the judge failed to engage with the appellant's case
    as put forward in any significant respect. In this matter the appellant
    has satisfied the Tribunal that he  has  genuinely  been  substantially
    prejudiced by the Judge's failure to  provide  an  adequately  reasoned
    decision because the Judge  has  failed  to  identify  and  record  the
    matters that were critical to his decision on material issues in such a
    way that this Tribunal is unable to understand the true basis as to how
    and why he reached that decision.

11. For those reasons I am satisfied that  the  errors  identified  in  the
    grounds are made out.  As those errors  go  to  findings  of  fact  and
    analysis of evidence, I set aside the decision and do not preserve  any
    of the findings.

12. As to remaking the decision, given the nature of the errors,  I  accept
    the submission made by  both  Miss  Cunha  and  Mr  Jaffar  that  clear
    findings have to be made on the  evidence  presented.   Both  advocates
    submit that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice  Statement  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the  disposal  of
    appeals in this Tribunal.  That reads as follows at 7.2:-

         "7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to remake the decision, instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:-

             (a)      the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put and considered
                  by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)      the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be remade is such that, having regard to the overriding
                  objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal".

13. I have reached the conclusion that it  is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all  matters.
    The appellant has enjoyed no adequate consideration of his asylum claim
    to date and has not yet had a fair hearing.



Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is therefore set aside.

15. It is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  before
    any judge other than JFtT Sweet.

16. No findings of fact are preserved.



Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 17 July 2019

