
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02762/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 September 2016                       |On 4 October 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                              miss safia begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, of counsel instructed by KC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Coutts, who, in a determination promulgated on  7  July
    2016, dismissed her appeal.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and her date of  birth  is  22
    October 1997.  She left Bangladesh travelling with her mother in  March
    2011, entering the United Kingdom on a family visit visa valid until  7
    August 2011.  On 3 August 2011 the appellant's mother applied for leave
    to remain in the UK outside of the Immigration Rules with the appellant
    as her dependant. The Secretary of State refused that application.  The
    appellant's mother appealed against that decision on 10 November  2011.
    The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal on 19 December 2011.   The
    appellant's mother appealed against the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    and on 26 June 2012, the appellant's appeal  was  heard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and was dismissed on 3  July  2012.   The  appellant's  appeal
    rights were exhausted on 20 July 2012 and  an  enforcement  notice  was
    served on 7 October 2012.  In  February  2014  the  appellant's  mother
    returned to Bangladesh whilst the  appellant  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  On 16 June 2015  the  appellant  made  a  claim  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and for leave to remain on  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').  The Secretary  of  State
    refused that application on 3 November 2015 and on the same date served
    removal directions.  The Secretary of State  rejected  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum because she did not accept the appellant's evidence in
    relation  to  her  father's  political  activities  as  credible.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept  that  the  alleged  attacks  on  the
    appellant's brothers  were  as  a  result  of  her  father's  political
    activities.  The Secretary of State considered that the appellant could
    internally relocate within Bangladesh with members of her  family.  The
    appellant appealed against the decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The First-tier Tribunal did not accept that the reason for the  killing
    of the appellant's  brother  was  politically  motivated  and  did  not
    consider that the appellant was at risk on return to  Bangladesh.   The
    Tribunal also considered that the appellant could relocate  to  another
    area of Bangladesh and be safe if other members of her family  were  to
    relocate with her.  When considering Article 8 of the ECHR the Tribunal
    considered that it would not be disproportionate for the  appellant  to
    be removed to Bangladesh.  The  appellant  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  29  July  2016  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Saffer granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

Summary of Submissions

 4. The first ground of appeal is  essentially  that  the  judge  erred  by
    applying the wrong standard of proof.  It is asserted that at paragraph
    48 the judge concluded that he could not accept that the murder of  the
    appellant's brother was politically motivated and could not be  certain
    that the name  Anhar  refers  to  the  appellant's  father's  political
    opponent, Mr Anhar Miah.  It is asserted that the standard of proof  is
    the lower civil standard and therefore the judge did  not  need  to  be
    certain.  Mr Mannan submitted  that  the  use  of  the  word  'certain'
    implies that the judge considered that there needed to be a second name
    in the newspaper article.  He submitted  that  the  judge  should  have
    accepted that the killing of the appellant's brother was perpetrated by
    Anhar and that that Anhar must be Anhar Miah.  It is also asserted that
    the judge erred in stating, in paragraph 50, that  if  the  attack  was
    politically motivated the Bangladesh Jatiyo Party ('BJP') letter  would
    have said so.  It is submitted that the  judge  reached  an  irrational
    conclusion as there could be no other reason  for  the  BJP  issuing  a
    letter  of  condolence  other  than  because  this  was  a  politically
    motivated killing.  He submitted that it would be very odd for the  BJP
    to write such a letter if there was not a political motivation.

 5. It is submitted that the judge raised a number of questions and queries
    that ought to have been put to the appellant to enable her  to  explain
    any concerns that the First-tier Tribunal Judge clearly had. It is also
    submitted that the judge used those inconsistencies to find against the
    appellant's claim.  It is submitted that the judge erred in failing  to
    make clear credibility findings in respect of the appellant's oral  and
    written testimony.  Reliance is placed on the case of MK (duty to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC) 28 October 2013.

 6. It is submitted that the judge failed to consider  the  fact  that  the
    matters had been published in newspapers  and  were  therefore  in  the
    public domain when considering  whether  or  not  the  appellant  could
    internally relocate.  Mr Mannan submitted that it  is  critical  to  an
    assessment of the ability to relocate to make findings on the effect of
    this information being publicly available.

 7. It is also submitted that the Tribunal erred in concluding  that  there
    is  a  functioning  judiciary.   Reference  is  made  to  the   country
    information report which confirms the  corruption  amongst  the  police
    force.  It is submitted that the judge failed to have  regard  to  this
    when making findings about protection.

 8. It is  also  asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and that the appellant  might
    face very significant obstacles to reintegration in light  of  all  the
    accepted facts of the case.

 9. Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant could relocate with  all  or  any
    one of her family members.  He submitted that if  the  family  were  at
    risk they could all relocate together.  He submitted that in any  event
    the family are all still living in the same household, the  appellant's
    mother went back to Bangladesh and is  living  in  the  household.   He
    submitted that the use of the word  'certain'  by  the  judge  was  not
    connected to the standard of proof, it was simply a manner of speaking.
     He submitted that the politician was not named by his surname.   There
    is no evidence of how popular the name is and that it could  have  been
    anyone.  He submitted that the killing was clearly motivated by robbery
    with the amount that was  stolen  from  the  appellant's  brother.   He
    submitted that the FIR does not say that the  killing  was  politically
    motivated and that the condolence letter from the BJP simply refers  to
    wicked people.  If  this  was  a  letter  written  in  support  of  the
    appellant's claim or if written because the BJP  were  concerned  about
    the political motive for the killing, then that fact  would  have  been
    set out on the face of the letter.

10. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge  in  setting  out  the  queries,  for
    example at paragraph 57, was merely stating that many of the assertions
    were not backed at all by the appellant.  He also  submitted  that  the
    facts as represented by the appellant were not credible and  the  judge
    was entitled to question those facts in terms of  the  lack  of  detail
    that was given.  He submitted that the judge was entitled and  required
    to take into account the Section 8 issues regarding the timing  of  the
    appellant's asylum claim.

11. In reply Mr Mannan submitted that the judge's conclusions at paragraphs
    59 to 61 ignore the fundamental point about internal relocation.   When
    a matter is in the public domain it could make it enormously  difficult
    to relocate.  The judge did not make any findings or engage  with  that
    evidence.  He submitted that paragraph 48 has to be considered in light
    of the consideration by the  judge  at  paragraphs  43  to  47  of  the
    evidence.  He submitted that just because there has been a robbery does
    not mean that the killing was not politically motivated.

Discussion

The asylum decision

12. The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that the appellant's brother  was
    attacked and killed in Bangladesh in February 2014.  The judge set  out
    at paragraph 44:

         "44. It is also consistent with the documentary evidence  that  has
         been produced: namely, the appellant's brother's death certificate,
         his hospital documents, letter of condolence from the BJP dated  13
         March  2014,  the  various  newspaper  articles   and   the   first
         information report (FIR) which  was  made  to  the  police  by  the
         appellant's father, Mr Arshad Miah.

         45.  It is also understandable that this dreadful event would  have
         a profound effect upon the family.

         46.  In his evidence,  Mr  Kabir,  explained  how  the  appellant's
         mother suffered a form of breakdown upon hearing the  news  of  her
         son and that he had to accompany her to Bangladesh because she  was
         not able to return there alone.  It is also understandable that the
         appellant's father would be affected in a similar way and that this
         caused him to retire from his political activities.

         47.  The oral evidence regarding the appellant's parent's health is
         also supported by two handwritten letters dated 26 May  2016,  from
         Dr M. Nurul Afsar, cardiologist and diabetologist.  These say  that
         the appellant's parents  are  suffering  from  mental  illness  and
         depression and that in the case of her mother she is bedridden  and
         in the case of her father he is very seriously ill."

13. The judge in considering that evidence then went on to consider:

         "48.  However,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  killing  of   the
         appellant's brother was politically motivated and perpetrated by Mr
         Anhar Miah.  I accept that the newspaper article dated 27  February
         2014 mentions the name 'Anhar' but it  gives  no  second  name.   I
         cannot be certain this relates to him.

         49.   Moreover,  Mr  Anhar  Miah  is  not  named   in   the   other
         documentation; in particular, the FIR  by  the  appellant's  father
         does not name him as a suspect but lists  twelve  other  people  as
         being responsible.  It recounts the details of the assault  on  the
         appellant's brother and lists a number of witnesses.  It  does  not
         say that it was believed to be politically motivated but says  that
         the appellant's brother was robbed of Tk126,000.00 together with  a
         necklace and bracelet.

         50.  If the attack had been politically motivated  then  one  would
         have expected the condolence letter from the BJP,  dated  13  March
         2014, to have said so but it only says that the appellant's brother
         was killed by several wicked persons.

         51.  It follows therefore that I do not accept that the appellant's
         other brother was threatened and pushed off his bicycle by the same
         people who killed her brother."

14. The judge was  considering  whether  or  not  the  motivation  for  the
    appellant's brother's murder was political. The  newspaper  report  was
    one item so although the judge sets out at paragraph 48 that he  cannot
    be certain that the newspaper article referred to Mr  Anhar  Miah  this
    must be read in light of the subsequent paragraphs. Clearly  the  judge
    considered all the documentation that referred to the  killing  of  the
    appellant's brother and because none of them mentioned either Mr  Anhar
    Miah or a political involvement and listed 12 other suspects that  gave
    rise to the doubts  the  judge  expressed  in  paragraph  48  that  the
    newspaper article of 27 February 2014 related to Anhar Miah. I  do  not
    consider that the judge was applying a higher standard  of  proof  than
    that required.  It is clear that the judge  had  in  mind  the  correct
    standard of proof.  At paragraph 8 of the decision  the  judge  records
    that the standard of proof is "lower than the  civil  standard  of  the
    balance of probabilities".

15. At  paragraph  50  the  judge  states  that  if  the  attack  had  been
    politically motivated then  one  would  have  expected  the  condolence
    letter from the BJP to have said so.  It was submitted  that  the  only
    reason that the BJP were likely to have written a letter was because it
    was politically motivated.  This ignores the fact that the  appellant's
    father was the former General Secretary of  the  BJP.   The  conclusion
    reached by the judge was not irrational.   The  judge  considered  this
    letter in the round alongside the other evidence submitted  in  support
    of the claim that the appellant's  brother's  killing  was  politically
    motivated.  The letter from the BJP  refers  only  to  the  appellant's
    brother being killed by several wicked persons.   Alongside  the  other
    evidence that also fails to record any  political  motivation  for  the
    killing this was not a finding that was irrational, it  was  a  finding
    that was open to the judge.

16. It is asserted that the judge ought to have put  various  questions  to
    the appellant to enable her to explain any concerns that the judge had.
     In particular reference is made to paragraph 55.  The judge  sets  out
    in that paragraph:

         "55. There are no details given regarding the  assertion  that  the
         appellant's brothers are not going outside of the  home.   Is  this
         all the time?  Do they  work?   If  not  who  supports  the  family
         financially if the appellant's father is not working?  There is  no
         evidence from her brothers  in  support  of  this  assertion.   The
         appellant's evidence was  that  the  household  also  included  her
         paternal grandmother and uncle.  Who then looks after them  and  is
         it the case that they also do  not  leave  the  home?   It  follows
         therefore that from these inconsistencies I do not find this to  be
         credible.

         56. In addition, the appellant's father says that her  two  sisters
         have had to stop studying and remain at home and  are  now  looking
         after him and their mother.  Again there is no  evidence  from  the
         appellant's sisters to support this assertion.  The  oral  evidence
         was that those who seek to harm  them  do  not  live  in  the  same
         village but in another  village,  Sikkah,  which  is  approximately
         twenty minute's walk on foot from the family home.  The appellant's
         mother and father are in poor health.  It  is  therefore  plausible
         that their two daughters would have changed their plans to care for
         them."

17. It does appear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge placed weight on  the
    inconsistencies that he had identified when reaching a conclusion  with
    regard to the credibility of the assertion that the appellant's  family
    do not go outside of  the  family  home.   There  may  well  have  been
    credible explanations had these matters been put to the  appellant.   I
    find that it was an error of law for the judge to reach findings  based
    on his own assumptions e.g. the judge's supposition that  it  would  be
    plausible for the appellant's two sisters to have changed  their  plans
    to care for their parents.  However, for the  reasons  given  later  in
    this decision I do not consider that this was a material error of  law.



18. It is asserted that the judge failed to make clear credibility findings
    in respect of the appellant's oral and written testimony.  A judge does
    not need to set out every  single  piece  of  evidence  that  has  been
    considered and reach conclusions in relation to each piece of evidence.
     The judge in this case set  out  with  clarity  that  he  accepts  the
    appellant's evidence that  her  brother  was  attacked  and  killed  in
    Bangladesh and that this has had a profound  effect  upon  the  family.
    The essential part of the claim was that the  killing  was  politically
    motivated.  The judge set out in a number of paragraphs why he did  not
    accept that the killing was politically motivated.  The judge refers to
    a number of documents none of  which  make  reference  to  a  political
    motivation.  The judge also considered the  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's father pursuit of justice  for  his  son.   The  judge,  at
    paragraph 53, found:

         "53. The appellant's father has been able to make  a  complaint  to
         the police and his evidence is that the trial is  ongoing  and  has
         not been stopped by the authorities.  The  fact  that  these  legal
         proceedings are expensive and are causing financial worries for him
         is credible but does not amount to persecution.

         54.  Moreover, the evidence shows that the appellant's  father  has
         been active and open  in  bringing  his  son's  death  to  a  wider
         audience  which  is  shown  by  the  newspaper  articles  and   the
         condolence letter from the BJP.  He did not fear doing so.

         55.  There are no details given regarding the  assertion  that  the
         appellant's brothers are not going outside of the home...".

19. The judge acknowledged that there may have been some harassment against
    the appellant's family.  The judge set out at paragraph 58:

         "58. It is possible, given that it is claimed that those accused of
         attacking the appellant's brother come from another  village,  that
         there may have been some harassment against the appellant's  family
         owing to the events surrounding his killing and the complaint  that
         their father has filed with  the  police.   However,  this  is  not
         enough to amount to persecution and I find that the  appellant  can
         safely be returned to Bangladesh."

20. It is clear that the judge made findings in respect of the core of  the
    claim. He set out the evidence of the appellant  that  he  accepts  and
    also the limit to what he  accepted.   The  judge  has  given  adequate
    reasons for his findings.

21. With regard to internal relocation it is  not  clear  what  submissions
    were made before the First-tier Tribunal with regard to  the  relevance
    of the fact that matters had been published in newspapers and therefore
    in the public domain and how that might cause problems  if  the  family
    relocated.  There  was  no  reference  to  any  objective  evidence  or
    subjective evidence that indicate that the matters being  published  in
    newspapers some two years  ago  would  cause  problems  if  the  family
    relocated now. The judge at paragraph 63 considered:

         "63. The weight of evidence points towards the  appellant's  father
         being a prominent local politician; the former general secretary of
         the BJP for the Jogonnathan police station district.  His political
         opponent, Mr Anhar Miah, who he fears, covers  the  same  political
         district which was confirmed by the oral  evidence.   There  is  no
         reason to think that the influence by Mr Anhar Miah extends  beyond
         that district or that if it did he would be able to cause others to
         persecute the appellant and her family.

         64.  The objective evidence  shows  that  there  is  a  functioning
         judiciary  and  police  force  in  Bangladesh  and  the  subjective
         evidence shows that the appellant's family  have  been  willing  to
         avail themselves of this protection even  in  their  home  location
         where they claim to be living in fear."

22. The  judge  has  taken  into  consideration  the  appellant's  father's
    prominent political position.  Whilst the judge does not refer directly
    to matters being published in the newspapers when considering  internal
    relocation, he referred to the newspaper report of 27 August  2014  and
    considered all the documentation that was before him. The judge clearly
    has considered the extent, geographically, of the  influence  that  the
    appellant's father's political opponent would have.  He notes that  the
    appellant's father has been able to bring matters to the  attention  of
    the local police.

23. There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision that the appellant can return safely to Bangladesh.

24. Given my findings above the ground of appeal in  relation  to  internal
    relocation is immaterial. However, as the judge considered this I  deal
    with it briefly. It is submitted that the  judge  failed  to  determine
    whether it would be reasonable for the family  to  relocate  especially
    the appellant.  Reliance is placed on the case of AH (Sudan) & Others v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 297.  In the
    context of a claim for international protection the test is a  rigorous
    one as re-iterated throughout the case law, for example AH (Sudan):

         '41. ... Nevertheless, as Brooke LJ also observed there,  the  test
         of undue harshness "is still a very rigorous  test",  a  point  re-
         emphasised by Lord Carswell [2006]  2  AC  426,  para  67  (and,  I
         apprehend, accepted by the  other  members  of  the  Committee)  in
         Januzi itself ...'

25. The rigorousness of the test and the question  to  be  answered  is  as
    expressed in the speech of Lord Brown of Eaton-Under-Heywood:

         '42. ... Given that they can now  safely  be  returned  home,  only
         proof that their lives on return would be quite simply  intolerable
         compared even to the problems and deprivations of so many of  their
         fellow countrymen would entitle them to refugee status.  Compassion
         alone cannot justify the grant of asylum.'

26. The judge accepted the objective evidence that for a young Muslim woman
    to relocate without male relatives  would  be  difficult  and  she  may
    experience problems. The judge considered that the appellant could make
    plans from the UK to relocate with one or more members of  her  family.
    He considered that the family were able to function  as  a  family  and
    that the evidence does not indicate that the  appellant's  parents  are
    unable to travel. The judge considered that  the  appellant's  case  is
    that her whole family are living in fear so that it would be  in  their
    interests, if that were so, to relocate.

27. From the evidence available to the judge (and  given  the  high  hurdle
    that the appellant must overcome in order to demonstrate that it  would
    be unduly harsh for her to relocate) the decision  was  one  which  was
    reasonably open to him. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's finding.

The Article 8 decision

28. It is asserted that the judge failed to consider  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules.  No specific reasons are given in the grounds of
    appeal as to why  the  appellant  may  face  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration other than a mention of 'all the accepted  facts  of  the
    case'.  At paragraph 71 the judge indicated that  there  was  no  claim
    made by the appellant in respect of private or family  life  under  the
    Rules but that she made a claim under Article 8 of the ECHR, presumably
    a reference to a claim outside the Rules.  However,  I  note  that  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter did consider whether or  not  the  appellant
    met the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE.  The  Secretary  of  State
    considered that the appellant would not face any significant  obstacles
    reintegrating into life in Bangladesh because she was familiar with the
    language and culture and has family  members  who  continue  to  reside
    there including her parents  and  siblings.   If  the  judge  erred  by
    failing to consider paragraph 276ADE then this would not be a  material
    error on the facts found by the judge when assessing Article 8  outside
    the Immigration Rules. The judge, in finding that any interference with
    the appellant's article 8 rights  would  be  proportionate,  took  into
    account that the appellant is an adult, she spent her  formative  years
    in Bangladesh, is a Muslim by faith and  understands  the  culture  and
    that  she  would  have  her  family  to  support  her  if  returned  to
    Bangladesh. These are the  same  factors  that  would  be  relevant  to
    consideration of the 'very significant  obstacles'  test  in  paragraph
    276ADE. I find there is no merit in this ground of appeal.

Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.  The Secretary of State's decision therefore stands.

30. No anonymity direction has been made.


Signed P M Ramshaw                               Date 3 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

