
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02558/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 August 2019                    |On 27 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     MR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, Counsel, instructed by Lawmatic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  Devittie  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  21  May   2019,
         dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
         dated 27 February 2019 refusing his protection and Article 8  human
         rights claim.

   Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born in October 1988.  He
         entered the UK on 15 September 2009 as a Tier 4 (General)  Student.
         He was granted further leave in the same capacity,  but  his  leave
         was subsequently curtailed so as to end  on  27  August  2014.  The
         appellant however remained in the  UK  and  claimed  asylum  on  27
         November  2017.  Although  this  asylum  claim   was   subsequently
         withdrawn  due  to  non-compliance  on  his  part,  the  respondent
         considered further submissions lodged by the appellant and  refused
         his asylum claim on 27 February 2019.

      3. The appellant's asylum claim is premised on  his  involvement  with
         the Bangladesh Islami Chatra Shibir (BICS), the student wing of the
         Bangladesh Jamat-e-Islami  (BJI)  party,  an  opposition  political
         party in Bangladesh. I summarise the appellant's protection  claim.
         He was a popular and active member of the    BICS who  successfully
         recruited many members and participated in regular meetings at  his
         place of study, the Sylhet MC College. The  appellant's  activities
         attracted the adverse attention of the  Bangladesh  Chhatra  League
         (BCL), the student wing of the Bangladesh Awami League.  After  the
         Awami League came  to  power  BCL  members  started  provoking  and
         harassing BICS members at the college. On 14 April 2009, during the
         breakup by the  BCL  of  a  BICS  gathering  at  the  college,  the
         appellant kicked Kala Faruque, a BCL member who tried to attack him
         with a knife. Mr Faruque was a prominent member of the BCL and  his
         being kicked by the appellant was said to be a  humiliation.  As  a
         result members of the BCL started looking for the appellant and  he
         had to avoid going out of his home, attending his classes and going
         into  the  town  centre.  Fearful  for  his  safety  the  appellant
         successfully applied to enter the UK as a student.

      4. On 8 December 2009 the BCL used their influence over the police  to
         lodge  a  case  against  the  appellant  and  20  other   political
         colleagues relating to a riotous incident  that  occurred  on  that
         date. The appellant believes this was in order to  trace  them  and
         exterminate them. He claims that this was a  politically  motivated
         allegation and that he was  not  present  in  Bangladesh  when  the
         incident is said to have occurred. A warrant  for  the  appellant's
         arrest was issued on 15 February 2011 and police came to the family
         home in order to arrest the appellant. He fears that if he returned
         to Bangladesh he would be arrested and his political  rivals  would
         take advantage of corrupt law enforcement officials  to  harm  him.
         The appellant claims that the members of the BCL who  targeted  him
         are now prominent leaders in Sylhet city. His  younger  brother,  a
         member of the student wing of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party, was
         attacked on 14 April 2011 because of his political associations and
         the police rejected the brother's attempts to lodge a complaint.  A
         friend of the appellant's brother was killed for what are  believed
         to have been politically motivated reasons. The  appellant's  fears
         he would be arrested if returned to  Bangladesh  and  detained  and
         tortured. He claims that he could not  relocate  in  Bangladesh  as
         "the grass-root politicians" of the Awami  League  "are  very  well
         connected throughout Bangladesh." The appellant did  not  make  his
         asylum application  sooner  because  he  was  "stigmatised  by  the
         immigration complexities" of claiming asylum and had been  told  by
         friends that  he  might  be  deported  if  he  claimed  asylum.  He
         underwent a religious marriage on 28 December 2017 to RB, a British
         citizen.

      5. The respondent accepted that, if an individual had a  high  profile
         in an position party or was an opposition party  leader,  they  may
         face harassment  and  prosecution  in  Bangladesh.  If  however  an
         individual was simply a member or  a  supporter  of  an  opposition
         political party there was said to be no real risk of serious  harm.
         The respondent noted that the appellant failed to provide certified
         documents and failed to provide the credentials of  the  translator
         who translated  a  First  Incident  Report  (FIR)  upon  which  the
         appellant relied into English.  The  respondent  expressed  concern
         that many of the documents provided by the appellant  were  written
         in English and that there was no explanation or other  evidence  as
         to how the appellant obtained those documents. The  respondent  did
         not accept that the appellant demonstrated that he was  politically
         active in Bangladesh. Nor was the  respondent  satisfied  that  the
         police would not have investigated the attack on the appellant. The
         respondent  concluded  that  the  applicant  was  not  entitled  to
         international protection and that the refusal of his  human  rights
         claim would not breach Article 8.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6. The judge had before him a  bundle  of  documents  running  to  288
         pages. This included, inter alia, a letter from  the  secretary  of
         the  BICS dated 25 November 2018, copies of the  FIR  sealed  on  9
         December 2012,  an Order Sheet sealed  on  9  December  2012  by  a
         Magistrate's court in Sylhet, an Order Sheet  issued  by  the  same
         Magistrate's court and sealed on 15 February 2011, a  Charge  Sheet
         sealed on 14 or 15 February 2011, an Arrest  Warrant  sealed  by  a
         Magistrate's court on 15 February 2011 relating to  the  appellant,
         an Order sealed by the "Court of Metropolitan Session Judge"  on  4
         March 2018, and translations of all of the above. The  judge  heard
         oral evidence from the appellant and his partner.

      7. At [9(1)] the judge said he  considered  the  documentary  evidence
         including the FIR and the arrest warrant. At [9(2)] the judge  drew
         an adverse inference from the appellant's delay in claiming asylum,
         and at [9(3)] the judge found it incredible that  Mr  Faruque,  who
         was an ordinary member of the BCL in April 2009, would now seek  to
         harm the appellant because of a "relatively minor altercation." The
         judge noted the absence of any evidence that  Mr  Faruque  was  now
         secretary of the Awami League, as claimed by the appellant  in  his
         oral evidence.

      8. At [10] the judge stated,

             "I have considered in the round the documentary  evidence  and
             the background evidence. I am however not persuaded  in  light
             of  the  unsatisfactory  features  that  this  Appellant   has
             established that he was more than an ordinary  member  of  the
             party he claims to have been activist for during  his  student
             days. It is common ground that he did not hold any position. I
             do not accept his evidence that he was so popular although not
             holding a position that  he  attracted  adverse  interest  and
             would continue to do so. I do not accept the Appellant's claim
             that there was an incident in which he had an altercation with
             one Faruq whom he kicked. I  do  not  accept  the  Appellant's
             evidence is true that Faruq and other  members  of  the  Awami
             League have been looking for him in the last 8 years and going
             to his home."

      9. And at [11] the judge stated,

              "I find that even taking the Appellant's evidence at its very
             highest and accepting that Faruq would cause him harm  in  his
             home area, that it  is  entirely  reasonable  to  expect  this
             Appellant to relocate to an area of safety.  Bangladesh  is  a
             country with a large population.  The  Appellant  is  in  good
             health and has a good standard of education. He  would  easily
             be able to relocate and I do  not  accept  his  evidence  that
             Faruq, an ordinary member of the Awami League  10  years  ago,
             would have the means to find him and cause him harm  whereever
             he was to go for safety in Bangladesh."

     10. The judge dismissed the protection claim.  The  judge  went  on  to
         consider the appellant's Article 8 claim  but  concluded  that  the
         respondent's refusal of the human rights claim would not constitute
         a disproportionate interference with Article 8.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision and the 'error  of  law'
hearing

     11. The grounds, which are poorly drafted, contend (a) that  the  judge
         failed to adequately consider the Country  Policy  and  Information
         Note (CPIN) indicating that opposition activists have been targeted
         and that it was not necessary for the  appellant  to  have  a  high
         profile in order to  face  political  persecution,  (b)  the  judge
         failed  to  adequately  consider  the  arrest  warrant  and   other
         documents suggesting  the  appellant  would  come  to  the  adverse
         attention of the Bangladesh authorities and the Awami  League,  and
         (c) the judge erred in failing  to  assess  whether  the  appellant
         would be required to limit his political activities for fear of ill-
         treatment, thus breaching the principles established in HJ (Iran) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1024.

     12. Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  granting  permission  to
         appeal found no arguable errors of law in relation to some  of  the
         grounds, there was said to be an  arguable  error  of  law  in  the
         judge's failure to explain why no weight was given  to  the  arrest
         warrant and the failure to make any express finding in  respect  of
         the arrest warrant. Permission  was  nevertheless  granted  on  all
         grounds.

     13. Ms Malhotra focused her  submissions  on  the  judge's  failure  to
         engage with the FIR and the arrest warrant.  The  judge  failed  to
         make any finding in respect of these material documents.  This  was
         relevant both to the judge's finding that the appellant was not  an
         activist or so popular that he would  have  attracted  the  adverse
         attention of the BCL and the Awami  League.  It  was  possible  for
         someone to be ordinary member of a political party but also  be  an
         activist.

     14. Mr Clarke submitted that the judge had taken account of the FIR and
         the arrest warrant but  that  he  had  implicitly  attached  little
         weight to those documents in light of his other adverse credibility
         findings. both representatives drew my  attention  to  the  January
         2018 CIPN.

     15. I indicated that I would reserve my decision.

Discussion

     16. The judge's factual findings are not entirely clear. He appears  to
         have accepted that the appellant was a member of the BICS, although
         only  an  ordinary  member  (see  [10]).  The  judge  rejected  the
         appellant's claim that he was an activist on behalf of  the  party,
         and he rejected the appellant's  claim  that  he  was  sufficiently
         popular so as to attract the adverse interest of the BCL. The judge
         also rejected the appellant's  claim  that  he  kicked  Mr  Faruque
         during an altercation and that this gentleman and other members  of
         the BCL would be looking for him  8  years  later.  The  judge  was
         entitled to rely on the appellant's delay in claiming  asylum,  his
         seemingly inconsistent evidence relating to  Mr  Faruque's  current
         position in the  Awami  League,  and  the  implausibility  that  Mr
         Faruque would take such umbrage against the appellant  merely  from
         being kicked by him.

     17. There were however several documents, including the FIR, the arrest
         warrant, the charge sheets  and  the  court  order  (identified  in
         paragraph 6 of this decision) that were capable of  supporting  the
         appellant's claim to have been targeted by  the  BCL/Awami  League.
         The translation of the documents is extremely poor  (a  point  that
         may ultimately affect their reliability), but they do suggest  that
         the appellant was identified as a participant in a  civil  disorder
         incident that occurred on 8 December 2009. The appellant of  course
         had left Bangladesh in September 2009, a point he  acknowledges  in
         his statement. He maintains however that the  allegations  levelled
         against him were politically motivated  because  of  his  activism.
         Whilst the respondent found the FIR to be unreliable, the judge was
         obliged reach his own view on the reliability of this document  and
         the other purportedly officially issued documents. If the documents
         were considered reliable the appellant would be the  subject  of  a
         serious allegation and the subject of an arrest warrant.   This  in
         turn would support the appellant's claim to have been enough of  an
         activist to attract the adverse attention of the BCL/Awami  League,
         and was  therefore  a  factor  to  be  weighed  in  favour  of  the
         credibility of the appellant's account. The documents were  clearly
         material to the issues before the  judge.  Whilst  the  judge  made
         brief  reference  to  the  documentary  evidence   he   failed   to
         specifically engage with any of the purportedly official  documents
         and made no finding of  fact  in  relation  to  their  reliability.
         Whilst the judge may ultimately have been entitled to  attach  only
         limited weight to the documents he had, at the very least, to  give
         albeit brief reasons for so doing. The failure by the judge to make
         any specific factual finding in respect of the reliability  of  the
         police and court issued documents or to  assess  their  reliability
         renders his assessment of the appellant's credibility unsafe.

     18. Moreover, if the arrest warrant was found to be a genuine  document
         this would affect the assessment of risk on return and the issue of
         internal relocation. If an arrest warrant was  outstanding  against
         the appellant, then he may be detained on return to Bangladesh.  If
         he were to be detained in prison following an arrest there may be a
         risk of serious ill treatment (the respondents Fact-Finding Mission
         to Bangladesh, published in September 2017  and  contained  in  the
         appellant's bundle of documents, referred,  at  2.5.2,  to  torture
         being endemic in Bangladeshi prisons). If the appellant  is  wanted
         by the state authorities then this may prevent him from  internally
         relocating within  Bangladesh.  No  assessment  was  made  of  this
         possibility by the judge.

     19. I am satisfied, for the reasons given above, that the  decision  of
         the First-tier Tribunal is infected by errors of law requiring  the
         decision to be set aside. As the errors  of  law  affect  both  the
         judge's assessment of credibility and his  assessment  of  risk  on
         return, I am satisfied that the case  should  be  remitted  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing, before a judge other  than
         judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devittie.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing  before
a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devittie.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.BLUM                              21 August 2019

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
