
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02271/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2019                            |On 15 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                 Beenish [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Raw, Counsel, instructed by Middlesex Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan.   Her  date  of  birth  is  26
    January 1983.  She made an application for  asylum  on  31  March  2009
    claiming to have entered the UK on 16 July 2008.  The  application  was
    refused by the Respondent on 31  July  2009.   The  Appellant  appealed
    against that decision.  Her appeal was dismissed  by  the  First  -tier
    Tribunal ("the FTT") on 22 September 2009.

 2. The Appellant continued to remain here in the UK. She made a series  of
    further submissions and an application for judicial  review  which  was
    unsuccessful.  The final set  of  further  submissions  resulted  in  a
    decision of 25 February 2019 refusing the application  but  giving  the
    Appellant a statutory right of appeal.  The Appellant  exercised  this.
    Her appeal came before FTT Judge Chana on 9 April  2019.   Judge  Chana
    dismissed the appeal in a decision dated 3 May 2019.

 3. Permission was granted to the  Appellant  by  FTT  Judge  Andrew  on  2
    September 2019.  The grant of permission reads as follows:-

         "2.  I am satisfied that there is an arguable error of law in  this
             decision.  However, I do not find that  the  Judge  was  wrong
             when not considering  Article  8  fully.   It  is  plain  from
             paragraph 16 of the decision  the  Appellant's  representative
             acknowledged that the  Appellant  did  not  seek  to  rely  on
             Article 8.

         3.   Notwithstanding this the Judge considered the position of  the
             Appellant's child but in doing so made  no  reference  to  the
             independent social circumstances report contained  within  the
             Appellant's Bundle when coming to his findings in relation  to
             the best interests of the child, and did not consider  whether
             the child would  be  able  to  return  to  Pakistan  with  the
             Appellant.

         4.   For the reasons that she has given I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Judge made sustainable findings in relation to the Appellant's
             asylum claim, finding that the Appellant was not  credible  in
             her claims."

 4. The matter came before me to determine whether the FTT made an error of
    law.

The decision of the FTT

 5. The FTT heard evidence from the Appellant and a witness, Mr  [B].   The
    judge set out the law and directed herself at paragraphs 10 to 13.   At
    paragraph 16 the judge stated that she was informed by the  Appellant's
    Counsel, Mr Raw, that  the  Appellant's  son  (I  shall  refer  to  the
    Appellant's son as AB), born on 17 October 2013, was not able to obtain
    documentation from the Pakistan High Commission  with  reference  to  a
    letter at page 5 of the Appellant's bundle from the High Commission for
    Pakistan of 10 January 2019.

 6. The Appellant gave oral evidence which is  recorded  by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 17 to 27.  The Appellant's case was that  she  was  at  risk
    from her ex-husband and family in Pakistan.  This was the case that had
    been advanced before the FTT in 2009.  However, the Appellant relied on
    evidence that was not  before  the  FTT  in  2009,  namely  threatening
    WhatsApp messages. These were sent to  her  ex-husband's  sister-in-law
    but according to the Appellant meant for her attention. She also relied
    on a letter from the Pakistan High Commission  in  support  of  AB  not
    being able to travel to Pakistan and the  evidence  of  a  witness  and
    friend, Mr [B]. None of this evidence was before the FTT in  2009.  The
    Appellant's claim was that she was now at risk from her ex-husband  and
    her family as a result of having a child outside of  marriage.  Mr  [B]
    gave evidence which is recorded by the judge at paragraphs 28 to 31.

 7. The judge made findings of fact at paragraphs 33 to 52.   At  paragraph
    34 she directed  herself  in  respect  of  the  case  of  Devaseelan  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2002]  UKIAT  00702.   The
    judge recorded that the basis of the Appellant's  claim  was  that  she
    feared persecution and ill-treatment in Pakistan at the hands of her ex-
    husband and her family which was the very same claim that was  made  in
    her appeal in 2009, however the Appellant now has a child born  outside
    of marriage and claims that her ex-husband and  family  will  kill  her
    because she has brought shame on them as a result of this.

 8. The judge said that her starting point was the FTT in 2009.   She  said
    that she had considered  all  the  evidence  in  the  appeal  including
    evidence to which she has not referred.  She recorded that the judge in
    2009 found that the Appellant  had  fabricated  her  account  of  being
    subject to domestic violence by her ex-husband in Pakistan and being at
    risk from honour killing.  She recorded that the Appellant continued to
    allege that her ex-husband and family will kill her now because of  the
    birth of her child.  The judge concluded that  she  did  not  find  the
    Appellant to be credible and nor did she find Mr [B]  to  be  credible.
    She found, at paragraph 39, that there were  inconsistencies  in  their
    evidence.  She recorded that the judge in  2009  also  found  that  the
    Appellant was not credible.

 9. The judge, at paragraph 39, recorded that the Appellant did not seek to
    rely on Article 8. Her appeal was based on return to Pakistan as a lone
    woman with a child born outside of marriage who was at  risk  from  her
    family and her ex-husband.

10. The judge  considered  the  evidence  that  was  not  before  the  FTT,
    including the WhatsApp messages.  At paragraph 40  she  concluded  that
    she could not place reliance on those messages  because  the  Appellant
    was unclear about who sent them and that there was a lack of clarity as
    to how the messages were sent to the Appellant, moreover there  was  no
    telephone number from where the text messages emanated.  She said  that
    the Appellant was not able to give a  credible  explanation  explaining
    how the messages came to her and who sent them.

11. The judge made findings about the evidence of Mr [B] and the  Appellant
    at paragraphs 41 and 42 which read as follows:-

         "41. The appellant and Mr [B] were totally  inconsistent  in  their
             evidence about Mr [B]'s personal  status.   The  appellant  in
             cross-examination said that she lived with Mr [B]  who  had  a
             partner and children who lived with him  and  where  she  also
             lived in a separate room.  When it was put to the appellant in
             re-examination whether Mr [B] was married, she  said  that  Mr
             [B] was not married.  The appellant was asked whether she ever
             asked Mr [B] whether he was married or had children, she  said
             that she did not want to ask him personal questions.   Mr  [B]
             however in his evidence said that he is married and  his  wife
             and children were in Pakistan when the appellant lived at  his
             house and that when she returned he  asked  the  appellant  to
             leave.  At the hearing when Mr [B] was  asked  why  would  the
             appellant think that he was not married, he  had  no  credible
             answer.  These inconsistencies in their evidence goes  to  the
             credibility of the appellant and Mr [B].  I also do  not  find
             it credible that the appellant would have lived with  Mr  [B],
             who she claims was a benefactor, for five months and not  have
             known or not asked about this marital status.  I find that the
             appellant  and  Mr  [B]  are  not  being  truthful  about  the
             appellant (sic) circumstances.

         42.  I find that the appellant has  not  been  truthful  about  her
             circumstances so it is difficult for me to decipher  her  true
             story.  The claim that she was subjected to domestic  violence
             by her husband in Pakistan was not believed  by  the  previous
             Judge.  I do not find her credible  and  therefore  I  do  not
             accept her claim about her previous circumstances in  Pakistan
             either.  The appellant has family  in  Pakistan  although  she
             claims that they will kill her.  I do not  accept  that  claim
             and I find that she will have family support on her return  to
             Pakistan."

12. The judge concluded at paragraph 43 that she accepted the Appellant had
    a child outside marriage.  She said in  these  circumstances,  "I  must
    consider whether this would put her at risk on her return  to  Pakistan
    with or without family support".

13. The judge at paragraph 44 considered the country guidance  case  of  SM
    (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067.  She set  out  the
    head note of the case and she said at paragraph 45 as follows:-

         "I have taken account of these factors in deciding  whether  it  is
         safe for the appellant to return to Pakistan as a lone woman with a
         child and without family support.   The  appellant  can  internally
         relocate within Pakistan and it will not be unduly harsh for her to
         do so.  The case law demonstrates that a  single  woman  or  female
         head of household who has no male protector or social  network  may
         be able to use the state domestic  or  private  shelters,  who  can
         provide the appellant with support while she regularises her social
         situation.  The appellant has lived in this country by herself  and
         displayed great resourcefulness and survived she can do the same on
         her return to Pakistan."

14. In relation to sufficiency of protection the judge said as follows:-

         "The appellant will also have  sufficiency  of  protection  to  the
         Horvath standard in Pakistan.  In KA and others it  was  held  that
         the evidence fell well short of establishing that  in  general  the
         police were fundamentally unwilling or unable to carry out law  and
         order functions and ensure the protection of the  public.   I  find
         that the appellant will have the protection of the authorities when
         living in Pakistan in any of the bigger cities."

The Grounds of Appeal

15. The grounds of appeal are unfocused.  There is a challenge in the first
    ground which relates to a decision under paragraph 353 of the Rules.

16. The grounds assert that the judge did not consider  the  birth  of  the
    child which was a "very significant new feature to this case".   It  is
    submitted that the judge did  not  properly  apply  SM  (lone  women  -
    ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067  which  was  not  the  country
    guidance when the case was before the First-tier Tribunal in 2009.

17. It is further asserted that the judge was wrong to say that there would
    not be significant obstacles to the  Appellant's  integration.   It  is
    also asserted that the judge failed to give weight to the  "independent
    witness" who attended the Appellant's family home in Pakistan  and  the
    judge gave no  reason  not  to  accept  his  evidence  as  an  accurate
    reflection of what happened in  Pakistan.   It  is  asserted  that  the
    assessment of the Appellant's son's best interests  was  "unlawful  and
    unreasonable"  because  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of   the
    independent social worker report.

18. It is also asserted that the judge failed  to  take  into  account  the
    background information on the persecution and discrimination  that  the
    AB would face on return to Pakistan as an  illegitimate  child.   Large
    sections of background information are set out  in  the  grounds.   The
    grounds also rely on the unreported decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    AA/06732/2015 which is set out at length.   It  is  asserted  that  the
    judge failed to take into account the background evidence  relating  to
    the child and that his mother would be at risk.  If his mother  was  to
    go to a domestic violence shelter he would be taken away from  her  and
    placed in an orphanage or madrassa.  The judge  erred  when  concluding
    that shelters would be available to the Appellant because she failed to
    consider the situation for the Appellant whose child is born outside of
    marriage and who would not be allowed entry to a shelter.

19. The grounds go on to say that it could not possibly be in  the  child's
    best interests to return to Pakistan with his mother, especially  "when
    he cannot even be registered with the Government agencies in Pakistan".
     It is asserted that the judge failed to  consider  the  case  properly
    under Section 55 of the 2009 Act.

Rule 24 response

20. Initially the Secretary of  State  served  a  response  under  Rule  24
    stating as follows:-

         "The Respondent does not oppose the appellant's application to  the
         limited basis has (sic) stated in the  grant  of  permission.   The
         findings  regarding  the  asylum  claim  and   credibility   remain
         unaffected by the challenge.  Also, it is clear from  paragraph  16
         reliance was not placed on Article 8".

21. There was an amended  Rule  24  response  which  was  received  by  the
    Tribunal on 6 November 2019.  Mr Raw confirmed  that  he  had  received
    this the day before the hearing and had had time to  consider  it.   He
    did not object to the Respondent withdrawing the earlier  response.   I
    conclude that no unfairness arises from this. The following is stated:-

         "4.  It is accepted that the grant of permission to  appeal  issued
             by F-tTJ Andrew and dated 2 September  2019  is  not  strictly
             limited.  However, it is clear that  Judge  Andrew  considered
             that the only arguable errors committed  by  the  Tribunal  in
             dismissing the appeal are  those  identified  at  [3]  of  the
             reasons for the grant.

         5.   Judge Andrew noted at [4] - it is submitted correctly  -  that
             sustainable conclusions were reached by the Tribunal  both  on
             the appellant's asylum claim and on the issue of credibility.

         6.   The unchallenged finding of Judge Chana, recorded at  [16]  of
             her decision, is that the Appellant (who  was  represented  by
             Counsel) did not rely upon Article 8 ECHR in her appeal.   She
             relied solely upon protection grounds [39].

         7.   Accordingly, Judge Chana's relatively brief  consideration  at
             [47] in respect of the best interests of the Appellant's child
             was wholly sustainable given the way that the case was put.

         8.   Equally, there was no need for the Judge to make any  findings
             on an Article 8 claim that was explicitly not pursued."

Oral submissions

22. I heard oral submissions from both parties.  I asked Mr Raw to  clarify
    the grounds on which he sought to rely because the  grounds  of  appeal
    are unhelpful and unfocused. He identified  two  separate  grounds.  He
    explained that the first ground was a failure  by  the  judge  to  give
    weight  to  Mr  [B]'s  evidence  which  he  says  was  independent  and
    consistent in respect of the visit he made to the Appellant's family in
    Pakistan in 2017.  He said to me that this evidence was not  challenged
    and it was overlooked by the judge.

23. Mr Raw identified a second ground which is that  the  judge  overlooked
    evidence when considering whether AB could return to  Pakistan  because
    he was born outside of marriage. In support of this he  relied  on  the
    letter from the High Commission with specific reference to paragraph  3
    which reads as follows:

             "To apply for your child's card  as  NADRA  holders,  you  are
             advised to get your  marital  status  updated  on  the  cards.
             (NADRA)  system  will  not  allow  that  child's   application
             processing  if  birth  parent's   status   is   mentioned   as
             single/unmarried)."

24. Mr Raw submitted that the judge did  not  engage  with  the  submission
    about the position of the child in the light of the evidence  from  the
    High Commission.  He said that the judge did not consider the  evidence
    of the social worker about what would happen to  the  child  should  he
    return to Pakistan and  return  to  a  shelter.   He  referred  to  the
    background evidence before the judge.  He said that the unreported case
    cited in the grounds  (whilst  accepting  he  could  not  rely  on  it)
    supported conclusions that back-up the letter from  the  Pakistan  High
    Commission.

25. Mr Lindsay made submissions.  His first submission was that Section  55
    is not a freestanding ground of appeal and must be a facet of a  ground
    pleaded.  The Appellant had not relied on  Article  8.   There  was  no
    properly articulated  argument  before  the  FTT  that  the  child  was
    stateless.  The best interests of the child in this appeal will not  be
    relevant unless material to a decision  on  protection  grounds  or  on
    grounds of humanitarian protection.  He said that there were evidential
    difficulties relating to the letter from the Pakistani High Commission.
     It does not say that a child will not be allowed to travel to Pakistan
    with his mother.  He said there was  no  specific  pleading  about  the
    letter from the High Commission in any event. He said that taken at its
    highest the letter does not assist the Appellant in respect  of  asylum
    or protection grounds.  The judge was satisfied  that  there  would  be
    family support available to the Appellant. There is no  authority  that
    the Appellant or the  child  would  be  at  risk  on  return  in  those
    circumstances.  Mr Lindsay submitted that the guidance  in  SM  plainly
    includes  women  with  children  outside  of  marriage.   It  does  not
    distinguish between married and unmarried women.

26. In respect of the evidence of Mr [B], Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  the
    judge found that the Appellant and Mr [B] were not credible. She  found
    that it was difficult to decipher the Appellant's true  story.   It  is
    not the case that a Tribunal has to accept all  evidence  that  is  not
    inconsistent.  What is required is that the evidence is  considered  in
    the round.  The  judge  gave  cogent  reasons  for  not  believing  the
    witnesses.  The judge was entitled to find that there would be  support
    available to her in Pakistan.

The Evidence of the Independent Social Worker

27.  The  independent  social  worker,  Nikki  Austin,  prepared  a  report
    comprising fourteen pages having had sight of the Appellant's  personal
    statements, letter of support, a letter of complaint to  Middlesex  Law
    Chambers, a photographic  copy  from  the  Hillingdon  Hospital  and  a
    photographic copy of the child's birth certificate.

28. Ms Austin met with the Appellant and AB on 3 November 2017 and was with
    them for two hours.  She recorded that the  child  attended  pre-school
    for sixteen  hours  a  week.   She  recorded  the  Appellant's  account
    relating to her ex-husband in Pakistan and that her  family  would  not
    support her and had disowned her following the birth of her  son.   The
    social worker said that it was clear that the child  had  settled  into
    his extended support network here in the UK where he was born and  that
    the support network and friendships would all be lost should his mother
    be forced to relocate, and that it would be detrimental to separate the
    child from the support network he has here and the bonds and links that
    he has established here.  She concludes that  forced  relocation  would
    not be in the child's best interests.  She concludes,  having  accepted
    what the Appellant told her about her family  in  Pakistan,  that  they
    would not have support should they relocate.   She  concludes  on  this
    basis that he should not be relocated there where he would be  at  risk
    of "significant harm".  She recorded that she had  been  informed  that
    should he relocate to Pakistan he would live in contrast to his current
    conditions and would be at risk of being taken into care and  separated
    from his mother.

The 2009 decision

29. In the Respondent's bundle there is a  copy  of  the  determination  of
    Immigration Judge Crawshay who heard the Appellant's  appeal  in  2009.
    The Appellant advanced an account of domestic  violence  and  that  she
    would be at risk from her husband should she return to  Pakistan.   The
    judge found that the  Appellant  was  married  but  was  at  that  time
    separated and has a child in Pakistan (see paragraph  39).   She  found
    that the Appellant  lacks  credibility  and  that  she  fabricated  her
    account of being subjected to domestic violence and at being at risk of
    falling victim to honour killing.

Background evidence

30. The Appellant relied on the Country Information and Guidance  Pakistan:
    Women fearing gender-based harm/violence Version 3.0 of February  2016.
    Mr Raw drew my attention to parts of the  evidence  in  the  report  in
    submissions.

SM (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067

31. The Upper Tribunal in SM made the following findings  contained  within
    the head note as follows:-

         "(1) Save as herein set out, the existing country  guidance  in  SN
             and HM (Divorced women - risk on return)  Pakistan  CG  [2004]
             UKIAT 00283 and in KA and Others (domestic violence - risk  on
             return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) remains valid.

         (2)  Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her home
             area for a single woman or a female head of  household,  there
             may be an internal relocation  option  to  one  of  Pakistan's
             larger cities, depending on the family, social and educational
             situation of the woman in question.

         (3)  It will not be normally be unduly harsh  to  expect  a  single
             woman or female  head  of  household  to  relocate  internally
             within Pakistan if she can access support from family  members
             or a male guardian in the place of relocation.

         (4)  It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,
             or older women to seek internal  relocation  to  a  city.   It
             helps if a woman has qualifications enabling her to get  well-
             paid employment and pay for  accommodation  and  childcare  if
             required.

         (5)  Where a single woman, with or without children, is  ostracised
             by family members and other sources of possible social support
             because she is in an irregular situation, internal  relocation
             will be more difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will  be
             a question of fact in each case.

         (6)  A single woman or female head of household  who  has  no  male
             protector or social network may  be  able  to  use  the  state
             domestic violence shelters for a short time, but the focus  of
             such shelters is  on  reconciling  people  with  their  family
             networks, and places are in short  supply  and  time  limited.
             Privately run shelters may be more flexible, providing  longer
             term support while the woman regularises her social situation,
             but again, places are limited.

         (7)  Domestic violence shelters are available for women at risk but
             where they are used by women with children, such  shelters  do
             not always allow older children to enter and stay  with  their
             mothers.   The  risk  of   temporary   separation,   and   the
             proportionality  of  such  separation,  is  likely  to  differ
             depending on the age and  sex  of  a  woman's  children:  male
             children may be removed from their mothers at the age of 5 and
             placed in an orphanage or a madrasa until the family situation
             has been regularised (see KA  and  Others  (domestic  violence
             risk on return) Pakistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  216  (IAC)).  Such
             temporary separation will not always  be  disproportionate  or
             unduly harsh: that is a question of fact in each case.

         (8)  Women in Pakistan  are  legally  permitted  to  divorce  their
             husbands  and  may  institute  divorce  proceedings  from  the
             country of refuge, via a third party  and  with  the  help  of
             lawyers in Pakistan, reducing the risk of family reprisals.  A
             woman who does so and returns with a new  partner  or  husband
             will have access to male protection and is  unlikely,  outside
             her home area, to be at  risk  of  ostracism,  still  less  of
             persecution or serious harm."

Conclusions

32. I engage with the grounds  as  articulated  by  Mr  Raw.   He  did  not
    specifically challenge the  decision  on  Devaseelan  grounds.   It  is
    unarguable that the judge misapplied Devaseelan which does  not  appear
    to be the subject of  a  challenge  in  any  event.   The  first  judge
    rejected the Appellant's claim on the basis that she is  at  risk  from
    her ex-husband  and  family.   The  judge  acknowledged  this  was  the
    starting point, however, she also acknowledged that the  Appellant  now
    had a child and considered whether this fact and the  further  evidence
    that was not before the FTT Tribunal undermined  the  findings  of  the
    first judge.  She considered the evidence in the round  (see  paragraph
    39).  Whilst the aspect of the claim  relating  to  the  birth  of  the
    Appellant's son outside marriage, is capable of being a self  contained
    reason for persecution, there is no assertion that the  judge  did  not
    understand this.

33. The first challenge is effectively a challenge to the weight  given  by
    the judge to  the  evidence  of  Mr  [B]  and  an  assertion  that  she
    overlooked his evidence.  Mr [B]'s evidence contained  in  his  witness
    statement was that he had visited the Appellant's family home in  2017.
    He said that he went there under pretence to give condolences following
    the death of the Appellant's mother.   Her  family  became  angry.  Her
    father denied knowing the Appellant and said that she was dead to  him.
    He was asked by her father whether he was the  Appellant's  lover.   He
    was sworn at and told to get out.  The Appellant's brother  pushed  him
    and swore at him.  He was accused of being  the  Appellant's  boyfriend
    and the father of her child.  Mr [B] was physically assaulted  and  the
    Appellant's brother threatened to kill AB.  The family  said  that  the
    Appellant deserved "only death".

34. The judge set out Mr [B]'s evidence about the visit at paragraph 30  of
    the decision.  At paragraph 41 where she considered the credibility  of
    Mr [B] and the Appellant, the judge did not make specific reference  to
    the part of his evidence referring  to  the  2017  visit  to  Pakistan.
    There was in my view no need for her to do so.  The judge  emphatically
    rejected the Appellant and Mr [B]'s evidence concluding that they  were
    "totally  inconsistent  in  their  evidence  about  Mr  [B]'s  personal
    status".   The  inconsistency  which  she  goes  on  to   describe   is
    significant (see [41]).  The judge said  that  the  inconsistencies  in
    their evidence "goes to the credibility" of the Appellant  and  Mr  [B]
    and she concluded at paragraph 42  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    truthful about her circumstances.  The judge's findings were sufficient
    and a proper reading of the decision indicates that  she  rejected  the
    totality of Mr [B]'s evidence.  There is  no  substance  in  the  first
    challenge as articulated by Mr Raw.

35. The second challenge refers to AB.  Mr Raw raised an issue that was not
    raised in the grounds of appeal and that was that  the  judge  did  not
    make findings in  relation  to  the  letter  from  the  Pakistani  High
    Commission. However, I accept that the grounds challenge  the  findings
    in respect of the AB which would include this challenge.

36.  In relation to the social worker's report there  is  no  reference  to
    this within the decision  of  the  judge.   In  any  event,  the  judge
    concluded at paragraph 47 that the child was very young and it  was  in
    his best interests to be with his mother wherever she lives.   This  in
    my view was a rather simplistic assessment of his  best  interests  and
    there was no reference to the evidence of  the  social  worker  or  the
    letter from the High Commission. However, this is not a material  error
    for the following reasons.

37. The social worker's report was premised on  the  basis  of  an  account
    which was given by the Appellant of persecution in Pakistan; an account
    which was emphatically rejected by the FTT.  Thus, the  thrust  of  the
    social worker's conclusions are undermined. The judge  found  that  the
    Appellant would have family support  on  her  return  to  Pakistan  and
    therefore she would not be returning as a lone woman  without  support.
    Mr Raw in oral submissions stated that the finding was  not  adequately
    detailed because the judge did not identify what family  support  would
    be available to the Appellant on return such as  whether  or  not  that
    support would include accommodation. This  submission  is  misconceived
    and is premised on the judge  being  obliged  to  find  an  alternative
    scenario because she did  not  accept  the  Appellant's  account.   The
    evidential  value  of  the  social  worker  is  limited   because   its
    conclusions are based on a narrative rejected by the judge. There is no
    challenge of substance to the findings of the judge that the  Appellant
    (and therefore AB) would have family support  on  return  to  Pakistan.
    Thus, it was reasonably inferred by the judge that she would  not  have
    to look for accommodation in a shelter.

38. The problem with the Appellant's grounds is that they do not take  into
    account that her  account  was  rejected  by  the  judge  who  said  at
    paragraph 42 that it was difficult to  decipher  the  Appellant's  true
    story.  There is no obligation  on  the  judge  to  identify  the  true
    narrative. The burden of proof is on  the  Appellant.   She  failed  to
    discharge it.  It was sufficient for  the  judge  to  conclude,  having
    rejected the Appellant's evidence, that she would have  family  support
    available to her in Pakistan and on this basis she would  not  have  to
    internally relocate or find  accommodation  outside  the  family.   The
    judge was entitled to conclude that she has nothing to fear as from her
    ex-husband or family.   In these circumstances the case of  SM  is  not
    material to  the  Appellant's  case  because  she  would  not  have  to
    internally relocate. She is not returning as a lone female. She has the
    support of her family.  There is no support for the  assertion  that  a
    single, unmarried mother and child would be at risk on return if  there
    is family support available.

39. Should the evidence be that the Appellant could not  register  her  son
    through the NADRA system as a single unmarried mother, it  is  possible
    that the Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  avoid  enquiry  into  the
    background of her children which would reveal that he was born  outside
    of marriage.  There was no evidence before me  or  the  FTT  about  the
    situation for a child returning from the United Kingdom  without  being
    formally registered by the Pakistan High Commission. Mr Raw stated that
    he would not be able to travel to Pakistan with  his  mother;  however,
    the evidence does not establish that.

40. From the Country of Origin  Information  Report  (see  section  9)  the
    Appellant may have committed a criminal offence which is punishable  by
    imprisonment and it may not be possible for the Appellant  to  register
    her son before returning to Pakistan and it may be that she  will  have
    difficulty registering him given her unmarried  status.   There  is  an
    issue about how the child will be treated on his  return  to  Pakistan,
    possibly in the absence of an ID card.  The case was not put to  me  in
    this way and I am not sure how it was advanced before the FTT. What  is
    clear from the judge's lawful findings is that the  Appellant  and  her
    son are not directly at risk of violence from the Appellant's family or
    the  Appellant's  ex-husband.  They  would  be  supported  on   return.
    Furthermore, the country guidance case of KA & Ors  indicates  that  in
    general persons who face prosecution will not be  at  real  risk  of  a
    flagrant denial of their right to a fair trial, although it will always
    be necessary to consider the particular circumstances of the individual
    case.  The judge did not consider the issue concerning the registration
    of the child and difficulties that may arise.  However,  there  was  no
    evidence before her that would indicate that AB or his mother would  be
    at risk of persecution or serious harm arising from his  birth  outside
    marriage. In respect of his  best  interests,  the  judge  should  have
    considered this in the context of registration and the circumstances of
    his birth; however, on the evidence before the judge,  this  would  not
    have undermined the finding that it would be in his best  interests  to
    return with his mother. There was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  of
    discrimination arising from the circumstances  of  his  birth  that  it
    would have made any difference to the outcome in this case. Whilst  the
    child has been here all his life and has support here, his private life
    is limited as a result of his age. He is young and has extended  family
    in Pakistan. In any event, the Appellant did not rely on Article  8  at
    the hearing. This was readily accepted  by  Mr  Raw.  Moreover  on  the
    evidence and the findings made by the judge the Appellant is  not  able
    to meet the Rules. Had the  judge  considered  proportionality,  taking
    into account the social worker's evidence and the letter from the  High
    Commission (and any discrimination that can be inferred from the letter
    and the background material), it is  not  arguable  that  the  decision
    breached the Appellant's rights under Article 8.

41. Mr Raw drew my attention to the background evidence which is capable of
    supporting claims of honour killings and domestic violence in Pakistan.
    However, it was not clear how this submission  tied  in  with  the  two
    grounds on which he sought to rely in oral submissions. In  any  event,
    there is no substance in a claim that the  judge  did  not  factor  the
    background evidence into the assessment  of  credibility.  The  problem
    with the Appellant's account is that  her  claim  to  be  at  risk  had
    already been rejected in 2009. The further evidence that she now relied
    on was problematic for the reasons properly identified by the judge.

Notice of Decision

42. In the light of the way that the appeal was advanced before the FTT and
    the limited grounds of appeal upon which Mr Raw relied, I conclude that
    there is no error of law capable of making a difference to the  outcome
    in this case.  The decision of  the  FTT  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal is maintained.

43. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                     Joanna McWilliam      Date 11 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
