

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02249/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 12 September 2019                          |On 18 September 2019         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                            UPPER TRIBUNAL KEBEDE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                     B S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This matter comes before us for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sills promulgated on 5 June 2019.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    the appellant will be removed to Afghanistan as a failed asylum  seeker
    an anonymity order is appropriate.

Background

 3. The appellant is an Afghan citizen born on 1 January 1995.  He  entered
    the UK in February 2015 and claimed asylum on the same day.  He claimed
    to be at risk of serious harm  from  the  Taliban  who  had  previously
    kidnapped and detained him for three years; he had escaped,  found  his
    family but left Afghanistan a year later when the Taliban had been seen
    in the area looking for him.


 4. The appellant's asylum claim was refused and his  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed on 22 June 2017.   It  was  found  that  various
    aspects of his account were inconsistent and that he was not at risk on
    return or by reason of indiscriminate violence in  the  context  of  an
    internal armed conflict.

 5. The appellant made further submissions on 9 January 2019.  The basis of
    those submissions was that the security situation  in  Afghanistan  was
    such that the appellant would be at risk on return; he would be  viewed
    as a traitor for  leaving  the  country.  He  did  not  submit  further
    evidence about the matters on the basis of which his earlier appeal had
    been dismissed.

 6. The fresh submissions were refused but the respondent accepted that the
    fresh claim test had been met; the  appellant  was  given  a  right  of
    appeal.  The respondent did not accept the appellant was at risk in his
    home area, Nangarhar. In any event, he could  relocate  to  Kabul.  The
    respondent relied  on  the  country  guidance  in  AK  (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)  and  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118.

 7. Judge Sills dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's
    decision. The Judge relied on  the  country  guidance  insofar  as  the
    Article 15(c) risk was concerned.  He  also  dismissed  the  Article  8
    claim.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    following terms:

         "2. .... It is alleged that the judge has made an arguable error of
         law in the interpretation of Article 15(c) in that the judge failed
         to properly address the objective evidence produced  on  behalf  of
         the appellant.


         3. It is arguable that in finding that there  is  no  situation  of
         internal armed conflict in Afghanistan (paragraph 14) the judge may
         have misunderstood the ratio of AK (Article  15(c)  Afghanistan  CG
         [2012] UKUT 00163 which does not say there is  no  armed  conflict.
         The judged further erred in finding that the appellant was  seeking
         to distinguish or ask him to depart from  the  country  guidance  -
         this is not evident from  the  reading  of  the  skeleton  argument
         submitted  or  the  oral  submissions  made  by   the   appellant's
         representative. Departure from the country guidance is noted in the
         record of proceedings in submissions by the respondent.  The  judge
         has made an arguable error of law in finding that the appellant was
         seeking  it.  This  shows  lack  of  proper  consideration  of  the
         appellant's case as put to him."

Submissions

 9. Mr Khan, for the appellant, relied initially in his oral submissions on
    the grant of permission to appeal. He  had  noted  the  Rule  24  reply
    lodged  by  the  respondent  and  indicated  he  would  respond  to  Ms
    Isherwood's oral submissions.


10. For the respondent,  Ms  Isherwood  submitted  the  grounds  of  appeal
    disclosed merely a disagreement with Judge Sills' findings.  She  noted
    the Judge had identified the history of this appellant at [3]  and  the
    basis of his further submissions at [4] namely that he would be at risk
    on return because of the  security  situation  in  Afghanistan.   Judge
    Sills noted the appellant had not submitted further evidence in support
    of his claim. While the Judge had stated, possibly erroneously, at [14]
    that there was no situation of  internal  armed  conflict  anywhere  in
    Afghanistan, he had  also  found  that  relocation  to  Kabul  was  not
    unreasonable, a finding which he reasoned later in  the  decision.   Ms
    Isherwood took us through the decision with some  care.  She  submitted
    that Judge Sills had taken into account all the background material  to
    which the appellant's counsel had referred.  This  included  the  UNHCR
    Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs
    of Asylum-seekers from Afghanistan published on 30  August  2018  ("the
    UNHCR guidelines"). She submitted it had been open to Judge  to  follow
    the country guidance.

11. Mr Khan acknowledged that  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  remained  good  law
    (albeit the case had been remitted to the Upper Tribunal).   The  grant
    of permission focussed on AK (Article 15(c)).  He  submitted  that  the
    UNHCR material before Judge Sills post-dated the judgment in AS (Safety
    of Kabul) which had been decided in late 2017.  The  changed  situation
    was  described  in  that  report:  conditions   in   Afghanistan   were
    significantly and materially  different.   Judge  Sills'  finding  that
    there was no situation of internal armed conflict  in  Afghanistan  was
    wrong. AK (Article 15(c)) remained good law, at least until AS  (Safety
    of Kabul) was fully considered.  He submitted Judge Sills had to make a
    decision as to  the  extent  to  which  the  situation  had  materially
    changed. The appellant was not a person of rank or position; he  was  a
    civilian. It was for Judge Sills to decide whether, as such, he was  at
    risk of serious harm.  He had relevant material before him, namely  the
    UNHCR guidelines.  Mr Khan identified the pertinent passages at Section
    B of that report.  The UNHCR had identified that civilians were bearing
    the brunt of the conflict and that the number  of  civilian  casualties
    had increased between 2009 and 2017,  with  a  disturbing  increase  in
    casualties in the first half of 2018. Thus this report  demonstrated  a
    significantly increased internal armed conflict such that  in  2018  it
    was severe. He submitted that this  was  material  background  evidence
    which had not been properly taken into account, such that there  was  a
    material error of law.

Discussion

12. It is clear from the appellant's skeleton argument produced  for  Judge
    Sills, the main plank of the appellant's appeal was his claim that  his
    removal would place the UK in breach of Article  15(c).   Reliance  was
    placed in that  skeleton  on  the  background  material  cited  in  the
    respondent's  reasons  for  refusal   letter,   including   the   UNHCR
    guidelines.  The skeleton does not include a specific  submission  that
    the Judge should depart from the country guidance;  it  relies  on  the
    background material to assert that the appellant would be  at  risk  of
    indiscriminate harm on return.

13. The record of proceedings indicates that  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer adopted the reasons  for  refusal,  submitted  that  the  UNHCR
    guidelines did not indicate that all were at risk; and that it was  for
    the appellant to demonstrate he had a profile such that he would be  at
    risk. It was submitted to Judge Sills that his  brother,  who  was  now
    British, had returned to Afghanistan to find their family and that  the
    appellant had no particular  vulnerabilities.  The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that Judge Sills could follow  the  country  guidance  in  AK
    (Article 15(c)) and AS (Safety of Kabul).

14. Submissions to Judge Sills for the appellant were made  on  the  ground
    that Article 15(c), Articles 2 and 3  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights, but not the  Refugee  Convention,  were  engaged  by  the
    decision. It was submitted that the appellant was at risk  due  to  his
    absence from Afghanistan, his unfamiliarity with attacks, and the  need
    to flee. Reference was made  to  the  UNHCR  guidelines.   Neither  the
    appellant's skeleton  argument  nor  the  record  of  proceedings  make
    reference to a specific submission for the  appellant  that  the  Judge
    should depart from the country guidance.


15. Nonetheless the Judge started his decision-making by finding  that  the
    country guidance was clear (albeit  he  misrepresented  it  by  stating
    there  was  no  situation  of  internal  armed  conflict  anywhere   in
    Afghanistan, see below). He went on to find that  "internal  relocation
    to Kabul will not in general by unreasonable".  He concluded  that,  in
    the light of the country guidance, the appellant was "asking  [him]  to
    depart from this country guidance".  While there does not  appear  (and
    the record of proceedings is inevitably not a verbatim record  of  oral
    submissions) to have been a specific submission to that effect, it  was
    not unreasonable for the Judge  to  infer  this  from  the  appellant's
    reliance  on  the  background  material,  as  opposed  to  the  country
    guidance.

16. There is no challenge before us as to  the  circumstances  in  which  a
    Judge may choose to depart from country guidance (as set out at [15]  -
    [17] of the Judge's decision).  Nor is it in dispute before us that the
    relevant country guidance is AK  (Article  15(c))  and  AS  (Safety  of
    Kabul).

17. We note that the Court of Appeal has, in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019]
    EWCA Civ 873 found that the Upper Tribunal erred in  law  in  that  its
    conclusion  as  to  the  percentage  risk  of   being   a   victim   of
    indiscriminate violence was not available to it on  the  evidence.  The
    case was remitted to this Tribunal on the basis that it  need  consider
    only the extent of the risk to returned asylum  seekers  from  security
    incidents.  It was for the tribunal to consider, in the  light  of  the
    UNHCR guidelines  on  returns,  whether  a  more  extensive  basis  for
    reconsideration was required.  Nonetheless,  as  Mr  Khan  acknowledged
    before us, AS (Safety of Kabul) remains good law.  The judgment  in  AS
    (Safety of Kabul) endorsed AK (Article 15(c)) where it was  found  that
    the proportion of the population  directly  affected  by  the  security
    incidents in Kabul was tiny and the current situation  did  not  render
    internal relocation to Kabul unreasonable or unduly harsh.

18. Judge Sills took into account the appellant's  personal  circumstances.
    He noted that the appellant's brother was,  at  the  date  of  hearing,
    visiting Afghanistan voluntarily notwithstanding the appellant's  claim
    to be at risk of indiscriminate harm  due  to  the  security  situation
    there. The  Judge  observed  that  the  appellant's  brother's  British
    citizenship "would [not] significantly reduce any risk  faced".   Judge
    Sills adopted the findings of the  previous  tribunal  as  regards  the
    appellant's account of being at risk of harm as a result of his claimed
    experiences there; these had been rejected and no new evidence had been
    produced.

19. At [27]  the  Judge  notes  that  both  parties  relied  on  the  UNHCR
    guidelines in their submissions.  He noted that these state

           "the situation in Afghanistan,  depending  upon  the  particular
           circumstances, may give rise to  a  risk  of  harm  under  15(c)
           (AB117). The guidelines do not state that there is such a  risk,
           just that there may be one. ... the Guidelines  do  not  give  a
           clear breakdown of the security situation by region. At AB32 the
           Guidelines state that 2017 saw a 9%  decrease  in  violence  and
           there were 10,453 casualties (3438 deaths and 7015 injured). The
           first half of 2018 had seen 1692 deaths and  3430  injured.  The
           number of deaths recorded in the  first  half  of  2018  is  the
           highest recorded, though a comparison of the overall  number  of
           casualties is not given. The Appellant has not provided detailed
           evidence of how the situation has developed since August 2018".

20. The Judge also noted that the Guidelines were published in August  2018
    and that the court in AS (Safety of Kabul) considered  evidence  up  to
    December 2017. He considered it relevant that the UNHCR Guidelines were
    only about 6 months more up  to  date  than  the  most  recent  country
    guidance.  He found


           "AS found that internal  relocation  to  Kabul  was  in  general
           reasonable despite the fact  that  the  city  had  suffered  the
           highest number of civilian casualties."


    He also noted


         "While the number of deaths increased in the first half of 6 months
         [sic], the UNHCR guidelines does [sic] not make clear if there  was
         an overall increase.  ... Nor does [sic] the UNHCR Guidelines  give
         a clear assessment of the level of violence in different provinces,
         and in Nangahar  and  Kabul  in  particular.   Further,  the  UNHCR
         Guidelines only state that the situation in  Afghanistan  may  give
         rise to a 15(c) risk."


21. Having carefully reviewed the content  of  the  UNHCR  guidelines,  the
    Judge refers to having considered the other country reports adduced  by
    the appellant.  He goes on to find at [30] that the appellant does  not
    have "any particular vulnerabilities"; he is "not in poor  health"  and
    "his brother would be in a position to provide him with  some  material
    support from the UK on  return  to  Afghanistan".   He  has  thus  made
    specific findings  about  the  appellant's  personal  circumstances  on
    return; there is no challenge to these.


22. Judge Sills concludes at [31] that there are not  very  strong  grounds
    supported by cogent evidence for departing from the  country  guidance.
    He points  out  that  he  has  identified  "limitations  to  the  UNHCR
    Guidance".  He concludes, relying on the  country  guidance,  that  the
    appellant can return to his home area (Nangarhar) or relocate to Kabul.

23. We agree that Judge Sills made an error  of  law  in  stating  at  [14]
    "there  is  no  situation  of  internal  armed  conflict  anywhere   in
    Afghanistan". This  is  plainly  wrong  and  contrary  to  the  country
    guidance.  He misdirected himself and this  is  an  error  of  law.  We
    consider its materiality below.

24. We note the terms of the grant of permission  to  appeal  but  consider
    that it was not unreasonable for Judge Sills to infer that he was being
    asked to  depart  from  the  country  guidance  in  the  light  of  the
    background material (including the UNHCR Guidelines)  adduced  for  the
    appellant.  Even if that were not the case, the Judge made  sustainable
    and cogent findings about the merits of that material and it  was  open
    to him to follow the country guidance.

25. As  regards  the  remaining  grounds  of  appeal  and  Mr  Khan's  oral
    submissions, we are unable  to  accept  them.   Judge  Sills  carefully
    considered the UNHCR Guidelines and, on  reasonable  grounds,  did  not
    find that the material warranted sufficient weight to depart  from  the
    country guidance. He has explained why that is. He  took  into  account
    the appellant's personal circumstances as a civilian.  We are satisfied
    that the grounds and submissions constitute no more  than  disagreement
    with the findings of Judge Sills. While Judge Sills made  an  error  of
    law in stating that there was no internal armed  conflict  anywhere  in
    Afghanistan, that finding must be seen in the context of  Judge  Sills'
    decision as a whole. It is clear from his findings, taken as  a  whole,
    that he had regard to all the material before him. Those  findings  are
    well reasoned and sustainable on the evidence and  background  material
    notwithstanding the latter post-dates the country guidance.

Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law and the decision is preserved.


27. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed           A M Black                               Date  13  September
    2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed            A  M   Black                                 Date       13
    September 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


