
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02303/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 January 2017                   |On 24 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    R M O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1 January 1991.   He
    is of Kurdish ethnicity.  He claims to come from  the  city  of  Kirkuk
    where he was born and lived until 29 September 2015 when he left  Iraq.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 October 2015  clandestinely  and
    on 27 October 2015 claimed asylum.

 3. The basis of the  appellant's  claim  was  that  his  family  had  been
    attacked by ISIS and, as a result of an explosion at their garage/shop,
    his brother had been killed.  A threat was subsequently  made  by  ISIS
    and by a group of men stating that they wanted "blood revenge" for  the
    garage/shop incident.  The threat made in a letter was that they  would
    find the appellant in any part of Iraq and, as a consequence,  he  left
    the country.

 4. On 19 February 2016, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    asylum and humanitarian protection claims and also under Art 8  of  the
    ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. In a decision sent on 16 September 2016, Judge Barcello  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  First, as regard to the appellant's
    asylum claim, the judge did  not  find  the  appellant's  claim  to  be
    credible and that, consequently, he was at risk from ISIS on return  to
    Iraq.  Secondly, in respect of the appellant's humanitarian  protection
    claim under Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, the judge did not
    accept that the appellant was from the City of Kirkuk which was  within
    the "contested areas" and to which  the  appellant  could  not  return.
    Instead, the judge found that  the  appellant  was  from  the  KRI,  in
    particular Suleymaniyah.  As a  consequence,  the  appellant  would  be
    returned to the IKR where there was  no  Art  15(c)  risk  applying  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  two
    grounds.  First, the  judge  erred  in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse
    credibility finding and dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.  Secondly, in assessing whether the appellant was from Kirkuk,
    the judge was wrong to take into account that of the nine  towns  named
    by the appellant as being outside Kirkuk only two were identifiable  on
    the map submitted at the hearing.  In fact, six could be verified  from
    the map and a seventh was identifiable but not on the map.

 8. On 10 October 2016, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  M  J  Gillespie)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal  on  ground  2  but  refused
    permission to appeal on ground 1.

 9. On 1 November 2016, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 notice.



Discussion

10. Ms Dirie, who represented the appellant accepted  that  she  could  not
    challenge the judge's adverse finding on the asylum claim as permission
    had not been granted on that ground.  As a  result,  she  focused  upon
    ground 2.

11. Ms Dirie submitted that the judge had been wrong in para 43(i) to state
    that:

         "Asked about what towns would be encountered by  a  person  leaving
         Kirkuk in any direction, the appellant named nine places, of  which
         only two can be identified on a map by his representatives."

12. Ms Dirie referred me to para 17 of the refusal letter where  the  judge
    stated:

         "17.     You were additionally asked to name the surrounding  towns
             and villages immediately surrounding Kirkuk  city.   (AIR  28)
             You stated Chamchamal, Pirde, Malal  Abdullan,  Daquq,  Dubis,
             Laylan, Khanaqeen and Kalar.  None of these places listed  are
             consistent with independent background information.  This is a
             noted inconsistency and belies your claimed area of residence.
              Your level of education has been  considered,  but  it  is  a
             reasonable expectation  despite  the  absence  of  any  formal
             education that you would be aware of your local area  and  the
             local vicinity, where you spent 25 years of your life."

13. Ms Dirie took me to maps at A61-A63 of the bundle in which the towns of
    Chamchamal, Malal Abdullan, Daquq (Tawuk), Laylan and Kalar  are  shown
    as towns outside Kirkuk.  She accepted that there were only five  shown
    on these maps and that Khanaqeen  was  not  shown  on  the  maps.   She
    submitted that the judge had, therefore, been wrong to  say  that  only
    two of the towns identified by the appellant were verifiable.  In fact,
    five were verifiable.

14. Ms Dirie also relied upon the map at page A64 of  the  bundle  showing,
    she submitted, districts of the City of Kirkuk including  Rahimawa  and
    Azadi which were identified by the appellant but which, in para  16  of
    the refusal letter, the Secretary  of  State  had  concluded  were  not
    verifiable.  The judge had referred to this in para 43(i) as  well  and
    this was also an error.

15. Finally, Ms Dirie submitted  that  the  judge  had  applied  the  wrong
    standard and burden of proof in making a positive finding in para 45 of
    his determination that the appellant came from  the  KRI,  specifically
    Suleymaniyah.  Ms Dirie submitted that the burden of proof was  on  the
    Secretary of State to establish that on a balance of probabilities.

16. Dealing with the latter point first, as I pointed out to  Ms  Dirie  in
    the course of her submissions, in para 45 the judge stated that it  was
    "highly probable" that the appellant came from  the  KRI,  specifically
    Suleymaniyah.  The judge, in effect, applied an even higher standard of
    proof than the one required, namely a balance of probability (see Hamza
    [2002] UKIAT 05185).  In the light of this, Ms Dirie did not pursue the
    point.  She was, in my judgment, entirely right not to do  so.   It  is
    clear that the judge's finding in para 45 was based upon a standard  of
    proof which was even more generous to the appellant than the applicable
    civil standard.

17. Turning to Ms Dirie's principal point, Mr Richards  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been more accurate in his  answers  than  the  judge  had
    acknowledged in para 43(i) of his determination.  However, Mr  Richards
    submitted that the point raised by Ms Dirie in relation to  the  naming
    of districts was a matter properly taken into account by the judge.

18. I accept that submission.  At para 43(i) the judge states that:

         "Asked about the districts within Kirkuk  Governorate,  he  gave  a
         number of names of which none were districts within Kirkuk but some
         were towns nearby.  It was clearly explained what was  being  asked
         in the question and he responded  that  he  had  never  heard  that
         Kirkuk was in a district, later  offering  instead  some  names  of
         neighbourhoods."

19. The point is dealt with in para 16 of the refusal letter as follows:

         "16.     You  were  asked  to  name  the  districts  within  Kirkuk
             Governorate, to which you stated  Dukhormato,  Laylan,  Pirde,
             Taqa.  When asked the districts, you stated you were not  good
             with geography, then named; Rahimawa,  Azadi,  Regai  Baghdad.
             These are not  consistent  with  background  information  that
             identified them as; Kirkuk, Al Hawiga, Daquq and Dabes.   This
             is a noted inconsistency  in  your  account  and  belies  your
             claimed area of residence in Kirkuk."

20. The appellant was  being  asked  about  districts  within  the  "Kirkuk
    Governorate".  His answer  refers  to  towns  outside  Kirkuk  such  as
    Laylan.  When asked the districts, the answer included two districts of
    the City of Kirkuk rather than the Governorate of Kirkuk (see page  A64
    of the bundle). That was, therefore, not  an  accurate  answer  to  the
    question asked.

21. Consequently, the crucial issue is whether the judge's  mistake  as  to
    the number of places or towns outside Kirkuk City  that  the  appellant
    correctly identified - five out of eight there being no evidence  about
    Khanaqeen (which it is accepted was off the map) - was material to  his
    adverse credibility finding that the appellant had failed to  establish
    that  he  was  from  Kirkuk.   In  my  judgment,  reading  the  judge's
    determination as a whole and in particular paras 43(i)-(v) and 44,  the
    judge gave copious reasons for his adverse credibility  finding.   That
    reasoning  includes  the  appellant's  lack  of  knowledge   concerning
    political figures, telephone numbers of  emergency  services,  lack  of
    knowledge about the city and Governorate of Kirkuk (see para 43(i)) and
    his reasonable knowledge of the KRI (para 43(ii)).   In  addition,  the
    judge gave detailed reason for rejecting the appellant's account of how
    he left Iraq and had  travelled  to  the  UK  was  not  credible  (para
    43(iii)).  Further, he had failed to obtain supporting documents and he
    could have done so (para 43(iv)) and there were inconsistencies in  his
    account about his father's involvement  with  the  Ba'ath  Party  (para
    43(v)).

22. At para 44, the judge reached the following conclusion:

         "44.     Taking into account the totality of the  evidence  I  have
             concluded that the Appellant is not  a  credible  witness  and
             that his account to me is expedient and designed to obtain  an
             immigration benefit.  The evidence before me is such that  the
             Appellant has failed  to  satisfy  me,  to  the  low  standard
             applicable in international protection cases that he has given
             an accurate account of his area of birth  and  residence,  his
             reasons for leaving his home country and his assertions as  to
             his father's political background.  Whilst I accept that he is
             of Kurdish ethnicity, I do not accept that he is  from  Kirkuk
             as claimed."

23. In my judgment, even if the judge  had  taken  into  account  that  the
    appellant had correctly identified five  out  of  eight  towns  outside
    Kirkuk (and not two out of  nine),  the  judge  would  inevitably  have
    reached the same adverse credibility finding given the  weight  of  his
    other reasons set out in detail and at length.

24. For completeness, I should deal with the judge's  finding  in  para  45
    that he was satisfied that the appellant came from the KRI even  though
    that finding is not challenged in the grounds.  At para  45  the  judge
    said this:

         "45.     Having concluded that the Appellant is not from Kirkuk,  I
             have considered whether or  not  the  evidence  before  me  is
             sufficient to permit me to make a finding as to  where  he  is
             from.  I consider that it is.  I consider it  highly  probable
             that the Appellant originates from  the  Kurdistan  Region  of
             Iraq, most specifically Suleymaniyah.   I  have  reached  this
             conclusion for the following reasons:

             (i)  The Appellant has provided a false account as to his area
                  of origin in order to establish a claim that  he  requires
                  international protection.  He has chosen a  city  that  is
                  known to be a contested area and of  which,  he  has  some
                  knowledge.  It is reasonable to infer that he is not  from
                  a contested area in the circumstances, but from  somewhere
                  safe.

             (ii)     He accepts that his parents are from the Suleymaniyah
                  area.

             (iii)     The  Appellant  appears  to  speak  with  a   slight
                  Suleymaniyah accent.

             (iv)     He  has  displayed  more  knowledge  about  political
                  figures in the KRI than in Iraq.

             (v)  Suleymaniyah is a safe area, relatively close to Kirkuk".

25. I see no basis upon which it can be said  that  the  judge  has  failed
    adequately to reason his positive finding in respect of the appellant's
    origins and there is no other basis upon which it can be said that that
    finding was not properly open to him on the evidence.

26. There is no challenge to the judge's  finding  that  if  the  appellant
    does, indeed, come from the KRI that  he  cannot  safely  return  there
    applying AA.

Decision

27. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection  claims  did
    not involve the making of a material error of law.

28. The First-tier Tribunal's decision, therefore, stands.

29. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date



