
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: PA/02297/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke-on-Trent                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2017                           |On 22 December 2017           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                        Mrs Amira khames moh abdalla
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant attended in person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Libya,  born  on  6  January  1978.   She
    seeks to appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  made  on  15
    October 2015 refusing to grant her asylum or other protection.

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2009, is  married  and  has
    two children, one born on 2014 and one in 2016.

3.   On 24  April  2015  she  claimed  asylum,  which  was  refused  by  the
    respondent in a decision dated 15 October 2015.  The  appellant  sought
    to appeal against that decision, which appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  on  16  December  2016.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 5 January 2017, that claim was refused in all respects.

4.   Challenge was made to that decision, with particular reference  to  the
    best interests of the children and to  an  error  in  relation  to  the
    status of her husband.

5.   Permission to challenge the decision was granted and  thus  the  matter
    came before the Upper Tribunal to determine whether or not an error was
    made.

6.   The matter came before me for hearing on 19 August 2017.  It seemed  to
    me that the real issue that emerged was one of the  safety  of  return.
    The account of the appellant, which was found credible,  was  that  she
    and her family had experienced threats and violence from certain people
    in Libya in the various locations in which she had resided.  It was the
    understanding of Judge Pooler, and indeed presented as a  fact  at  the
    hearing before me, that  the  husband  had  been  granted  humanitarian
    protection and that there were areas of Libya to which he too could not
    safely return.

7.   The appeal was allowed to the extent that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was set aside to be remade by myself on  the  issue
    of safety of return.

8.   Thus the matter comes before me for hearing on that issue.

9.   In terms  of  the  husband,  details  have  been  obtained  as  to  the
    circumstances in which he obtained his leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  There was a  letter  from  the  UK  Border  Agency  dated  21
    September 2012.

10.  He had applied for asylum in the United Kingdom citing a fear of  being
    arrested and killed by rebels in Libya because he had been a member  of
    a former revolutionary committee under the Gadaffi regime.   His  claim
    for asylum was rejected, his  lack  of  credibility  being  a  powerful
    factor.  It was also found that he did  not  qualify  for  humanitarian
    protection.

11.  Thus his leave to remain was based on another discretionary  basis  and
    it is not entirely clear what that was.


12.  Since  the  previous  hearing  there  has  been  an  important  country
    guidance decision in ZMM (Article  15(c))  Libya  CG  [2017]  UKUT  263
    (IAC).  In that decision the Upper Tribunal considered the situation in
    Libya, particularly faced by civilians and the overall  conclusion  was
    as follows:-

         "The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person."

13.  The appellant was unrepresented before me  at  the  hearing  and  spoke
    very little English.  She was assisted to some extent by  the  presence
    of her husband.

14.  As Mr Bates most realistically conceded,  there  was  little  merit  in
    considering the issue of internal relocation and risk in the  light  of
    the findings of a country guidance case.  It did not  matter  where  in
    Libya the appellant were to return to, with or without a  husband,  the
    same considerations would apply.  He conceded that in the light of  the
    country guidance case it would fall to the Secretary of State to  grant
    humanitarian protection to the appellant and  presumably  also  to  her
    husband.

15.  In terms of Article 8 it was again somewhat academic  to  consider  the
    issue of return.  Clearly it would not be in the best interests of  the
    children to be returned to a country where  it  was  found  that  there
    would be a risk to anyone who was returned.

16.  In those circumstances the appellant's appeal in respect of  asylum  is
    dismissed. Given the decision of the  Upper  tribunal  in  the  Country
    guidance case that the appellant cannot safely return to be on  account
    of  country  conditions  generally,  her  claim  to  be  in   need   of
    humanitarian  protection  succeeds.   To  that  extent  the  appeal  is
    allowed.

17.  In respect of Article 8 that appeal is also allowed in  line  with  the
    issue of humanitarian protection.

Notice of Decision

18.  The appellant's appeal is allowed in terms of  humanitarian  protection
    and Article 8 of the ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.








Signed                                  Date 12 December 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD





