
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02423/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Liverpool                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 9th November 2017                |On: 27th November 2017               |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     XBA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel of Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
                    and Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born in 1990.    She  appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge G. Tobin),
    who on  the  19th  December  2016  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse her protection claim.

    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The Appellant was born in Kirkuk and lived there until she was 24 years
    old. She left because her father had forced her into marriage  and  her
    husband had been violent and abusive towards her. Her husband had a son
    who was of a similar  age  to  the  Appellant  and  on  three  separate
    occasions this man had attempted to  sexually  assault  her.   She  had
    sought the help of her natal family but they had refused  to  intervene
    and had insisted that  she  stay  with  her  husband  as  a  matter  of
    'honour'.  She left Iraq via Erbil, with the  assistance  of  an  aunt.
    She flew to Turkey and from there made her way to  the  United  Kingdom
    where she claimed asylum.

 3. The Respondent did not doubt the claim advanced by the  Appellant.  The
    refusal letter dated 26th February 2016  expressly  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is from Kirkuk, and that she has been the victim of abuse  by
    her husband and stepson [at 24]. The Respondent further  accepted  that
    applying the caselaw of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544
    (IAC) the Appellant was from a 'contested area' where  there  was  real
    risk to civilians arising from war.  The  Respondent  was  not  however
    minded to grant protection.  She did not consider  that  the  Appellant
    feared persecution for a Refugee  Convention  reason.   Whilst  it  was
    accepted that she feared serious harm (ie  a  violation  of  Article  3
    ECHR)   the Respondent found that the  Appellant  could  reasonably  be
    expected to relocate within Iraq to avoid  such  harm,  namely  to  the
    Independent Kurdish Region (IKR). Although she was not in possession of
    a passport or other identity document (ie a CSID) as a Kurd  she  would
    be  admitted  to  the  IKR  with  no  difficulty.   In  the  individual
    circumstances of her claim - she is relatively  educated  and  had  the
    support of an aunt - it would not be unreasonable to expect her  to  go
    and live there, away from her husband.

 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the  central  issue
    was therefore whether it was reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant  to
    avail herself of the 'internal flight alternative' and go and  live  in
    the IKR.  There had  also  been  a  factual  development  in  that  the
    Appellant had, in October 2016, given birth to a baby boy.  The  father
    was said to be the Appellant's new partner, an Iranian naturalised as a
    British citizen who has lived in this country since he was a child.

 5. The Tribunal accepted the Respondent's contention that this was  not  a
    claim that engaged the Refugee Convention. It permitted  the  Appellant
    to amend her grounds of appeal to include reference to her  child,  but
    refused to adjourn proceedings so  that  documentary  evidence  of  the
    child's nationality could be  provided.  The  Tribunal  considered  the
    Appellant's evidence about her relationship with her baby's father.  It
    found her evidence about when that relationship commenced to be evasive
    and contradictory to the extent that the Judge found, at  paragraph  17
    of the decision, that  he  "could  not  really  believe  the  truth  of
    anything she was saying".  Evidence was given by a witness who  claimed
    to be the Appellant's partner. His testimony  was  found  to  be  "well
    rehearsed", the determination recording that he "stuck to his  script".
    Notwithstanding the internal consistency in the witness'  evidence  the
    Judge  concluded  that  he  was  "not  at  all  convinced  about   this
    relationship", adding  "the  lack  of  corroboration  and  self-serving
    answers heightened my discomfort with the story I'm being told". Noting
    the submissions that the birth of this prima facie  illegitimate  child
    would increase the risk of 'honour' based violence  the  Tribunal  says
    this:

         "The fact that the appellant has not raised any intention to pursue
         divorce and/or to remarry the father of her child raises questions.
         The appellant had a weak claim to remain in the UK and, I find, her
         new purported relationship and parenthood looks to be an attempt to
         shore up an otherwise weak case to remain  in  the  UK.  I  am  not
         convinced by this purported relationship".

 6. Having made those findings about the Appellant's circumstances  in  the
    UK, the  Judge went on to say this: "Likewise, I did not  believe  what
    the claimant said about the circumstances of her departure  from  Iraq.
    If the appellant was in an abusive relationship with a violent husband,
    then it would be highly unlikely that  the  appellant's  stepson  would
    indecently assault his stepmother. Such an intolerable situation  would
    hardly contrive to ensure the appellant's silence. So  obviously  there
    would be no sensible  constraint  on  telling  her  husband  about  her
    stepson's behaviour. It does not make sense that the Appellant suffered
    in silence. In any event, I do not believe that the stepson would  have
    engaged in such activity for fear that the  appellant  would  tell  her
    husband".  Those findings are at paragraph  18.  At  paragraph  23  the
    Tribunal returned to the accepted facts - that the Appellant has a well-
    founded fear of harm in Kirkuk - but stated that it did not accept that
    she would "not be safe" if  returned  elsewhere.  On  this  matter  the
    Tribunal did not accept that the Appellant would  not  receive  support
    from her own family; it noted that she  had  demonstrated  considerable
    determination and adaptability, and that she had shown herself to  have
    "skills that would be useful upon her return to Iraq and/or IKR".

 7. The Appellant was granted permission on the 10th May 2017.

    Discussion and Findings on Error of Law

 8. Before me the parties were in agreement that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal must be set aside  for  multiple  errors  of  law.  These
    included:

          i) Going behind a concession of fact made by the Respondent.  The
             Respondent has expressly accepted that the  Appellant  was  at
             risk from her husband and stepson and that concession had  not
             been withdrawn by the HOPO at hearing.

         ii) Failing to give the Appellant notice  that  the  Tribunal  had
             concerns about the evidence in respect of  Iraq.  The  hearing
             proceeded on the basis that the evidence was  uncontested  and
             Counsel was not given the opportunity to address the  Tribunal
             on those matters. This amounted to procedural unfairness.

        iii) A further procedural unfairness arose in respect of the child,
             and the child's father. The child had been  born  on  the  4th
             October 2016.   His birth  had  been  registered  on  the  5th
             October 2016. His parents had immediately sent off  his  long-
             form birth certificate with the application  for  his  British
             passport and by the date of the hearing on  the  5th  December
             2016 it had still not been returned. Counsel for the Appellant
             indicated  that  those  documents  would   very   shortly   be
             forthcoming; she sought an adjournment so that they  could  be
             before the Tribunal when it made its decision.   The  Tribunal
             refused to adjourn on the grounds that the Appellant  had  had
             "ample time" to sort out  her  evidence.  That  comment,  with
             respect, rather misses the point. It is difficult to  see  how
             the  Appellant  could  have  expedited  production   of   that
             evidence. She had registered the birth within 24 hours of  her
             labour, and had sent off the  completed  passport  application
             form within the week. The matter of paternity  of  that  child
             assumed pivotal significance in this case (on both  protection
             and human rights grounds) and that the  Tribunal  subsequently
             rejected the evidence of the  relationship  -  and  implicitly
             paternity - on the grounds that it was "uncorroborated" serves
             to underline the importance of the evidence that was  awaited.
               The delay was likely to be a short one. As  it  happens  the
             long-form birth certificate confirming the witness to be named
             as the child's father, and the child's British passport,  were
             available within days of the  hearing,   the  passport  having
             already been issued on the 29th November 2016.

         iv) Applying the wrong standard of proof. The Tribunal  repeatedly
             finds  itself  "not  convinced".  It  did  not  have   to   be
             "convinced"  about  anything.   That   phrase   suggests   the
             application of a higher standard of proof than  was  necessary
             in this case. The Tribunal had to be satisfied  on  the  lower
             standard of proof.

          v) Irrationality. The central reason given by  the  Tribunal  for
             rejecting the  (accepted)  evidence  that  the  Appellant  was
             assaulted by her stepson is that it did not accept  that  this
             would have occurred, because she could have told  her  abusive
             husband about it. I am satisfied that this is a  finding  that
             no reasonable Tribunal could possibly have reached, had regard
             been had to the context in  which  this  claim  is  made.  The
             Appellant is a Kurdish woman  operating  in  a  society  where
             domestic and 'honour'  based  violence  are  commonplace,  and
             where women are routinely blamed for sexual  violence  visited
             upon them.  That  was  indeed  one  of  the  reasons  why  the
             Respondent had accepted her evidence: see paragraph 23 of  the
             refusal letter. In reaching its contrary finding the  Tribunal
             appears to have imbued the husband and stepson with  a  degree
             of rationality and humanity that on the evidence they did  not
             have, and to the Appellant a degree of  defiance  and  bravery
             that as a woman in that culture, in  that  context,   she  was
             unlikely to possess.

         vi) At paragraph 22 the Tribunal draws negative inference from the
             fact that the Appellant remains married to her first  husband,
             concluding that her failure to pursue a divorce and marry  the
             father of her child "raises questions".  It  is  difficult  to
             discern from the determination what those questions might  be,
             but the Tribunal has here entirely failed to set this claim in
             the context of the relevant country  background  material  and
             law. The Appellant was married to her  husband  in  accordance
             with Islamic law. This does not,  even  on  the  most  liberal
             interpretation  of  fiqh,  provide  any  mechanism   for   the
             Appellant to divorce her husband short of applying directly to
             the local sharia court for a 'Khula.    The  expectation  that
             she should have done  so  is,  in  the  circumstances,  wholly
             unrealistic.

        vii) Legal misdirection in  respect  of  the  appropriate  test  on
             internal flight. The question is  not  whether  the  Appellant
             would be "safe" elsewhere in Iraq, but whether  it  would,  in
             all  the  circumstances,  be  reasonable  to  expect  her   to
             relocate.

       viii) Failing to make clear findings on fact on  why  the  Appellant
             might reasonably be able to relocate. The finding that she has
             acquired  "skills  that   would   be   useful"   is   entirely
             unparticularised.   Neither party was able to assist  me  with
             what those skills might be.

         ix) Failing to conduct a holistic assessment of the reasonableness
             of internal  flight.  The  Tribunal  has  not  considered  any
             country background evidence at all on the likely circumstances
             faced by a Kurdish woman with  a  child  trying  to  establish
             herself in the IKR, on  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
             separate  this  family,  or  alternatively  whether  it  would
             reasonable, or even possible, for a  British  man  of  Iranian
             origin to live in the IKR.

          x) Misdirection as to the definition of 'particular social group'
             and failing to take published policy  guidance  into  account.
             The Tribunal  considered  whether  the  Appellant  could  fall
             within  the  particular  social  group  'woman  who  has  fled
             domestic violence/sexual assault' and found  as  follows:  "by
             any criteria women who flee domestic  violence/sexual  assault
             are not a PSG because day (sic) do not fulfil the  appropriate
             definition in Shah &  Islam".    This  reasoning  is  hard  to
             follow. The Tribunal does not explain why the Appellant  would
             not  fall  into  a  'particular  social  group'  applying  the
             criteria in Shah & Islam [1999] Imm AR 283.  It is unclear  to
             me why 'Kurdish women in Iraq' would  not  a  be  an  adequate
             definition, sharing as they  do  an  immutable  characteristic
             that results in discrimination against them. That  is  a  moot
             point that I need not address however, since the  Respondent's
             own published guidance accepts that persons in the Appellant's
             position fell  within  the  very  group  that  the  First-tier
             Tribunal  rejected  (without  reasons):  see  2.2.1   of   the
             Respondent's Country Policy and Information Note Iraq: Kurdish
             Honour Crimes:

                  "2.2.1 Victims or potential victims of 'honour' crimes can
                  form a particular social group (PSG) within the meaning of
                  the 1951 Refugee Convention. This is  because  victims  or
                  potential victims of 'honour' crimes can  share  a  common
                  background that cannot be changed -  the  experience  that
                  they have compromised family or tribal 'honour' - and have
                  a distinct identity that is perceived as  being  different
                  by the surrounding society".

 9. The parties agreed that the entire decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    should be set aside. They invited me to re-make  the  decision  on  the
    evidence before me.

    Protection: The Re-Made Decision

10. The accepted facts are that the Appellant is at risk of harm in Kirkuk.
    The Respondent has produced no evidence to warrant departure  from  the
    country guidance given in AA and I continue to  apply  the  finding  in
    that case that Kirkuk is a contested area where civilians are at a real
    risk of harm  arising  from  indiscriminate  violence.  The  Respondent
    accepts that the  Appellant  is  further  at  risk  of  'honour'  based
    violence, and domestic violence, from  her  husband  in  Kirkuk.    The
    parties agree therefore that the only issue is internal relocation.

    Legal Framework

11. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive reads:

    1.     As part of the assessment of the application  for  international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.

    2.     In examining whether a part of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.

    3.     Paragraph 1 may apply  notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
         return to the country of origin.

12. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007]  UKHL
    49 the House of Lords make clear that the question of whether  internal
    flight is "reasonable" is not to be equated with the test under Article
    3 ECHR. Lord Bingham refers [at 5] to his  own  guidance  in  Januzi  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5:

         "In paragraph 21 of my opinion in Januzi I summarised  the  correct
         approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with  which
         all my noble and learned friends agreed:

             'The  decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all   relevant
             circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of
             origin, must decide whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
             claimant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to
             expect him to do so....There  is,  as  Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
             observed  in  Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum  of  cases.
             The decision-maker  must  do  his  best  to  decide,  on  such
             material as is available, where on the spectrum the particular
             case falls... All must depend on  a  fair  assessment  of  the
             relevant facts'.

         Although specifically directed to a secondary issue  in  the  case,
         these observations are plainly of general application.  It  is  not
         easy to see how the rule could be more simply or clearly expressed.
         It is, or should be, evidence that the enquiry must be directed  to
         the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
         experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
         relevant. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority to,
         consideration of the applicant's  way  of  life  in  the  place  of
         persecution. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving  priority
         to consideration of conditions generally  prevailing  in  the  home
         country. I do not underestimate the difficulty of making  decisions
         in some cases. But the difficulty lies in applying the test, not in
         expressing it. The humanitarian object of the Refugee Convention is
         to secure a reasonable measure of protection for those with a well-
         founded fear of persecution in their home country or some  part  of
         it; it is not to procure a general levelling-up of living standards
         around the world, desirable though of course that is."

13.   At 20 Baroness Hale cites with approval the UNHCR view that  the  test
    is whether the individual will be able to  live  a  "relatively  normal
    life without undue hardship", itself a formulation  approved  by  their
    Lordships in Januzi [9]:

         "As the UNHCR put it in their very  helpful  intervention  in  this
         case:

             '...the correct approach when considering  the  reasonableness
             of IRA [internal relocation alternative] is to assess all  the
             circumstances of the individual's case holistically  and  with
             specific reference to the individual's personal  circumstances
             (including past persecution or fear thereof, psychological and
             health condition, family and social  situation,  and  survival
             capacities). This assessment is to be made in the  context  of
             the conditions in the place  of  relocation  (including  basic
             human rights, security conditions, socio-economic  conditions,
             accommodation, access to health care facilities), in order  to
             determine the impact on that individual  of  settling  in  the
             proposed place of relocation and whether the individual  could
             live a relatively normal life without undue hardship'.

         I do not  understand  there  to  be  any  difference  between  this
         approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5  of  his
         opinion. Very little, apart from the conditions in the  country  to
         which the claimant has fled, is ruled out."

14.   The assessment on the individual characteristics of the claimant  must
    include her personal history, and its relevance in the society in which
    she is relocating. See for instance VNM v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 47 [per Wilson LJ at 25]:

         "it is obvious that the  reasonableness  of  her  relocation  in  a
         different   part   of   Kenya   requires   consideration   of   the
         practicability of her  settling  elsewhere;  consideration  of  her
         ability convincingly to present to those in her new milieu a  false
         history relating to herself and  to  her  daughter,  including  the
         latter's paternity, and  a  false  explanation  for  their  arrival
         there;  and,  in  the  light  of  her   substantial   psychological
         vulnerability, consideration of her ability to sustain  beyond  the
         short term a reasonable life for them both on that false basis".

    Personal Characteristics

15.   The Appellant has the following personal history and characteristics:

          i) She is a woman

         ii) She is a mother of a baby boy

        iii) As far as she is aware, she remains married to a man in Kirkuk

         iv) She is in an adulterous relationship with a man in the UK

          v) She has no CSID and no easy means of obtaining one. She cannot
             be expected to return to her home governate because she  faces
             a real risk of harm there. The potential proxies who might  be
             able to obtain one for her are  her  persecutors  (either  her
             husband, who  subjected  her  to  domestic  violence,  or  her
             father, who forced her into marriage:  both  perceive  her  to
             have 'dishonoured' them)

         vi) She is moderately educated, having completed secondary  school
             and one year of agricultural college

        vii) She travelled on her own through the IKR to leave Iraq,  spent
             2 months in Turkey on her own and showed sufficient resilience
             to get to the UK and claim asylum

       viii) She has an aunt who previously assisted her in  escaping  from
             Kirkuk

         ix) She has no family members in the IKR

          x) She has no family or other connections to Baghdad.

    Country Background Information

16. I have had regard to the Respondent's Country  Policy  and  Information
    Notes Iraq: Return/Internal relocation ('IR') and Iraq: Kurdish  Honour
    Crimes ('KHC'). I  have  further  had  regard  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).   I  note
    the following:

       . Although there are two government run shelters  for  women  fearing
         'honour'  based  violence  in  the  IKR  service  provision  is  so
         inadequate that it must be  concluded  that  although  the  Kurdish
         authorities are able to provide sufficient protection, they are  in
         fact unwilling to do so [2.4.2 KHC]. The focus of the  shelters  is
         to persuade women to return to their families,  sometimes  forcibly
         so [8.6.2]

       . Although Kurdish women  have  traditionally  enjoyed  a  degree  of
         freedom  greater  than  that  of  their  Arab  counterparts,   that
         situation has  changed  in  recent  decades.  A  Kurdish  woman  is
         considered to be the 'property' of her male  guardians  [section  5
         KHC]

       . Having sexual relations with someone other than your husband  would
         count as a 'crime' necessitating action to preserve  'honour';  the
         most common form of 'honour'  based  violence  in  Iraq  is  murder
         [section  7  KHC]:  "in  the  severely  puritanical  atmosphere  of
         Kurdistan, death is the usual punishment  for  any  breach  of  the
         moral code" [7.2.2]

       . It is generally possible for Kurds who are not from the  region  to
         enter the KRI [2.2.11 KHC]

       . Although internal relocation to Baghdad is  generally  possible  it
         will be more difficult for a lone woman who does not  speak  Arabic
         and has no  family or other connections to the  city   [2.2.15  IR,
         AA]

       . A CSID is generally required  in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
         financial assistance from the authorities;  employment;  education;
         housing; and medical treatment [2.4.8 IR, AA at 204]

       . A person who: a) is unable to replace their CSID or INC; and b)  is
         unable to obtain support from family members or others is likely to
         face   significant   difficulties   in   accessing   services   and
         humanitarian conditions which may reach the Article 3 threshold and
         in those circumstances a grant of humanitarian leave  will  usually
         be appropriate [2.4.9 IR]

       . Admission to the IKR remains at the discretion of  the  authorities
         [7.1.1] but at the date that the IR CPIN  was  produced  (September
         2017) Kurds were permitted into  the  region  without  needing  any
         particular permit. Kurds are granted a short period of entry, after
         which they must register with the Asayish to gain a permit allowing
         them to reside and move freely within the IKR [7.1.2]. Some sources
         suggest that a sponsor is required if  the  IDP  wishes  to  remain
         permanently  in  the  IKR  [see  for  instance  7.1.3]   but   this
         requirement is not applied to lone women [see for instance  7.3.2].
         Some sources report Kurds from Kirkuk to also be exempt [7.1.5].

    Conclusions

17.   I am satisfied, having regard to  the  evidence,  that  the  Appellant
    would be able to gain admission to the IKR. Although there are variable
    reports about the requirements being imposed on Kurds fleeing into  the
    ILR from other places in Iraq the objective material indicates that she
    would have two advantages: she is a lone woman, and she is from Kirkuk.
    Both of these groups have been identified  as  being  exempt  from  the
    requirements imposed on others, for instance the  requirement  to  have
    employment, or to have a sponsor.  I am satisfied  that  she  would  be
    admitted to the region, even without a CSID.

18.   I now consider whether  she  might  reasonably  be  expected  to  live
    there. It is true that this is a  relatively  educated  woman  who  had
    previously exhibited some degree of resilience in leaving  her  abusive
    family and travelling to Europe on her own. She did  pass  through  the
    IKR on that  journey.  Today  however,  she  is  in  a  very  different
    position, because she  is  now  in  what  must  be  assumed  to  be  an
    adulterous relationship, and has had a child out of wedlock.

19.   Her partner questions whether, as an Iranian  national,  he  would  be
    permitted entry to the IKR.  That  is  a  good  question  that  is  not
    answered in the evidence presented to me. Since  the  burden  of  proof
    lies on the Appellant I assume for the purpose  of  this  determination
    that his concerns are unfounded and that he would be able to gain entry
    and live there.    What then? This  couple  are  likely  to  draw  some
    scrutiny from the authorities:  when  the  Appellant  attends  for  her
    Asayish interview she will no doubt be asked for some explanation as to
    why she has an Iranian husband. At that point the Appellant would  have
    to lie in order to avoid revealing her personal history of having  fled
    from her Iraqi Kurdish family, having travelled to the  UK  and  having
    met him there.  Assuming that she tells the truth,  it  would  at  that
    point be obvious that the child is illegitimate. The  Appellant  -  and
    her partner - would then  be  at  the  mercy  of  an  official  in  the
    "severely  puritanical"  atmosphere  of  Kurdistan,  where   specialist
    domestic violence shelters consider it appropriate to return  women  to
    the very families that they have fled from.   I consider there to be  a
    real risk that the Asayish would in these circumstances  either  refuse
    to issue a residence permit or alternatively to inform the  Appellant's
    family of her whereabouts.  The alternative would be to lie,  in  order
    to avoid the risk of harm. I am satisfied that  this  would  not  be  a
    'reasonable' alternative for the Appellant.    Even if I  accepted  the
    Respondent's 'best case scenario' in respect of  the  IKR  -  that  she
    would be permitted to enter and reside and would  be  able  to  support
    herself even absent a CSID (either with or  without  her  partner)  the
    Appellant would face this predicament in  her  every  interaction  with
    authority.   I do not consider that this would be  a  burden  that  she
    should be expected to  tolerate.  Living  with  the  constant  fear  of
    discovery, and the attendant risk of murder or other serious harm would
    in these circumstances be unduly harsh.

20.   I therefore allow the appeal on protection grounds.

    Human Rights

21.   There is no dispute that the Appellant enjoys a family life  with  her
    partner in the UK, or that her  removal  to  Iraq  would  result  in  a
    significant  interference  in  this  family's  life  together.   I   am
    satisfied that Article 8 ECHR would be engaged.  It  is  accepted  that
    the decision to refuse leave to persons who do not  qualify  under  the
    rules is one that is lawfully open  to  the  Respondent  to  take.   In
    assessing whether or not it would be proportionate I must  have  regard
    to the factors set out at s117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. The parties agree that in this case, it is sub-section
    (6) of that provision that is likely to be determinative:

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

22.   The Appellant is the parent of a British child. I  am  satisfied  that
    she enjoys a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  him.  I
    am further satisfied that it would not be 'reasonable' to expect him to
    leave the EEA, as he would inevitably have to do if she was removed  to
    Iraq (she is still nursing him). I note the terms of the  Secretary  of
    State's policy on this matter, set out in the Immigration Directorates'
    Instructions, Family Migration Appendix FM Section 1.9 at 11.2.3:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or the EU"

23.   I am satisfied that there are no considerations of  sufficient  weight
    to justify separation of this  family,  in  particular  of  mother  and
    infant. The child could theoretically remain in the UK with his British
    father but in the absence  of  any  criminality  on  the  part  of  his
    parents, and given that this would be strongly  contrary  to  his  best
    interests, I am satisfied that this would not be a reasonable course of
    action.   I therefore allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

    Decisions

24.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  material  errors  of
    law and it is set aside.

25.   I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

26.   There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          23rd November 2017
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Deans on the 10th
May 2017


