
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02891/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 6th August 2019                   |On 22nd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    M s G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bashow, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson &
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is female and was born on 25th December 1997.  She  is  a
    citizen of Iran.  The respondent issued to the appellant  a  Notice  of
    Refusal of Leave to  Enter,  after  refusing  an  asylum  claim.   This
    contained removal directions for the appellant's removal to Iran.   The
    appellant appealed the decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  Her appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald in  Manchester  on  30th
    April, 2019.

2.   The appellant originally arrived in the United Kingdom at  the  end  of
    November 2010 for the purpose of studying for a  Master's  in  Business
    Administration at Sheffield University, until 2013.  She then  returned
    to Iran in 2014.  She claims that on her return she was arrested at the
    airport, taken to a separate room for questioning and questioned by one
    man who was a different person to the one who took her  into  the  room
    and asked about  everything  in  her  life;  why  she  had  chosen  the
    particular university; why  she  had  chosen  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom; why she had  chosen  that  degree  and  asked  her  about  her
    parents, what they did  and  where  they  worked.   She  described  the
    questioning as aggressive and detailed.   However,  after  some  twenty
    minutes she was released.

3.   The appellant then applied to study for a PhD at Lincoln University  in
    "Responsible Management".  The degree was funded by the university  and
    involved working with an organisation  called  PRME,  a  UN  supporting
    initiative.  The appellant returned to Iran in  2016,  on  a  two  week
    family visit and on this occasion when she returned to Iran  she  faced
    no difficulties.

4.   It was the appellant's claim that during her course of  study  for  her
    PhD she received e-mails from the Ministry  of  Science  and  Education
    questioning her about the betterment of the country  (presumably  as  a
    result of her studies).  She never replied to them.  She  deleted  them
    and could not produce any in evidence.

5.   The appellant returned to Iran again in November 2017.  At  some  stage
    before the end of 2016, the appellant's  leave  was  curtailed  by  the
    Secretary of State, because the university had written to the Secretary
    of State advising  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  attending  her
    studies.   In  November  2017,  she  went  back  to  Iran  having  made
    applications for permission to remain in the United  Kingdom  but  then
    having withdrawn them.  She returned to Iran in November 2017,  because
    she had a problem with her eye.  She claims that at the airport she was
    stopped by the authorities and asked similar questions to the questions
    she was asked previously.   Some  of  the  questions  focussed  on  her
    research.  She said she felt more intimidated because she  had  started
    on a new project funded by a British university.  Again, she said  that
    the  questioning  lasted  about  twenty  minutes.   She  said  she  was
    convinced that she was being watched because of her activities  outside
    Iran.

6.   At the  beginning  of  August  2018,  the  appellant  joined  what  she
    described as being an eco-tourism project in Iran.  She was to work  as
    a freelancer consultant.  She had planned some expeditions to undertake
    field studies, but claims that she had to leave Iran before  she  could
    start work on the project.  On or about 7th December 2018,  she  claims
    to have received a handwritten letter delivered to her  parents'  home.
    Her parents were handed a letter, the appellant  thought,  by  somebody
    from the Revolutionary Guards.  It appears that before the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge she conceded that she did  not  actually  know  who  had
    delivered the letter, but two cars had come to the house  and  one  man
    was in plain clothes and the other was in a military uniform, according
    to her parents.

7.   Her parents told her that she was required to report to  an  Office  on
    13th December, 2018, but she never returned to her parents'  house  and
    left her laptop at home.  She bought a ticket from Iran to England  and
    left the country using her own passport.  She asked her parents to send
    the letter, which she thought was from  the  Revolutionary  Guards  and
    they said they posted it, but it had gone  to  a  previous  address  in
    London.  They did not keep a copy and she was not  able  to  produce  a
    copy.  The appellant claimed that on  13th  December  2018  authorities
    visited her home, removed her laptop and her  father  for  questioning.
    He was released almost immediately and as  far  as  the  appellant  was
    aware there were no further visits to her home.

8.   The judge dismissed the appeal and in  doing  so  made  findings  after
    having examined background material.  One  of  the  challenges  to  his
    determination  was  that  whilst  he  has  considered  the   background
    material, he has ignored relevant country evidence which suggests  that
    the  situation  in  Iran  for  academics  returning  from  abroad,  and
    particularly in places like Britain, has worsened in recent years.  The
    judge noted that evidence of  persecution  against  academics,  and  in
    particular foreign academics, goes back as far as  2007/2008.   Indeed,
    several of the background articles included within the  country  bundle
    date from that time.  The appellant had, however, used her own passport
    and passed through normal channels in 2014 and  claimed  to  have  been
    questioned for around twenty minutes, but was then released.

9.   The judge noted that after the end of  that  visit  she  used  her  own
    passport again to pass through the airport and  return  to  the  United
    Kingdom without any difficulties.  He noted that she had no problems in
    Iran because of any studies in the United Kingdom or elsewhere, between
    her return to Iran in November, 2017 and more than a  year  later  when
    she claims the authorities delivered a letter to her requiring  her  to
    go and report.  She confirmed she had no idea why the authorities would
    wait from 2014 until 2018.

10.  The appellant was, however, asked to explain on oath why  she  made  an
    application for leave to remain which was made in  the  United  Kingdom
    and then withdraw it, and she gave  what  he  describes  as  being,  "a
    convoluted and unsatisfactory response".  He did not  accept  that  she
    did not know anything about asylum.

11.   The  judge  recorded  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claims.  The e-mails  she  claimed  to  have  received  she
    claims  that  she  deleted  and  there  was  no  apparent  ability   to
    reconstitute them.  She had no confirmation of any offer of  employment
    in Iran and no evidence of further visits by  the  authorities  to  her
    home since December, 2018.  There was no suggestion that the  appellant
    exiled Iran illegally.  However,  at  one  report  in  the  appellant's
    bundle an Australian academic was contained "as she was leaving  Iran".
    The judge believed that if  the  appellant  was  truly  wanted  by  the
    authorities she would not have been able to leave Iran  using  her  own
    passport and he was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  in  any
    difficulty as a result of her imputed political  opinion  or  otherwise
    and he dismissed the appeal.

12.  As I indicated, the first ground on which leave was  granted  suggested
    that the judge ignored relevant country  information  that  showed  the
    situation in Iran had worsened.  Counsel suggested that the  judge  had
    only looked at some of the evidence and not assessed the claim properly
    in the context of background evidence, which  she  urged  me  to  note,
    showed that in recent times the authorities have become more  concerned
    with those people who are academics who have studied abroad.  So  that,
    were the appellant to return to Iran today, the  authorities  would  be
    keenly interested in her as someone who had studied abroad and who they
    percieve might be s spy for Western Governments or agencies

13.  So far as the second challenge is concerned,  Counsel  said  that  this
    showed that the  judge  has  ignored  the  alternative  case  that  the
    appellant is at risk on return because of her profile  as  an  academic
    with links to UK institutions.  Although the judge did not  accept  her
    account of why she fled in December  2018,  she  would  still,  Counsel
    submitted, be at risk because of her profile  as  an  academic  in  the
    light of the crackdown against academics and others in Iran with  links
    to UK institutions.  At paragraph 14(k) of the determination the  judge
    says that there was  no  suggestion  that  the  appellant  exited  Iran
    illegally, but he did not go on to consider the risk on return  because
    of her profile as an academic person with links to UK institutions.

14.  Mr McVeety suggested that the judge had not failed  to  deal  with  the
    hypothetical risk to the appellant on her return as  a  result  of  her
    being an academic studying at a UK institution and her being funded  by
    a British university with links with an organisation under a UN scheme.
     On the judge's  finding,  in  2017  and  again  in  2018,  after  some
    deterioration in the situation in Iran and after an  alleged  visit  by
    the authorities, the appellant actually left Iran legally using her own
    passport.  There was no evidence anywhere  that  she  was  stopped  and
    questioned by the authorities, or indeed that she was of  any  interest
    to the authorities.  The appellant claims that academics are  at  risk,
    but her claim  to  have  connections  with  academia  is  disingenuous,
    because she has not  actually  studied  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    December 2016, when, for whatever reason, she decided not  to  continue
    her studies at Lincoln University.  It  was  following  the  university
    writing to the Secretary of State that her leave was curtailed  by  the
    Secretary of State.  She has not been studying for a PhD  between  2016
    and when she left in 2017 and she has not studied since she returned to
    the United Kingdom in 2018. Her last period of study ended  more  three
    years ago when, for whatever reason, she gave up her studies.

15.  The appellant was originally granted  leave  to  study  for  a  PhD  at
    Lincoln University in December, 2014 and the authorities, according  to
    her, would have been aware of this during the two interviews  that  she
    had had with them.  The judge found that  the  appellant  had  actually
    created a profile, suggesting that she would be  at  risk  because  the
    authorities  have  an  interest  in  Iranians  and  people  with   dual
    nationality who have studied abroad, who might be spies  on  behalf  of
    the West.  If the appellant was remotely considered to be connected  to
    any organisation in the West, anxious to obtain  intelligence  on  what
    was going on in Iran, she would not have been able to leave on her  own
    passport. She was not then, an academic,  and  had  not  been  for  two
    years.
16.  Counsel reminded me  that  the  appellant  had  actually  received  the
    letter calling for her to attend on 9th December but only left  on  the
    11th.  It is  quite  possible  that  she  was  wanted  by  the  Iranian
    authorities and nonetheless was able to use her own passport  to  leave
    the country.  As of April 2019, the Iranian authorities would have seen
    the appellant to have been a student, because she obtained her Master's
    degree in 2013 and received funds from Lincoln University.

17.  I reserved my determination.

18.  There is in the appellant's bundle a considerable amount of  background
    evidence relating to the attitude of the Iranian authorities  to  those
    it would seem as might be working for foreign Governments as  spies  in
    Iran, but this is not a new phenomenon and I believe  in  quoting  from
    the background evidence as he did, the judge was  well-aware  of  this.
    In 2007 Radio Free Europe carried a report  that  Iran  warns  students
    against US contacts.   Students  currently  "studying  in  universities
    under the guise of being students and have contact with foreigners  and
    White House statesmen" would be confronted the report said.

19.  There was a report also of 2018 of an Iranian academic  being  detained
    on espionage charges.   This  particular  lady  has  dual  nationality.
    There was a Guardian report of 2007 which said  that  the  Intelligence
    Ministry had told "the country's academics they will  be  suspected  of
    spying if they obtain  contact  with  foreign  institutions  or  travel
    abroad to international conferences".  There is of course  more  up-to-
    date background information in the bundle and it may well be that there
    are more reported cases than there were previously, but  certainly  the
    background information suggests that the risk  to  academics  has  been
    very real and very live since 2007, if not before.  The judge was aware
    of this, as of course the appellant must have been.

20.  I do not believe that the judge has  erred  in  the  way  suggested  by
    Counsel.  I agree with Mr  McVeety.   The  appellant  appears  to  have
    created a profile which she says means that she will be  at  risk  from
    the authorities on her return, but it  is  quite  clear  as  the  judge
    pointed out that she has been able to come and go  between  the  United
    Kingdom and Iran without  any  particular  difficulty  apart  from  the
    inconvenience of two twenty minute interviews.  It is also  clear  form
    the determination that the First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the
    background material before making his findings of fact.  The fact  that
    he has not quoted from all of it is, with respect, not an error of law.
     It has, according to the material be dangerous for academics to travel
    abroad if they  are  perceived  to  come  into  contacts  with  foreign
    politicians or agencies.  There is more of the recent material  in  the
    bundle than there is of the material going  back  to  2007,  but  there
    clearly has always been a risk.

21.  I do not believe that  the  appellant  would  be  perceived  to  be  an
    academic and neither  did  the  judge.   She  has  not  undertaken  any
    academic study since 2016 and if she was questioned so extensively,  as
    she claims, in 2017, she would have explained that  she  had  completed
    her studies and abandoned her PhD.  The appellant simply does not  have
    the  profile  as  an  academic  with  links  to  the   United   Kingdom
    institutions.  She is a failed  PhD  student,  and  was  a  failed  PhD
    student when she returned in 2017, if not when  she  actually  returned
    home to Iran in 2016, and if questioned on her return to Iran  will  be
    able to also say that her academic study ceased in 2016 and that  since
    that time she has been attempting to obtain  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, initially in 2017 and more recently since  her  arrival
    in December.

Notice of Decision

22.  I have concluded that the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herwald does not contain any material errors of law and  I  uphold  the
    determination.  The appellant's appeals are dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley   Date: 16 August 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley   Date: 16 August 2019

