
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02250/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunals |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th September 2018                   |On 05th October 2018               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            mr halow abdul-rahman
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Azmi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Birk,  promulgated  on  1st November  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 9th  October  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on 15th August
    1996.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  21st
    December 2017, refusing his application for asylum and for humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is a Sunni Muslim  Kurd
    who comes from a town in the Diyala  governorate.   His  father  was  a
    member of the Ba'ath Party and involved in killing Kurdish people.   On
    16th May 2013 he was  shot  dead.   The  Appellant  left  his  town  of
    Jalawala in June 2014 when ISIS invaded his home area.   On  10th  June
    2015 he was contacted by ISIS on his mobile phone and told that he  had
    to join ISIS in order to take revenge  for  his  father  who  had  been
    killed by Shia militias.  The Appellant  refused.   He  was  forced  to
    leave the area.  He left Iraq on 16th June 2015.  He fears that  if  he
    returns he will be persecuted and killed by ISIS.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not find the Appellant's claim to be credible  (paragraph
    25).   She  found  that  the  Appellant's  claim  had  been  fabricated
    (paragraph 26).  The judge held that  the  Appellant  did  not  require
    protection or the implementation of the Refugee  Convention  (paragraph
    30).  As far as his return to Iraq was concerned, the judge  held  that
    the "return of the Appellant would be  to  Baghdad  which  would  be  a
    relocation for the Appellant" and that "the guidance is that  a  return
    to Baghdad in terms of armed conflict does not give rise to a level  of
    indiscriminate violence to civilians which engages Article  15(c)"  and
    that "Sunni identity alone is not sufficient to give  rise  to  a  real
    risk of serious harm" (paragraph 31).  Indeed, the Appellant previously
    had an ID card "which he states has been left in Iraq"  and  the  judge
    was not satisfied that the Appellant had "no family members in Iraq  to
    whom he could turn to for support" (paragraph 32).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  whilst  finding  at
    paragraphs 32 to 33, that the Appellant had  family  support  in  Iraq,
    failed to conclude that the Appellant  had  such  support  in  Baghdad,
    which is where the Appellant was being returned to.  In AA [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 944, the Court of Appeal emphasised the importance of the applicant
    being "from a minority community".  This had  been  overlooked  by  the
    judge.

 7. On 29th November 2017, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal
    on the basis that, the reference by the judge (at  paragraph  33)  that
    the Appellant spoke "... a little bit of Arabic..." was  indicative  of
    the acceptance that the judge recognised that  the  Appellant  did  not
    have a fluent command of Arabic.  Given that the judge  also  held  (at
    paragraph 33) that the Appellant "...may not have a sponsor in  Baghdad
    in order to rent accommodation..." it was arguable that she  failed  to
    take into account the proper picture in finding that it would be unduly
    harsh for the Appellant to be returned to Baghdad.

 8. On 21st December 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent
    to the effect that what the Court of Appeal stated in  AA  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 944, was not to be read as a list of requirements before relocation
    was considered reasonable.  The judge  did  give  adequate  reasons  at
    paragraphs 31 to 34 to support her conclusion as to why  the  Appellant
    could safely return to Baghdad.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 11th September 2018, Mr Azmi, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that  the  sole  issue  before  this
    Tribunal was that of internal relocation.  The  matter  had  previously
    been considered by Judge Ferguson, when the Appellant's appeal had been
    allowed, but then overturned by DUTJ McCarthy on 1st June 2017 in  the
    Upper Tribunal, necessitating a remittal back to the Tribunal of  Judge
    Birk.  Judge Birk, however, had now fallen into error, according to  Mr
    Azmi, because of her finding at paragraph 31, that the Appellant can be
    returned to Baghdad.  The error lay in the  fact  that  the  judge  was
    considering this issue, not as an issue of return, but as an  issue  of
    internal relocation.  However, it was necessary to first  know  whether
    the Appellant  could  be  returned  to  Baghdad,  before  it  could  be
    considered whether internal relocation could be found in the IKR.   The
    judge, on the other hand, made a decision which was flawed, because  of
    a lack of consideration regarding whether the Appellant had any  family
    support in Baghdad, so as to enable him to return  to  Baghdad  in  the
    first place, before internal relocation could  then  take  place.   The
    Appellant had no family support in Baghdad.  It was not enough for  the
    judge to say (as she did at paragraph 32) that the Appellant had family
    in Iraq, despite the fact that she does not then confirm where in  Iraq
    the Appellant has a family.  This was a  matter  of  some  considerable
    importance given that it is not possible to consider return to  Baghdad
    for someone who is not a fluent speaker in  the  Arabic  language,  had
    never lived in Baghdad, and had no material support there.

10. For her part, Ms Aboni submitted that she would rely upon the  Rule  24
    response.  It was clear from paragraph 15 of the  annex  in  AA  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 944, that the list of  issues  to  consider  were  not  to  be
    operated as prerequisites before  relocation  could  be  considered  as
    being reasonable.  The judge had considered  the  issue  of  return  to
    Baghdad quite adequately.  The judge had also said that  the  Appellant
    could take advantage of a reintegration package upon  return.   It  had
    been found that the  Appellant  had  a  CSID  card.   He  could  get  a
    duplicate on the basis of that card. There was no error of law.

11. In reply, Mr Azmi submitted that the judge had only been able  to  find
    that the Appellant spoke "a little bit of Arabic", and  on  this  basis
    alone, the Appellant could not reasonably return back to Baghdad, if he
    had no family there.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  I come  to  this
    conclusion notwithstanding Mr Azmi's clever  and  well-honed  arguments
    before me.  It is true that the judge does not make  a  finding  as  to
    whether the Appellant has any relatives in Baghdad.   In  fact,  it  is
    arguable that the judge finds the opposite.  This  is  clear  from  her
    statement that, "although he may not  have  a  sponsor  in  Baghdad..."
    (paragraph 33).  However, that aside, the judge does conclude that  the
    Appellant "has previously had an ID card which he states has been  left
    in Iraq" (paragraph 32).  Of course, it was the Appellant's  case  that
    he now had no family support, and only last spoke to his mother in 2014
    and to his sister and brother-in-law in 2016.  However, the  judge  did
    not accept that no support would be forthcoming from family  relatives,
    even if the Appellant were to be returned to Baghdad.   The  judge  was
    not satisfied that the Appellant's sister  and  her  husband  had  left
    their place of abode.  She  concluded  that  "therefore,  in  terms  of
    obtaining a CSID he would have family members who would be prepared  to
    vouch for him when he approaches the CSA  officers.   I  find  that  he
    would be able to obtain one reasonably soon after his arrival in  Iraq"
    (paragraph 32).  Such a  finding  is  in  compliance  with  the  latest
    country guidance cases in Iraq,  such  that  whatever  error  may  have
    arisen in the judge's conclusions in these  respects,  they  cannot  be
    said to be material errors of law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th September 2018




