
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02206/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Oral determination given following hearing|On 15 September 2016             |
|On 7 July 2016                            |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                Nishantha [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, Counsel, instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who was born on 19 April  1975
    and, having entered this country as a visitor and then as a student, he
    applied for asylum on 19 May 2015.  The basis of  his  application  was
    that he would face persecution  and/or  treatment  which  would  be  in
    breach of his Article 3 rights if returned to Sri Lanka because of  his
    homosexual orientation.  It is not necessary for the purposes  of  this
    decision to do more than summarise this  claim.   The  application  was
    considered by the respondent but was refused on 20 October 2015.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  15
    February 2016.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated a week later,  on
    22 February 2016, Judge Moxon dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals against that decision with permission granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  on  15  March  2016.   Essentially
    although the grounds take issue with the judge's Article 8 findings the
    main challenge is to the dismissal of his asylum/Article 3 claim and in
    particular as to the credibility findings which the judge made and  the
    basis upon which he made them.  It is argued on behalf of the appellant
    both in the grounds and orally before me that essentially  the  judge's
    credibility findings were both unfair for the reasons which I will  set
    out and also in some parts wrong.

 3. The appellant makes four main points.  The  first  is  that  the  judge
    unfairly relied upon the  appellant's  failure  to  call  corroborative
    evidence to support assertions within his  case  that  had  never  been
    challenged previously by the respondent.  In particular,  at  paragraph
    34 of his determination the judge stated that "I do not accept that the
    appellant  is  well-known  within  Sri  Lanka  as  any  type  of  media
    personality" and  in  this  regard  he  noted  "a  lack  of  supportive
    evidence, such as newspaper articles, which would have been  plenty  if
    this account was correct".  Ms Bayati points  out  correctly  that  the
    respondent had in the refusal letter at page  8  specifically  accepted
    the appellant's sexuality  and  had  not  made  any  challenge  to  the
    assertion that the appellant was a well-known media personality  within
    Sri Lanka.  It is also right to say that the appellant had referred  at
    questions 32, 33 and 57 of his asylum interview to  his  activities  in
    media within Sri Lanka and this again was not challenged.

 4. At question 32 in answer to being asked whether he had  worked  in  Sri
    Lanka the appellant had said "yes, I worked in Media Ministry  and  ABC
    radio network".  In answer to question 33 he had said that sometimes he
    had done  newsreading  and  he  was  also  head  of  retail  marketing,
    designing programmes and marketing.  He had also written  speeches  for
    ministers.  Then, in answer to question 57 he had said when asked  what
    kind of life he could have  as  a  gay  person  he  had  answered  that
    "because of my work, I worked in public media, I was  in  fear  because
    people know who I am".  He added that  "if  they  found  out  about  my
    sexuality as gay, they would write in the  newspaper,  and  this  is  a
    disgrace for me and my family and especially will affect my  children's
    future, this is my main worry and concern".   He  also  added  that  it
    would be "detrimental to my family in general".

 5. It is said on behalf of the appellant that it was not  clear  from  the
    decision whether the judge had even accepted  that  he  worked  in  the
    media and certainly there was no reference within the determination  to
    the fact that at his screening interview he had produced a  media  card
    confirming that he had.  That is  apparent  at  question  1.17  of  the
    screening interview where it is set out that he had  produced  a  media
    card.

 6. It is said in summary that the judge's rejection of that  part  of  the
    appellant's  account  which  was  not  in   issue   was   unreasonable,
    particularly  the  suggestion  that  the  appellant  had  not  produced
    evidence as claimed.

 7. The second plank of the appellant's  submissions,  which  is  contained
    from paragraph 6 of the grounds, is that the judge had no reason, or no
    good reason for rejecting the appellant's claim that his colleagues had
    become  suspicious  of  his  sexuality.   It  would  appear  from   the
    determination that this was a  finding  made  because  of  the  adverse
    credibility finding in general but no further reasons  had  been  given
    for this.  If the judge's  credibility  findings  are  tainted,  it  is
    suggested, then that whole decision  is  tainted  with  regard  to  his
    colleagues' suspicions.

 8. The third plank of the grounds relates to  the  judge's  findings  with
    regard to inconsistencies, or alleged inconsistencies  in  relation  to
    the evidence.  At paragraph 33 of his  decision  the  judge  states  as
    follows:

         "I have heard inconsistent evidence as to whether [the  appellant's
         wife] currently works in Sri Lanka.  I have heard evidence from  Mr
         Fonville [a previous partner of the appellant] that  the  appellant
         sends his wife money which is not a fact disclosed by the appellant
         himself".

    In fact, this is incorrect because in answer  to  question  66  of  his
    asylum interview the appellant had stated as follows: "She  is  working
    as an interior designer, set up her own business,  managing  [something
    ...].  When I was  working,  I  helped  financially.   Now  my  current
    partner who is  living  with  me  sends  money  once  a  month  to  the
    children".

    So it is not correct to say that this fact had not  been  disclosed  by
    the appellant himself.

 9. Also at paragraph 33 the judge states  that  no  explanation  had  been
    provided as to how his wife had discovered his  sexuality  or  why  she
    would seek to inform others of it, and he goes on to say:

         "The appellant states that the people she has told  include  people
         in the United Kingdom yet I have had not written or  oral  evidence
         from these people to support his account.  I find  these  omissions
         to be damaging to the appellant's credibility".

10. At the time of his interview, as Ms Bayati pointed out to the Tribunal,
    the appellant's case was that his wife did not know  of  his  sexuality
    but he explains in his statement how this changed.  At paragraph 43  he
    says that "over the last few months my wife has had an idea that  I  am
    living  with  a  man  (and  has  implied  we  are   having   a   sexual
    relationship)".  He then goes on to say that:

         "During this time she has informed all my close friends and  family
         in both Sri Lanka and the UK, including  my  ex-colleagues  in  the
         media.  Her parents, brothers and sisters are  constantly  verbally
         abusing me on the phone and mentally harassing me."

11. At paragraph 50 of his statement he says that he can only speculate how
    his wife had come to know he was gay but adds that: "I have  since  had
    phone calls from friends in both London and Sri Lanka who are asking me
    whether it is true that I am a homosexual as  they  heard  it  from  my
    wife.  It seems that she has told everybody I know."

12. The way in which the appellant's case in this  regard  is  put  in  the
    grounds is [and this is at paragraph 7 of the grounds]:

         "It is submitted that since it was the applicant's  case  that  she
         [the appellant's wife] had informed some in the United Kingdom, who
         had told the applicant and as a result wanted nothing  to  do  with
         him, it is highly unlikely that they would then  give  evidence  on
         his behalf"

    and  that   "such   expectation   is   wholly   unreasonable   in   the
    circumstances".  In fact, the appellant's  evidence  is  not  quite  in
    terms that these people  had  told  him  that  they  no  longer  wanted
    anything to do with him.  However, it is certainly not unreasonable  to
    infer from the statement that the friends were asking  whether  it  was
    true that he was a homosexual as they had heard it from his  wife  that
    one  reasonable  interpretation  from  that  is  that  they  were  very
    disapproving.  It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that in those
    circumstances it is simply unfair to hold it against the appellant,  as
    the judge appears to have done, that he could  not  call  corroborative
    evidence from these people.

13. The fourth point made within the grounds and repeated later relates  to
    the Article 8 claim, but it is not necessary for the purposes  of  this
    decision for me to deal with this aspect of the claim.

14. On behalf of the respondent Mr Melvin's main argument was that what  Ms
    Bayati was in effect doing on behalf of the appellant was,  as  he  put
    it, to make an "unmeritorious forensic attack" on  the  judgment  which
    does not have materiality  to  this  appeal.   He  submitted  that  the
    respondent by not making a forensic  attack  on  every  aspect  of  the
    appellant's case could not reasonably be taken to accept all the  facts
    asserted and that it was for the appellant to make out a case for those
    aspects on which he placed reliance.  Mr Melvin referred to  the  well-
    known decision to this effect in TK (Burundi).

15. So far  as  whether  or  not  the  appellant  was  a  well-known  media
    personality, this was irrelevant to the core issue which is whether  or
    not the appellant would be at risk on  return.  There  was  nothing  to
    suggest that he had suffered any persecution previously in Sri Lanka on
    account of his bisexuality and he certainly appeared to have  had  many
    affairs with men which were at a time when he was raising a family with
    his wife.  There was nothing to show any past persecution such as would
    indicate he would be at risk of  persecution  if  he  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka.

16. So far as colleagues talking or whispering about him, this would not in
    any event be persecution as such.  Just because the judge was concerned
    about his lack of a media personality was not in fact material  to  the
    core of his claim which was whether he could return safely.

17. With regard to inconsistencies in the evidence, which finding had  been
    challenged, Mr  Melvin  suggested  that  this  could  not  possibly  be
    material to the outcome.  The country guidance decision in  LH  and  IP
    was explicit in showing that there was little  evidence  that  gay  men
    were persecuted in Sri Lanka.  The findings of fact in that  case  were
    not under challenge.  Mr Melvin did  accept  that  that  case  did  not
    indicate that every gay man was safe in Sri Lanka  but  emphasised  the
    fact that there was no evidence in this case to show that anyone  would
    persecute the appellant if he returned.  So even if this  Tribunal  was
    to find  that  some  of  the  credibility  findings  made  against  the
    appellant were not justified this would not be  relevant  to  the  core
    findings which were set out from paragraph 38 of the decision  onwards.
    Mr Melvin then made submissions with regard to Article 8  but  for  the
    reasons which follow it is not necessary  for  me  to  deal  with  this
    aspect of the claim.

18. There was various discussion also as to the relevance  of  the  leading
    case of HJ (Iran) in which the Supreme Court had set out  the  approach
    to be taken where gay people were returned in circumstances where  they
    would intend to live discreetly.

    Discussion

19. In my judgment, although this is a finely  balanced  case  Ms  Bayati's
    complaint as to the manner in which the judge approached  his  task  of
    making credibility findings is made out.  I consider that  the  judge's
    approach was flawed as argued.  Although the respondent is not  obliged
    to challenge specifically every aspect of a claim and a failure  so  to
    challenge does not amount to  a  concession  that  what  has  not  been
    specifically challenged is  accepted,  nonetheless  it  is  not  in  my
    judgment reasonable to rely upon a failure to call evidence to  support
    a part of a case which has not been challenged and which might not even
    be central to the claim as evidence of adverse credibility.

20. It is not at all surprising that the appellant did not call evidence at
    the hearing to back up his statement that he was well-known as a  media
    personality within Sri Lanka because he had  no  realistic  expectation
    that this would be challenged.  Indeed, having looked at the Record  of
    Proceedings it does not even appear to have been challenged  in  cross-
    examination.  If the point had been  taken  by  the  judge  during  the
    hearing it would have been open to the appellant either to  have  asked
    for an adjournment in order to enable him to deal with this point or at
    the very least  to  be  able  to  submit  further  written  submissions
    following the hearing.  In the absence of such  opportunity  I  do  not
    consider that the judge could properly rely  on  the  absence  of  such
    corroboration as a material fact in this case.

21. Nor do I consider that the judge  was  entitled  to  find  against  the
    appellant on the basis that he had not given evidence himself as to the
    support he was providing to his wife.  This, as I have  already  noted,
    was simply wrong because the appellant had in his interview stated this
    fact.  Also, although the appellant did not state  in  terms  that  his
    former friends in the UK whom according to him his wife  had  contacted
    had broken off all relations with him that  is  at  the  very  least  a
    reasonable influence from his statement and in those  circumstances  it
    is not a rational conclusion from his failure to call these  people  to
    give evidence that his evidence on this point cannot be believed.

22. Accordingly  I  must  now  consider  whether,  having  found  that  the
    credibility findings  are  tainted,  the  errors  in  this  regard  can
    properly be said to be material to the decision overall  in  the  sense
    that but for  the  errors  a  judge  might  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion.  In my judgment I cannot rule out the possibility that  had
    the judge approached the evidence properly his  conclusion  might  have
    been different.

23. I have regard in particular to the finding, which is the  core  finding
    in this case, at paragraph 41 which is as follows:

         "41. I note that despite his marriage the appellant has  been  able
             to  undertake  various  homosexual  relationships  within  Sri
             Lanka.  He has not disclosed any adverse consequences  at  the
             hands of the general public or the authorities  save  for  the
             evidence about his colleagues  and  employer  which,  for  the
             reasons outlined above, I have rejected.  I do not accept that
             the appellant is a well-known media figure.   I  am  satisfied
             that he could safely live as  an  openly  homosexual  male  in
             Colombo".

24. The  finding  that  the  appellant  could  safely  live  as  an  openly
    homosexual male in Colombo is, it would therefore appear, predicated in
    part at least on the rejection of the appellant's claim  regarding  how
    his colleagues and employer had reacted and also the rejection  of  his
    claim that he was a well-known  media  figure.   Although  the  country
    guidance decision in LH and IP  had  found  that  generally  homosexual
    males within Sri Lanka were not persecuted, it is  not  the  case  that
    that decision is authority for the proposition  that  every  homosexual
    within Sri Lanka will be safe.  Although the appellant  may  ultimately
    find it difficult to establish that he personally would be at  risk  on
    return, that is a matter which  can  only  be  determined  following  a
    proper assessment of all the facts and in light of my finding  that  in
    this case the judge did not fairly assess all the facts that assessment
    has not yet properly been carried out.

25. As the adverse credibility findings must be set aside it is clear  that
    the entire decision will have to be  remade  and  that  none  of  Judge
    Moxon's findings can be retained.  Accordingly  and  in  light  of  the
    practice guidance which has been  given  it  is  appropriate  for  this
    appeal now to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing
    afresh by any judge other than Judge Moxon.

26. It follows that this decision must be set aside and remade and I  shall
    so decide.

    Decision

    The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal is set aside.

    The appeal will be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross for rehearing by any judge other than Judge Moxon.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 29 July 2016
