
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02274/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27th September 2017                   |On 28th September 2017            |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                    [B A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr. S Tettey; Counsel instructed by Broudie
                  Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr. J Harrison; Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Mathews promulgated on  4th  January  2017  in
       which  he  dismissed  an  appeal  against  a  decision  made  by  the
       respondent on 20th October 2015, to refuse the appellant's claim  for
       international protection.


    2. It is common ground that the appellant is a national  of  Libya.  The
       appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraphs [3]  to  [6]
       of the decision of the FtT Judge.  At paragraph [12] of his decision,
       the Judge sets out  a  summary  of  the  appellant's  evidence.   The
       Judge's findings and conclusions are to be found at  paragraphs  [13]
       to [41] of his decision.  The Judge carefully considered the evidence
       before him as to the appellant's place of birth and  the  address  at
       which he had lived prior to his departure from Libya.   At  paragraph
       [17] of his decision, the  Judge  found  that  on  any  account,  the
       appellant had been able to live in Tripoli, that he studied  in  that
       area, and held employment in that area too.  At  paragraphs  [18]  to
       [28], the Judge considered  the  appellant's  account  of  events  in
       Libya, and the information that  he  has  received  about  an  arrest
       warrant  issued  against  him  by  a  militia  because  of  his  past
       activities as a  guard.   At  paragraph  [28]  the  Judge  found  the
       appellant's account  to  be  lacking  in  credibility.   He  was  not
       satisfied that any group has an interest  in  the  appellant  or  his
       family and the Judge found that the appellant's position is no better
       or worse than life for many similar Libyan people.  The Judge  found,
       at [30], that the appellant has not discharged the burden of  proving
       that he is at risk.


    3. The Judge then turned to consider whether the appellant qualifies for
       humanitarian protection under  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
       Directive.  To that end, the Judge states, at [33];


             "I do not accept that the evidence shows change in Libya,  the
             airport in Tripoli has now been  closed,  amnesty  reports  do
             refer to  risks  to  civilians  from  internal  conflict  that
             continues, the further reports also refer to similar  fighting
             against Islamic militants though the casualties referred to by
             the Voice of America document are largely the protagonists  of
             the fighting rather than civilian citizens."


    4. At paragraphs [35] and [36], the Judge states:


             "I note the extensive evidence of militia activity  with  that
             of other armed groups including Islamic extremists,  but  this
             appellant, as set out above has not made out on  the  evidence
             before me any basis for an adverse interest in him by  any  of
             the groups  he  claims  to  fear,  or  indeed  by  any  groups
             considered in the material before me.


             I do not find that this appellant  makes  out  his  claim  for
             protection on humanitarian grounds"


    5. At paragraph [39] of his decision, the Judge found that the appellant
       is able to depart voluntarily to Libya.  The  Judge  did  not  accept
       that the appellant "has made out an inability to travel through Libya
       such that he cannot return along the well-travelled coastal zone".


    6. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.  First, the  FtT  Judge
       failed to properly consider arguments advanced in relation to Article
       15(c) and the route of return to Libya.  The appellant contends  that
       in accordance with  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  HH
       (Somalia) [2010] EWCA Civ 426, in a case in which it could  be  shown
       either directly or by implication what route and method of return was
       envisaged, the Tribunal is required to  consider  and  determine  any
       challenge to the safety of  that  route  or  method.   The  appellant
       accepts that inability to return by itself does not give  rise  to  a
       protection claim, but submits that where the safety of that route  or
       method is in issue as a result of instability in  a  country,  it  is
       incumbent on the Judge to deal with that matter.


    7. Second, in reaching his credibility findings,  the  Judge  failed  to
       take into account factors weighing in favour of the  appellant.   The
       appellant submits that the Judge failed to consider photographs  from
       Facebook, and that the other photographs that were referred to by the
       Judge, deserved more substantial and independent consideration by the
       Judge,  as  evidence   that   supports   the   appellant's   account.
       Furthermore, the Judge failed to  consider  objective  material  that
       described a very similar scenario to the  facts  of  the  appellant's
       case, to inform the Judge as to the plausibility of  the  appellant's
       account.  Finally, the Judge erred as to his  assessment  of  whether
       the appellant assisted in guarding a building  by  referring  to  the
       appellant's student visa  application  in  which  the  appellant  had
       stated that he had never been employed in a security role, not as the
       Judge states at paragraph [19] of his decision,  denied  having  been
       involved in any security role.


    8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mailer
       on 11th May 2017.  He noted that it is arguable that  the  Judge  was
       required to consider the safety  of  any  proposed  route  of  return
       following HH (Somalia) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 426 and it is arguable,
       as contended in the grounds, that the Judge might have conflated  his
       findings on the asylum claim with his findings on  route  to  return.
       The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the decision of
       the FtT Judge involved the making of a material error of law, and  if
       the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


    9. Before me, Mr  Tettey  focussed  his  submissions  upon  the  Judge's
       failure to adequately address the claim under Article  15(c)  of  the
       Qualification Directive. He submits that  the  FtT  Judge  failed  to
       consider how the appellant could safely return to Libya in  light  of
       what is said at paragraph [33] of the decision  in  which  the  Judge
       accepts that the airport in Tripoli has now  been  closed,  and  that
       amnesty reports do refer to risks to civilians from internal conflict
       that continues.  Mr Tettey submits that the Judge failed to give  any
       or any sufficient reasons for his conclusion that he did  not  accept
       that the appellant has made out an inability to travel through  Libya
       such that he cannot return along the well-travelled coastal zone.  He
       submits the Judge failed to take account of the objective evidence as
       to the civilian casualties caused by the violence, particularly  when
       considering the safety of the proposed route of return.


   10. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response dated 11th June  2017  in
       which the respondent submits that  the  appeal  is  opposed.  In  his
       submissions before me, Mr Harrison adopted the Rule 24 response.   It
       is  submitted  that  there  is  only  a  technical  obstacle  to  the
       appellant's  return  in  that  Tripoli  airport  is  closed  and  the
       respondent is unable to conduct an escorted return of  the  appellant
       to Libya until such time as Tripoli airport reopens.


   11. I deal first with  the  Judge's  findings  of  credibility.   I  have
       carefully read the matters referred to by the Judge, and his findings
       at paragraphs [15] to [28] of his decision. I reject  the  submission
       that the adverse credibility findings are vitiated by  a  failure  on
       the part of the Judge to take into account  factors  pulling  in  the
       appellant's favour. Paragraphs [15] to [28] of the decision  must  be
       read as a whole.  The Judge refers at paragraph [18] of the  decision
       to the photographs submitted in support and it was open to the  Judge
       to conclude that they are of limited evidential  weight.   The  Judge
       does not expressly refer to the photographs from Facebook, but in  my
       judgement, the failure to expressly refer to those photographs  would
       not be material to the outcome of the appeal in light of all  of  the
       other matters that are referred to by the Judge  that  undermine  the
       credibility of the appellant's account.


   12. The appellant gave evidence before the FtT  and  the  Judge  had  the
       advantage of  hearing  the  evidence  of  the  appellant.  The  Judge
       carefully  sets  out  the  evidence  before  him  and  considers  the
       inconsistencies in the evidence. It  is  now  well  established  that
       although there is a legal duty to give a  brief  explanation  of  the
       conclusions on the central issue on which the appeal  is  determined,
       those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a whole  makes
       sense, having regard to the material accepted by the  Judge.   It  is
       equally well established that a finding might only be set  aside  for
       error of law on the grounds of perversity if  it  was  irrational  or
       unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not
       overturn a judgment  at  first  instance,  unless  it  really  cannot
       understand the original judge's thought process when  the  Judge  was
       making material findings.  Here, it cannot be said that  the  Judge's
       analysis of the evidence is irrational or perverse. The Judge did not
       consider irrelevant factors, and the weight that he attached  to  the
       evidence either individually or cumulatively, was a matter for him. I
       am  satisfied  that  the  Judge's  adverse  credibility  finding   is
       sufficiently reasoned, and was open to him on the evidence.


   13. In my judgement, it was open to the Judge to conclude, as he  did  at
       paragraph [42] of his decision that the appellant has not  discharged
       the burden of proving a well-  founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
       Convention reason.


   14. The question of whether the appellant is at risk  in  Libya  for  the
       purposes of Article 15(c), must  be  determined  separately,  on  the
       basis of the evidence in the  appeal.  In  my  judgement,  the  Judge
       failed to adequately address his mind to  the  question  of  how  the
       appellant could safely return to Libya in light of what  is  said  at
       paragraph [33] of the decision.  The Judge simply states at paragraph
       [39] of the decision that the appellant has not made out an inability
       to travel through Libya such that he cannot return  along  the  well-
       travelled coastal zone, without setting out the evidence  upon  which
       that conclusion is reached. I accept the submission made on behalf of
       the appellant that the Judge has failed to properly engage  with  the
       arguments relative to Article 15(c) generally, but  appears  to  have
       conflated the Article 15(c) claim with the  international  protection
       claim under the Refugee Convention.   In  my  judgment,  the  Judge's
       assessment of the Article 15(c) risk  is  inadequate  and  the  Judge
       failed  to  sufficiently   engage   with   the   objective   evidence
       particularly  regarding  the  civilian  casualties  caused   by   the
       violence.  The failure to engage with the objective evidence  and  to
       give sufficient reasons for  the  finding  that  the  appllant  could
       return along the  well-travelled  coastal  zone,  is  such  that  the
       decision discloses a material error of law.  It follows  that  in  my
       judgement, the decision of the  Judge  dismissing  the  appeal  under
       Article 15(c) of the Qualifying Directive must be set aside.


   15. Since the decision of the FtT Judge, and  the  grant  of  permission,
       there has been further Country Guidance. In ZMM (Article 15(c)  Libya
       CG [2017] UKUT 00263 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held as follows:


             "The violence in Libya has reached  such  a  high  level  that
             substantial grounds are shown for believing that  a  returning
             civilian would, solely on  account  of  his  presence  on  the
             territory of that country or region, face a real risk of being
             subject to a threat to his life or person."


   16. I re-make the decision.  Mr Harrison did not seek to distinguish  ZMM
       or make any submission that the appellant would not be at  real  risk
       of being subject to a threat to his life or person solely on  account
       of his presence in Libya. Although it is for the appellant  to  prove
       his case, the lack of even a suggestion that this appellant would not
       be at risk renders any further consideration unnecessary,  given  the
       Country Guidance decision of ZMM.


   17. I allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds only.


   18. Although I have set aside the decision of the FtT promulgated on  4th
       January 2017, the appellant's appeal under  the  Refugee  Convention,
       and under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of  the  ECHR,  is  dismissed  for  the
       reasons given by the Judge of the FtT in his decision promulgated  on
       4th January 2017.


Notice of Decision


   19. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of the FtT  promulgated  on  4th
       January 2017 is set aside.


   20.  I  re-make  the  decision  and  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
       protection grounds only.


   21. The appellant's  appeal  under  the  Refugee  Convention,  and  under
       Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR, is dismissed for the  reasons  given
       by the Judge of the FtT in his decision promulgated  on  4th  January
       2017.


Signed                                  Date       28th September 2017

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

FEE AWARD

No fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date     28th September 2017

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




