
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02214/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 November 2019                           |On 22 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                    g i o
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Osman, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 3  September  2019  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence which refused  the  protection
    and human rights claim of the appellant.

 2. The background to this matter is that the appellant was born in Iraq in
    1996.  His protection claim concerns ISIS coming to his  home  area  on
    two occasions. He came to the UK in 2015, afraid of reprisals from ISIS
    and from those who viewed him adversely as somebody coming from an area
    in which ISIS was active.  On arrival in the UK he claimed  asylum  but
    his claim was refused in  a  decision  from  the  respondent  dated  22
    February 2019.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal found against  the  appellant  on  all  grounds
    finding that the appellant was not credible as regards his  history  in
    Iraq or his inability  to  obtain  a  CSID  document.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal also placed little weight on  a  psychiatric  report  from  Dr
    Katona.

 4. The grounds of appeal were extensive and  addressed  all  of  the  core
    adverse findings of the First-tier Tribunal including the  approach  to
    Dr Katona's report and to the extant country guidance of  AA  (Iraq)  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and AAH (Iraq  Kurds  -  internal  relocation)
    [2018] UKUT 2012.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Clarke conceded for the respondent that the
    decision disclosed the errors of law set out in the  grounds  and  that
    these errors were material such that the decision had to be  set  aside
    in its entirety to be remade de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.  As Mr
    Clarke's concession was in line with the preliminary view I had reached
    on the case, the matter was dealt with relatively briefly.

 6. In the light of the concession  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    cogency of the grounds of appeal, I find that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal discloses an error of law such that it must be set  aside
    to be remade entirely and where the findings of fact all remain  to  be
    made again, the re-making is to take place in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in Birmingham.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law such that it is set aside  to  be  remade  de  novo  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  19   November
    2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
