
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02618/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2018                  |On 04 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               OMIDEULLAH [U]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Khan, instructed by Legal Justice, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent is a citizen of Afghanistan. He appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
    his international protection claim. The respondent's decision is  dated
    6 November 2017. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision dated 27  March
    2018, the First-tier Tribunal allowed  his  appeal.  The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  I  shall
    hereafter refer to the appellant as the respondent and  the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they respectively appeared before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).

 2. The respondent challenges the judge's credibility  findings.  At  [28],
    the judge found that the appellant was born  on  1  January  1997.  The
    appellant had claimed that he was born in 2001.  The  grounds  complain
    that, having found that the appellant had lied about his age, the judge
    did not examine his motives for doing so or how his lack of truth might
    impact upon the remainder of his evidence. Respondent asserts that  the
    judge had not given adequate weight to the failure of the appellant  to
    claim in a European country whilst travelling to the United Kingdom. In
    particular, the respondent challenges the judge's finding at [35]  that
    the judge had 'no real reason to disbelieve  [the  appellant]'.  It  is
    asserted  that  that  is  an  insufficient  basis  for  accepting   the
    credibility of the appellant's account.

 3. The problem for the respondent is  that  the  judge  has  not,  as  the
    grounds suggest, simply believed the appellant because he had no reason
    to disbelieve him and,  in  doing  so,  ignored  the  problems  in  the
    appellant's evidence. The judge's comment at [35] is made 'despite [the
    appellant's] reduced credibility for failing to claim asylum  en  route
    and having lied about his age'. Moreover, at [28-34]  the  judge  deals
    with the very problems in the appellant's evidence highlighted  in  the
    grounds of appeal. He gave little weight, as he was  entitled  for  the
    reasons he provides, to discrepancies  regarding  family  relationships
    and vagueness regarding the precise sequence of events in  Afghanistan.
    The judge explains that he accepted  that  the  appellant's  memory  of
    precise events may have diminished over the two years it took following
    the appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom  for  the  respondent  to
    interview him. Judge also notes the appellant's limited education.  The
    judge has, therefore, given  detailed  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant given a truthful account and for attaching limited weight  to
    apparent discrepancies. I am satisfied that the judge reached  findings
    which were available to him on the evidence. Accordingly, the Secretary
    of State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 4. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
