
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02914/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 August 2019                    |On 03 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    AMKI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Legal Justice
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1989 and is a male  citizen  of  Iraq.  By  a
    decision promulgated on 11 April  2018,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson
    found that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  such  that  its
    decision fell to be set aside. He preserved the findings of fact of the
    First-tier Tribunal (including a finding that the appellant  is  not  a
    credible witness) and limited the  resumed  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal to the issue of internal flight within Iraq (in particular, to
    the Independent Kurdish  Region  (IKR)).  Following  the  making  of  a
    transfer order, the matter came before me at Bradford and 3 June  2019.
    I adjourned hearing on that occasion in  order  to  enable  the  expert
    witness of the appellant to attend and give oral evidence.  The  expert
    duly attended at the adjourned hearing on 30 August 2019. At the end of
    that hearing, I told the parties'  representatives  and  the  appellant
    that I intended to allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.
    I shall, therefore, be brief in giving my  reasons  since  I  explained
    these at length in court.

 2. The appellant gave oral evidence at the resumed hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal. I was asked by Ms Khan, who represented  him,  to  treat  the
    appellant has a vulnerable witness. There is a medical report  dated  4
    April 2019 which indicates that the appellant is suffering  from  PTSD.
    Ms Khan told me that the only  adjustment  which  the  appellant  might
    require  was  for  breaks  in  his  oral  testimony  should  he  become
    distressed. I told the appellant that he should notify  me  should  you
    require a break. As it happened, when the appellant became  distressed,
    I adjourned the hearing briefly without being requested  to  do  so  to
    enable him to collect himself. The appellant then proceeded to the  end
    of his oral testimony without further difficulty.

 3. Even allowing for the appellant's medical condition, I did not find him
    to be an impressive witness at all. The  appellant  had  only  recently
    contacted the Red Cross with a view to locating his relatives in  Iraq.
    Under cross-examination,  the  appellant  confirmed  that  he  had  not
    contacted or asked the  Red  Cross  to  contact  his  brother  in  Iraq
    ostensibly because the brother has his own family and  would  therefore
    not be concerned with assisting the appellant. This explanation was not
    persuasive. Likewise, the appellant was unable to explain  why  he  had
    not told the Red Cross  that  he  had  heard  from  a  friend  in  Iraq
    (concerning whom the appellant was particularly vague) that his  mother
    and sister had been living in a refugee camp. Indeed, he  gave  to  the
    Red Cross no details at all of the likely  whereabouts  of  any  family
    member thereby making it highly unlikely that they could be located and
    contacted.  I find that the appellant's contact with the Red Cross  was
    perfunctory and half-hearted, at best. It did not represent  a  serious
    attempt to contact his relatives in Iraq, assuming that he has,  as  he
    claims, lost touch with them.

 4. The appellant's expert witness, Dr Kaveh Ghobadi, attended  court  from
    his home in Exeter and gave oral evidence. He  has  produced  a  report
    dated 29 May 2019 upon which the appellant relies. The  report  details
    the problems which the appellant may face seeking to obtain replacement
    identity documents in Iraq. Cross-examined by Mr Diwnycz, who  appeared
    for the Secretary of State, Dr Ghobadi explained that he is essentially
    an expert in  Kurdish  culture  and  literature.  He  has  no  forensic
    qualifications enabling him to comment  authoritatively  regarding  the
    authenticity of Iraqi documents. His method is to  contact  individuals
    in Iraq, some of whom he appears never to have  met,  to  ask  them  to
    comment on the authenticity of documents and to  advise  him  regarding
    the feasibility of refugees in the United  Kingdom  obtaining  identity
    documentation in  Iraq.  Whilst  I  was  grateful  to  the  doctor  for
    attending court and for the  frankness  with  which  he  explained  his
    methodology, I find  it  hard  to  accept  that  he  has  any  personal
    expertise in the matters which are the subject of his  report  in  this
    appeal. Rather, he acts as an intermediary  for  individuals,  some  of
    whom have not been named or whose exact roles within  Iraqi  government
    administration have not been elucidated, who provide him with their own
    opinions. I am aware that expert witnesses  often  rely  upon  external
    sources but it appeared to me that in this instance the expert  witness
    had little, if any, means of judging whether the  information  provided
    by  supposed  experts  in  Iraq  (of  whose  own  expertise  he  seemed
    uncertain) could be relied upon; he was obliged to adopt  the  opinions
    of his Iraqi sources. To that extent, he was little more than a conduit
    for the opinions of others who have not indicated that they were  aware
    of the duties which they may owe to a court or tribunal in  the  United
    Kingdom. In the  light  of  these  observations,  I  have  treated  his
    evidence with some caution although it is also fair  to  say  that,  in
    general,  his  report  contains  rational  and  appropriately  measured
    observations.

 5. As I explained to the representatives, neither the weight appropriately
    attaching to the expert's  report  nor  the  appellant's  own  lack  of
    credibility and his unhelpful contact with the Red Cross constitute the
    determinative issue in this case. As at the date  of  the  hearing,  no
    fresh country guidance is available and the guidance  set  out  in  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT  00212  (IAC)  and  AA
    (Iraq) [2017] EWCA  Civ  944  remains  valid.  The  so-called  'embassy
    letters' (issued with the authority of the Iraqi ambassador in  London)
    annexed to the latest versions of the CPIN are written in general terms
    and do nothing to  contradict  the  guidance  contained  in  the  cases
    referred to above (see SS [2019] EWHC 1402 (Admin) in which the letters
    were not found to contradict existing country guidance.) The appellant,
    therefore, would be returned to Baghdad. His  home  area  lies  in  the
    province of Mosul which, as at today,  remains  a  contested  area.  He
    cannot be expected to travel there from Baghdad and, even  if  he  were
    able to enlist the support of  his  brother,  the  evidence  background
    material indicates that the latter would also need to travel  to  Mosul
    to obtain replacement documentation for the appellant. It would not  be
    reasonable to expect him to do so. Whilst the appellant may be able  to
    obtain a laissez passer while still in the United Kingdom,  this  would
    not get him beyond Baghdad where he  would  inevitably  be  delayed  in
    seeking to arrange  documentation  for  onward  travel  and  where,  by
    application of the current country guidance, he would, as a Kurdish man
    without friends or family in Baghdad, be exposed  to  a  real  risk  of
    harm. There is also force in Ms Khan's submission  that,  even  if  the
    appellant did reach the IKR, there is  no  evidence  that  he  has  any
    relatives there whilst his  own  mental  health  condition  might  well
    impede his efforts to find accommodation and work.

 6. In the light of what I say above, I find that  the  appellant's  appeal
    should be allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.  I  do,  however,
    find that the appellant  is  not  a  truthful  witness  and  I  am  not
    satisfied that he is either lost touch with his family in Iraq or  that
    he has made a proper effort to  re-establish  contact  with  them.  The
    appellant should not expect to receive a  lengthy  grant  of  leave  to
    remain given the rapidly changing situation in Iraq; indeed, he  should
    be aware that the Secretary of State may soon reconsider  his  case  in
    the light of any future country guidance issued by the Upper Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The Upper Tribunal has remade the decision. The appellant's  appeal  against
the decision of the Secretary of State dated 8  March  2016  is  allowed  on
humanitarian protection grounds.  The  appeal  is  dismissed  on  all  other
grounds.




Signed                              Date 30 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

