
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA029082016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 April 2017                               |On 22 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                   m a j i
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Gunamal, Solicitors of Duncan Lewis & Co
                  Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Sudan, date of birth [  ]  1998,  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision dated 17 February 2016  to  refuse  a
    protection claim and to refuse a  general  claim  to  remain  based  on
    private life under the Rules.
2.   An appeal against that decision came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Turquet (the Judge) who, in a decision [D] promulgated  on  17  October
    2016, dismissed the appeal under asylum,  Humanitarian  Protection  and
    human rights grounds.  Permission to appeal was given by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer on 31 January 2017.

3.   The judge rejected the Appellant's claim  and  in  doing  so  concluded
    that he could be returned to Sudan and that  he  was  not  at  risk  by
    reference to him being a non-Arab Darfuri.

4.   The  judge  identified  the  correct  burden  and  standard  of  proof.
    Although  in  her   determination   she   makes   reference   to   'her
    satisfaction', 'her being satisfied',  which  certainly  may  give  the
    appearance that  it  is  not  clear  what  standard  she  was  actually
    applying.  It is trite law that both parties to an appeal are  entitled
    to give sufficient and adequate reasons to explain why they have won or
    lost the appeal.  In this case the Appellant was under the age  of  18,
    at the time  he  came  to  the  UK  when  he  underwent  his  screening
    interview, asylum interview and making a statement  with  the  help  of
    representatives.

5.    As Mr Bramble rightly points out, there is no medical evidence of  the
    Appellant's claim to be dyslexic.  It  is  known  dyslexia  may  affect
    recollection as well as presenting educational problems.  In any event,
    the judge makes passing reference to the Appellant's age, to his  claim
    to suffer from dyslexia, but in her  analysis  fails  to  identify  any
    particular considerations that would have been pertinent to someone who
    was at material times under the age of 18: Not least given his  history
    of when he left his home area and the circumstances where  he  went  to
    live elsewhere in Sudan.

6.   The principal criticism as it first started out in  the  grounds,  upon
    which permission was given by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer appeared  to
    be  principally  directed  at  what  was  said  to  be   the   somewhat
    unquestioning  repetition  of  the  Respondent's  objections   to   the
    Appellant's claim: In effect  the  judge  had  unquestioningly  adopted
    those criticisms.  However, it became apparent that  in  fact  much  of
    what the judge said was not actually challenged  in  terms  of  factual
    matters which the Respondent had taken a view on.  Rather,  the  actual
    criticism was the Judge's failure to properly address  the  risks  that
    the Appellant might face as a non-Arab Darfuri, who has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom, claimed asylum here and identified fears on return.

7.   Submissions were made that with respect to the  country  guidance  case
    of MM (Darfuris) Sudan [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC), whilst the judge had  made
    reference to the case, he had not seriously considered the implications
    of return of the Appellant but had largely traversed them on the  basis
    of a general approach to consistency and credibility supported  by  the
    Respondent's decision.

8.       It seems to me that there must be a risk that if  properly  written
    the same decision would be arrived  at.   Therefore  I  have  carefully
    considered whether the errors, such as they are, are  material  to  the
    outcome.  On balance it seems to me when there  is  an  expectation  of
    sufficient and adequate reasons. This is one of those cases  where  the
    decision might well be different but similarly it is not  inconceivable
    that it would be the same.

8.   It seems to me that the correct course is that the Original  Tribunal's
    decision should not stand and that the matter will have to  be  re-made
    with particular reference to the evidence addressing the issue of 'non-
    Arab Darfuris' and the return in that context of the Appellant.  As far
    as I can see the case can properly be  dealt  with  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (IAC).

9.   The Original Tribunal decision  does  not  stand.   The  case  will  be
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.

DIRECTIONS

1.   Time estimate of three hours.

2.   An Arabic/Sudanese interpreter is required.

3.   The Appellant plus one -  witness's  identity  and  nationality  to  be
    notified to the Respondent.

4.   Any expert evidence to be  served  not  later  than  ten  working  days
    before the further hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   Any medical evidence that is relied upon to be served as in 4 above.

6.   The issues will relate  to  the  return  of  a  non-arab  Darfuri,  the
    Refugee Convention, Humanitarian Protection and Articles 2 and  3  ECHR
    grounds.  Further issue if advised and to be notified to the First-tier
    Tribunal, IAC, whether or not a private life  claim  is  being  pursued
    under the Rules or under Article 8 ECHR.

7.   Anonymity order to continue.

NOTICE OF DECISION
The appeal is allowed to the extent the matter is to be remade in the First-
Tier Tribunal.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 11 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
