
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02747/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2018                          |On 4 February 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     I H
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Loughridge promulgated on 6 July 2018 in which he dismissed the  appeal
    of the Appellant against a decision of the Respondent dated 19  January
    2018 to make a deportation order.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born  on  27  February  1993.  He
    arrived in the UK on 24 August 2009 and claimed asylum. He was  refused
    asylum on 8 October 2009 but was granted discretionary leave to  remain
    until 27 August 2010 in accordance with the Respondent's 'unaccompanied
    asylum seeking child' ('UASC') policy.


3.   On 24 August 2010 the Appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain.
    The application was refused on 5 October 2010 and a  subsequent  appeal
    dismissed in a decision of Immigration Judge O'Connor promulgated on 17
    March 2011 (ref. AA/15460/2010 - see Respondent's bundle, Annex J).


4.   Thereafter the Appellant made further  representations  in  respect  of
    his asylum claim which were again refused. A further appeal was finally
    dismissed  in  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Napthine
    promulgated on 25 March 2015 (ref  AA/00999/2014,  Annex  N)  after  an
    earlier decision of the first-tier Tribunal had been set aside  by  the
    Upper Tribunal (Annex M).


5.   On 12 June 2016 the Appellant was stopped at  Heathrow  airport  trying
    to travel to  Canada  using  another  person's  British  passport.  The
    Appellant was convicted of possession of identity documents with intent
    upon a guilty plea,  and  sentenced  on  11  July  2016  to  12  months
    imprisonment with a recommendation for deportation (Annexes P and Q).


6.   The Respondent then commenced deportation procedures culminating  in  a
    Deportation Order dated 19 January 2018,  served  on  22  January  2018
    together with a 'reasons' letter.


7.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


8.   The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in  the  Decision  and
    Reasons of Judge Loughridge promulgated on 6 July 2018.


9.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell 15 August 2018.


10.  Before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Appellant  sought  to  resist  the
    Respondent's Deportation Order on protection grounds (with reference to
    both the Refugee Convention and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR),  and  on
    human rights grounds (with reference to Article 8  of  the  ECHR).  The
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.


11.  The challenge before the  Upper  Tribunal  focuses  on  the  protection
grounds.


12.  The Grounds of Appeal in support of the application for  permission  to
    appeal plead that the First-tier Tribunal Judge misapplied the  country
    guidance in MOJ and others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT
    44 (IAC). The grounds were amplified before me by  way  of  a  Skeleton
    Argument and the oral submissions of Ms Bayoumi.


13.  It is not suggested that the Judge did not have regard to the  case  of
    MOJ. Manifestly he had it in mind because it is referred to  repeatedly
    -  particularly  in  the  context  of  quoting  at  length   from   the
    Respondent's Country Policy and Information Note  of  July  2017  which
    cross-refers to MOJ: see paragraphs 31, 32, and 35. Moreover Ms Bayoumi
    acknowledged that paragraph 39 of the Judge's decision  adequately  and
    accurately reflected relevant parts of the country guidance:

         "As regards the risk of serious harm in consequence of being forced
         to live in an IDP camp, that will depend on the Appellant's  access
         to family/other support, the extent of any remittances from the  UK
         and his ability to work." (Paragraph 39).

    See in this context paragraph (xi) of the headnote in MOJ:

         "It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or  family  support
         who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who  have
         no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on  return  who
         will face the prospect of living  in  circumstances  falling  below
         that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms."


14.  Rather, the grounds  and  written  submissions  plead  that  the  Judge
    misapplied the country guidance to the facts of the case. However, upon
    further discussion, in the course of submissions Ms Bayoumi - with  one
    caveat - acknowledged that the real substance of the challenge was  not
    so much in respect of misapplication of the  country  guidance,  but  a
    dissatisfaction with the Judge's findings in respect of the Appellant's
    ability to work.


15.  Ms Bayoumi's caveat - which in  effect  stood  as  the  only  basis  of
    challenge to the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  -  arose  from
    paragraph 341 of MOJ:

         "There  is  evidence  also  from  a  number  of  sources  that  the
         importance of what has been termed "the nuclear family" has  become
         more significant than membership of a clan. This was recognised  by
         UNHCR in the report dated 25  September  2013  which  is  mentioned
         above and to which we will return  below.  It  is  plain  that  the
         significance of clan  membership  has  changed  and,  increasingly,
         residents of Mogadishu look to their nuclear  family  for  support,
         protection and access to a livelihood. But, of  course,  the  close
         relatives involved would invariably also be  members  of  the  same
         clan  but  it  is  the  family  relationship,  rather   than   clan
         membership, that is  of  significance.  It  is,  perhaps,  entirely
         unsurprising that people choose to live in  areas  where  relatives
         are established or that district police forces,  being  drawn  from
         the area in which they operate, reflect the numerical dominance  of
         the clan predominately present:

           "UNHCR-Somalia, Mogadishu, confirmed that someone  in  Mogadishu
           will not be  at  risk  today  solely  because  he/she  is  of  a
           different clan, although clan dynamics in combination with other
           factors  are  an  important  element  when   considering   risk,
           including for the IDP population. It  is  obvious  that  one  is
           safer when he or she is residing in an area dominated by his  or
           her own clan or if one has  good  relations  with  a  dominating
           clan.""


16.  Ms Bayoumi argued that this demonstrated that having a  family  by  way
    of support was an important factor in being  able  to  access  the  job
    market to take advantage of the so-called economic boom. She  submitted
    that  absent  such  a  network  there  would  be  barriers  to  finding
    employment.


17.  I do not accept that paragraph 341  can  bear  that  construction.  The
    fact that persons increasingly turn to family for support  rather  than
    specifically their clan, and that such support may include 'access to a
    livelihood'-  i.e.  that  family  members  may  provide  assistance  in
    accessing employment - does not mean that the absence of family support
    constitutes a barrier to employment. Indeed it seems to  me  abundantly
    clear from a sequential reading of the headnote in MOJ that the country
    guidance expressly recognised that persons  without  a  family  support
    network may yet be able to find employment, but that evaluation of such
    a person's prospects will require careful consideration of all  of  the
    particular circumstances,  with  the  burden  of  proof  being  on  the
    applicant/appellant - see headnote at paragraph (ix) and (x).

         "(ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return to  Mogadishu
         after a period of absence has no nuclear family or close  relatives
         in the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself  on  return,
         there  will  need  to  be  a  careful  assessment  of  all  of  the
         circumstances. These  considerations  will  include,  but  are  not
         limited to:

            . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
            . length of absence from Mogadishu;
            . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
            . access to financial resources;
            . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
              or self employment;
            . availability of remittances from abroad;
            . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
            . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
              enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.


           (x) Put another way, it will be for the person facing return  to
           explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
           opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
           especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are
           taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.


18.  On such bases I do not accept the essential  premise  of  Ms  Bayoumi's
submission.


19.  It is convenient to  note  at  this  juncture  that  my  attention  was
    directed to the Judge's observation at paragraph 40 to the effect that,
    notwithstanding the failure to trace his mother and sister through  the
    Red  Cross,  and  Judge  Loughridge's  acceptance  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he had not been in touch with  family  members  since  he
    left Somalia, the  Judge  nonetheless  observed  that  "there  is  some
    prospect" of the Appellant being "able to trace his mother and  sisters
    if he was physically present in Mogadishu and able  to  return  to  the
    locality where he used to live and to make enquiries".  It  was  argued
    that the Judge was not entitled to make such a finding on the available
    evidence. Even if I thought there were  substance  in  this  point,  it
    seems to  me  that  it  could  not  possibly  avail  the  Appellant  in
    challenging the outcome decision  because  it  is  rendered  immaterial
    given that in the final analysis at paragraph 43 the  Judge  considered
    the Appellant's ability to establish himself "irrespective  of  whether
    he is able to make contact with his mother/sisters, or to link up  with
    any other members of [his] clan who can provide support".


20.  In such circumstances I can identify no foundation for concluding  that
    the Judge has misunderstood or misapplied the country guidance  of  MOJ
    to the particular findings in the appeal.


21.  As I have noted above  the  real  substance  of  the  challenge  is  in
    respect of the Judge's  finding  as  to  the  Appellant's  prospect  of
    establishing himself. Indeed when I invited Ms  Bayoumi  to  articulate
    what it was in the decision that offended against the country  guidance
    she responded by stating that it was the Judge "speculating"  that  the
    Appellant would be able to establish himself in Mogadishu.


22.  The challenge in this regard in my  judgement  is  essentially  one  of
    disagreement with the outcome, and constitutes an  attempt  to  reargue
    the case; it does not involve identification of any error of law.


23.  The  challenge  seeks  to  criticise  the  Judge's  findings  as  being
    'speculative': e.g. "...FtTJ Loughridge's assertion that the  Appellant
    could access employment is irrational given the speculative  nature  it
    is based upon..." (paragraph 13 of the Grounds). In my judgement  there
    is no merit in such a submission - either in respect of 'irrationality'
    or 'speculation'. The Judge's decision is not founded  on  speculation:
    it is adequately clear that the Judge evaluated the available  evidence
    and made reasonable inferences from the evidence. The conclusions  were
    not irrational: they were entirely open to the Judge on  the  basis  of
    the available evidence, and bearing  in  mind  those  passages  in  the
    country guidance considered above. In my  judgement  this  is  manifest
    from paragraphs 41 and 42 of the decision:

         "41. Finally, in respect of being able to work the  starting  point
         is obviously that the Appellant is a young man, in relatively  good
         health, and furthermore he indicated in oral evidence that  he  has
         an IT qualification. What might cause a move away from the starting
         point? Notwithstanding that Dr Munro is not a psychiatrist I accept
         his diagnosis of PTSD (on the basis that he has clearly applied the
         relevant criteria, and indeed he appears to have conducted quite  a
         detailed assessment during the  consultation).  This  diagnosis  is
         consistent, to a degree, with references in the medical records  in
         August 2017 to anxiety, flashbacks and nightmares, and to being put
         on  amitriptyline  and  referred  for  therapy.  However,   it   is
         significant that in the Appellant's Nass health  assessment  on  12
         June 2017... he was stated  to  have  "no  apparent  mental  health
         issues" and overall I find that his symptoms are  not  at  a  level
         which would interfere with his ability to work. As for his physical
         health, whilst I acknowledge that he has  some  back  pain  it  is,
         similarly, not at a level which would reasonably interfere with his
         ability to work, even in a manual occupation. Once again, the  Nass
         health assessment  is  enlightening:  although  there  is  a  brief
         reference to "back pain when walking uphill"  for  which  he  takes
         pain relief there is also a reference to  "goes  to  the  gym"  for
         exercise. If he is capable of going to the gym for exercise  he  is
         likely to be capable of undertaking a wide variety of manual jobs.


         42. Taking all of these factors into account I find that there is a
         good  prospect  of  the  Appellant  being  able  to  find  work  in
         Mogadishu. There may be opportunities for him to make  use  of  his
         knowledge/experience of IT, which is likely to be in demand in such
         a large city. Alternatively, I note the reference in a report cited
         in the Skeleton Argument to work in transport, such as  dockers  at
         the port, or labourers at a construction site, and I consider  that
         to be work he is capable of doing. I do not say  that  it  will  be
         easy for him, and he will need to  be  resourceful  in  making  the
         necessary  enquiries.  However,  with  the   right   attitude   and
         commitment he is likely to be successful and I am confident that he
         will be able to establish a life irrespective of whether he is able
         to make contact with his mother/sisters or  to  link  up  with  any
         other members of  [his]  clan  who  can  provide  support.  As  the
         Respondent points out in the refusal letter the Facilitated  Return
         Scheme  may  be  able  to  provide  some  measure  of  support  and
         assistance."


24.  Ms Bayoumi also argued that the Judge's  findings  were  undermined  by
    reason of  the  Appellant  not  having  been  cross-examined  on  these
    matters. I note that in his witness statement signed on 12 June 2018 at
    paragraph 36 in this context he said little more than "I would  not  be
    able to get a job or make a life and would likely end up destitute  and
    vulnerable.  I've  never  had  employment  in  my  life,  I   have   no
    transferable skills to get a job and I would surely  be  treated  a  an
    outsider, subject to discrimination as a result of my time in the  UK".
    It is difficult to see what nature of cross-examination might have been
    relevant,  or  might  otherwise  have  strengthened   the   Appellant's
    assertions, or undermined the Judge's evaluation based on the available
    evidence. This was  essentially  a  matter  of  the  Judge  needing  to
    evaluate the situation from the premise of broadly  undisputed  primary
    facts.


25.  Moreover, it is clear that employment was an issue in the  proceedings:
    in the Respondent's decision letter  it  was  asserted,  amongst  other
    things, that the Appellant "as an adult,... can reasonably be  expected
    to live independently utilising any skills/training/experience obtained
    whilst in the UK"; the Appellant offered a view as to his prospects  in
    his witness statement (as quoted above), which was adopted in his  oral
    evidence (see paragraph 4 of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision);  and
    submissions  were  made  in  this  regard   by   both   representatives
    (paragraphs 5 and 7). The Appellant was plainly alert to the issue  and
    presented his evidence in the appeal accordingly. In  my  judgement  it
    cannot be suggested that he has been in any way  disadvantaged  by  any
    lack of cross-examination; the fact that he opined that his skills  (or
    lack of  skills)  was  such  as  to  present  an  obstacle  to  finding
    employment was not in itself determinative and was not  something  that
    the Judge was obliged to accept simply because the  Appellant  was  not
    cross-examined on his opinion. It is to be recalled that the burden  of
    proof was upon him, and he does not discharge  that  burden  simply  by
    expressing an opinion. Nor  was  the  Judge  required  to  accept  that
    opinion, particularly if  the  evidence  upon  analysis  pointed  in  a
    different direction.


26.  In such circumstance, as I have said, in my judgement  this  aspect  of
    the Appellant's challenge amounts to no more than a  disagreement  with
    the evaluation of the Judge and an attempt to reargue the  case.  There
    is no error of law in this or any other aspect of the decision.


Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    stands.


28.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 17 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
