
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02417/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |On 17 August 2020                    |
|On 29 July 2020 by Skype.            |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     EA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Loughran instructed by Luqmani Thompson &
                    Partners, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                                 DIRECTIONS


      1. By a decision dated 4 June 2020 the Upper Tribunal found a judge of
         the First-Tier Tribunal had erred in law in a  manner  material  to
         the Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal.
      2. The Error of  Law  assessment  was  undertaken  on  the  papers  in
         accordance with the Covid-19 protocol issued by the Upper Tribunal.
         At that date, as recorded at [8]  of  the  Error  of  Law  finding,
         representations had been received from the appellant  with  nothing
         from the Secretary of State. Those  submissions  were  subsequently
         received in a letter dated 3 June 2020 by way of a Rule 24 response
         the operative part of which is in the following terms:

             "in response to  the  directions  sent  12  May  2020,  having
             considered the grounds and detailed further submissions lodged
             on behalf of the appellant the SSHD accepts  that  the  First-
             Tier Tribunal Judge (FTTJ) materially erred. In  the  granting
             permission to appeal First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly  limited
             the grounds to 2-5. The SSHD accepts that the  FTTJ  erred  in
             relation to grounds 4 and 5 namely the  consideration  of  the
             evidence in relation to the appellant's claimed mental  health
             conditions and  credibility  of  the  account  given  for  the
             reasons  given  in  the  grounds/further  submissions.  It  is
             accepted that the FTTJ failed to make a finding on  weight  to
             be afforded to the medical and witness  evidence  nor  has  he
             provided adequate reasons for his conclusions. This impacts on
             the materiality of access to medical assistance has raised  in
             ground 3. Given the conclusions in relation to  these  aspects
             have a  material  impact  on  the  consideration  of  risk  on
             return/reasonableness of return to Kabul, the SSHD agrees with
             the proposal in the Grounds and submissions that  it  will  be
             appropriate for this matter to be remitted to  the  First-Tier
             Tribunal for a rehearing of the evidence."

      3. The appeal was listed for a remote, via Skype, Resumed  hearing  at
         Manchester on the 29 July 2020. It was specifically  directed  that
         an interpreter be provided  to  assist  the  appellant  in  Pushtu.
         Unfortunately, one did not attend, remotely or  otherwise,  meaning
         the hearing could not proceed.
      4. Miss Loughran made two  applications  as  preliminary  issues,  the
         first was to be for the hearing not to  proceed  remotely  for  the
         reasons stated but this was overtaken by  the  fact  we  could  not
         proceed.
      5. The second was for the matter to be transferred to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.
      6. Although such application had been refused  on  the  papers  it  is
         clear this is a case in which a judge  will  have  the  benefit  of
         seeing and hearing the appellant give his evidence directly as  his
         maturity and level of ability to  cope  is  an  issue  said  to  be
         relevant to whether he will be able to cope in Kabul or not.
      7. It was also agreed previously that  the  appellants  former  foster
         mother could sit by the appellant when he gave his  evidence  which
         did not happen with the remote hearing.
      8. Mr McVeety also indicated that the current psychiatric evidence was
         out of date and not of the highest quality. Miss Loughran confirmed
         that an up to date report will be obtained to assist the Tribunal.
      9. It is likely in this case that extensive fact finding  is  required
         especially in relation  to the recent cases of AS(Safety of  Kabul)
         Afghanistan  CG  [2020]  UKUT  130  (IAC)  which  found   that   an
         individualised assessment of relocation  required,  which  has  not
         been considered at all in this appeal to date, and  DH  (Particular
         Social Group: Mental Health) Afghanistan  [2020]  UKUT  223  (IAC),
         which may be relevant if a full and detailed psychiatric report  is
         obtained.
     10. Accordingly this case is adjourned to be transferred to the  First-
         tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House for a face  to  face  hearing
         before a judge nominated by the  Resident  Judge  of  that  hearing
         centre, other than Judge Abebrese.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 August 2020
