


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02505/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On : 6 June 2016                       |On : 7 June 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 Shilon MiAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Aghayere, instructed by MAC Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born on 16 September 1987, claims  to
have arrived in the United Kingdom in  2008  with  a  working  holiday-maker
visa. He was served with removal papers as an  overstayer  in  October  2012
when encountered working illegally in a restaurant, but he  then  absconded.
He was encountered  again  in  August  2015  working  illegally  in  another
restaurant and was arrested and served with removal  papers  again.  Removal
directions were set for his removal to Bangladesh on 19 September 2015,  but
were deferred when he claimed asylum. His asylum claim was  then  considered
and refused on 29 October 2015.

The appellant appealed against that decision.


The appellant's appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal  on  22  January
2016 and was dismissed in a decision promulgated on  6  April  2016.  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Zahed, in dismissing the  appellant's  appeal,  rejected
his claim as entirely lacking in credibility and found that he would  be  at
no risk on return to Bangladesh. He  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
human rights grounds.


Permission was sought by the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
against Judge Zahed's decision, challenging both  the  asylum  decision  and
the decision on Article 8 of the ECHR.


Permission was granted on 29 April 2016 only with  respect  to  the  grounds
relating to Article 8, on the basis that the judge's reasoning was  arguably
inadequate.


At the hearing before me, Mr Aghayere, when referred by me to  his  skeleton
argument before the First-tier Tribunal and to the  judge's  record  of  his
submissions, agreed that Article 8 had  been  pursued  before  the  Tribunal
only outside the immigration rules. He agreed that the evidence  before  the
First-tier Tribunal consisted only  of  the  appellant's  oral  evidence,  a
small bundle of  documentary  evidence  including  the  appellant's  witness
statement and a handwritten statement from the appellant's friend.


Mr Aghayere submitted that the judge had nevertheless failed to give  proper
consideration to the appellant's  circumstances,  including  his  length  of
residence in the UK and his strong ties  to  the  UK,  when  dismissing  the
appeal on Article 8 grounds and that  the  appellant  had  not  had  a  full
opportunity to have his Article 8 claim properly considered.


Mr Tufan submitted that  there  were  clearly  no  compelling  circumstances
existing outside the immigration rules and that the appeal  could  not  have
succeeded. There was therefore no material error of law.


Consideration and findings.

Whilst Judge Zahed's findings on Article 8 are limited, it  cannot  be  said
that he failed to have regard to the relevant  issues.  He  found  that  the
appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  in
relation to private and family life. There was no need  for  him  to  expand
upon that finding, since it was never claimed by the appellant,  or  by  his
legal representative in his skeleton argument or submissions, that he  could
meet the requirements of the rules. Indeed, it is clear  from  the  evidence
and information before the judge that he could not.

As regards Article 8 outside the immigration rules, it is relevant  to  note
that the judge's record shows that no submissions were made  before  him  in
that  regard,  and  certainly  none  to  the  effect  that  there  were  any
compelling or exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of leave  outside
the rules. The appellant's own  statement  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
made no such suggestion either, referring to his ties  to  the  UK  only  in
relation to his fear of return to Bangladesh. The skeleton  argument  before
the First-tier Tribunal did raise the matter but only in generalised,  vague
terms. Reference was made therein to family, social and cultural  ties,  but
with no details. Mr Aghayere referred to a handwritten  statement  from  the
appellant's friend,  but  that,  I  note,  referred  only  to  his  fear  of
returning to Bangladesh  and  plainly  could  not  be  taken  in  itself  as
evidence of significant ties to the UK.


There was, therefore, no particularised evidence before  the  judge  of  any
meaningful ties the appellant had to  the  UK,  other  than  his  length  of
residence, which was a matter to which he did indeed refer at  [30]  in  his
findings on Article 8. The appellant's  own  evidence  was  that  his  close
family members remained  in  Bangladesh.  Accordingly,  whilst  the  judge's
findings on Article 8 were limited, there was  little  else  that  he  could
say. On the very limited evidence that he had before  him,  and  considering
that  he  had  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  to  fear  persecution   in
Bangladesh, the judge could have reached no other  decision.  The  appellant
had no hope of succeeding in his Article  8  claim  and  certainly  did  not
pursue his appeal with any particular emphasis on that ground.

Accordingly, it seems to me that the judge's findings on Article  8,  albeit
limited, nevertheless addressed all relevant  matters  and  were  adequately
reasoned. However, even if it could be said that there was an error  on  the
part of the judge in not expanding upon  his  findings  and  in  failing  to
provide more detailed reasoning, it is clear that  such  an  error  was  not
material, in light of the limited evidence before him, the manner  in  which
the case was presented to him and the lack of any merit in  the  appellant's
Article 8 claim.

For these reasons I find that the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any errors of law in the judge's decision.

DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order. I  see  no  reason  to
    continue that order and I therefore lift the order.




    Signed                                  Date
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                  7th June 2016
