
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02533/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26th April 2017                    |On 23rd May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     J S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Afghanistan whose date of birth  was
    disputed.  He entered the UK  illegally  on  23rd  September  2015  and
    applied for Asylum.  That application was refused for the reasons given
    in the Respondent's Asylum Decision  dated  26th  February  2016.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Gribble (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham  on  19th September
    2016.  She decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given  in  her
    Decision dated 10th October 2016.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal
    that decision, and on 23rd January 2017  such  permission  was  granted
    limited to Grounds A, B, D and F of the Grounds of Application.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant's case was that he came from a  village  which  had  been
    constantly raided  by  the  Taliban  and  Government  troops.   On  one
    occasion the Appellant had been kicked in the stomach.  Eventually  the
    Appellant had left home in  order  to  avoid  being  recruited  by  the
    Taliban.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection,  and
    Articles 2 and  3  ECHR  grounds  because  although  she  accepted  the
    Appellant's background account, the Judge was not satisfied  that  some
    specific details of the Appellant's account were credible.   The  Judge
    found that the Appellant did not  fear  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason, being his imputed political opinion,  and  that  the  Appellant
    could safely return to his own village in the Province  of  Khost.   In
    the alternative, the Judge further found that it would be safe and  not
    unreasonable for the Appellant to relocate to Kabul.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Draycott argued that the Judge  had  erred
    in law by coming to these conclusions.  Mr  Draycott  referred  to  the
    Grounds of Application upon which leave was granted and argued that the
    Judge had erred  by  failing  to  engage  with  her  finding  that  the
    Appellant had been persecuted in the past.  According to  Article  4(4)
    of the Qualification Directive, as a result  of  past  persecution  the
    burden of proof shifted onto the Respondent to show that  it  was  safe
    for the Appellant to return to his home village.  This is in accordance
    with the decision in Abdulla and Others  v  Bundesrepublik  Deutschland
    [2011] QB 46  CJEU.   This  error  was  material  because  the  country
    information indicated that the risk of further persecution would follow
    the Appellant to Kabul.

 6. Mr Draycott went on to submit the Judge also erred in law by not taking
    into account that the Respondent did  not  dispute  that  there  was  a
    general risk of forced recruitment in the Province of Khost.   Further,
    the Judge had  erred  in  finding  that  the  Appellant  did  not  fear
    persecution for a Convention reason.  It was clear that  the  Appellant
    was a member of a particular social group.

 7. In response, Mr Mills referred to the Rule 24  reply  and  argued  that
    there were no such errors of law.  Although the  Judge  had  found  the
    Appellant's background account to be credible, she had not  come  to  a
    conclusion that the Appellant had suffered  persecution  in  the  past.
    She had not found that the Appellant had been targeted by  the  Taliban
    or Government forces but only that the Appellant had been caught in the
    crossfire when living in a violent area.  However,  Mr  Mills  accepted
    that Khost was not  a  safe  area  to  which  the  Appellant  could  be
    returned.  This was immaterial because the Judge  had  made  a  finding
    that it was safe and not unduly harsh for the Appellant  to  return  to
    Kabul.  The Appellant's expert witness said that  the  Appellant  would
    not be of interest to the Taliban or Government  forces  in  Kabul  and
    although it might be  difficult  for  him  to  live  there,  it  was  a
    relocation alternative.

 8. At the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give.

 9. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  The Judge clearly erred in law in  finding
    that the Appellant did not fear persecution for  a  Convention  reason,
    and it may be the case further erred when considering the risk  to  the
    Appellant on return to Khost for the reasons  argued  by  Mr  Draycott.
    However, these are not material errors because the Judge found that  it
    would be both safe and reasonable  for  the  Appellant  to  return  and
    relocate to Kabul.   The  only  criticism  Mr  Draycott  made  of  this
    decision was to say that the  Judge  had  not  considered  whether  the
    mistreatment the Appellant had received in Khost would  follow  him  to
    Kabul and put him at risk there.  I find no error in this respect.  The
    Judge only accepted the Appellant's  background  account  which  as  Mr
    Mills said amounted to the Appellant not being a target of the  Taliban
    or Government forces, but of being a member of a family  caught  up  in
    the general violence which at the  time  was  taking  place  in  Khost.
    There was no evidence before the Judge that the Appellant would  be  at
    risk in Kabul on account of this situation.   Indeed,  Mr  Foxley,  the
    Appellant's own expert witness, gave evidence to the  contrary  as  the
    Judge recorded at paragraph 35 of her Decision.  The  Judge's  decision
    is in accordance with the Country  Guidance  provided  by  AK  (Article
    15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC).

10. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge.

Notice of Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside that decision.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

12. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue
    for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Dated 22nd May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
