
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/02834/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24th April 2017                       |   On 16th May 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between


                          mr Harpreet Singh Chopra
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Hagan, promulgated on 8th November 2016, following a hearing at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 3rd October 2016.   In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on 12th
    December 1982.  He is  34  years  of  age.   He  appealed  against  the
    decision of the Respondent Secretary of State dated  11th  March  2016,
    refusing his claim for asylum and humanitarian  protection  and  giving
    directions for his removal to Afghanistan.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is a Sikh who  last  lived  in  Kabul,
    where he was married to Kuljit Kaur in  2006,  and  that  they  have  a
    daughter.  The daughter has a disability.  The Appellant ran a shop  in
    Afghanistan.  In June or July 2015 the Appellant was  targeted  by  the
    Mujahedeen in his shop.  Three or four members of Mujahedeen went there
    and demanded that he pay money and also convert to Islam.  He paid  the
    money but refused to convert.  The Appellant was then  visited  at  his
    shop on ten occasions and some three or four times at  his  home.   The
    men gave the Appellant ten days to reconsider his  refusal  to  convert
    and threatened to take his wife  and  daughter  if  he  did  not.   The
    Appellant's father arranged an agent, to whom he  gave  his  shop,  and
    arranged for the Appellant's departure from Afghanistan.  The Appellant
    left Afghanistan on 6th September 2015, went to Iran,  and  from  there
    came to the United  Kingdom  through  various  unknown  countries  (see
    paragraphs 4 to 5 of the determination).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed (at paragraph 7) how  it  was  that  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State  had  fundamentally  accepted  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's  claim.   This  gave  rise  to  some  difficulty  of   risk
    assessment that was eventually arrived at.  The judge made  this  clear
    when he stated that,

         "Even more difficult to understand is that the  Respondent,  having
         accepted the factual matters relied upon, and having also  accepted
         that the Appellant had a genuine  and  subjective  fear,  commented
         that his credibility was damaged by virtue of the matters  set  out
         in Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants)
         Act 2004."  (Paragraph 7).

 5. Against this background, the judge observed that, although  the  claims
    made by the Appellant are not inherently implausible, this did not mean
    that these things actually did happen, because  fabricated  claims  are
    usually shrouded in truth, and that it fell to  the  Tribunal  to  make
    findings with respect to what was alleged (see paragraph 28).  On  that
    basis, the judge went on to say that "there  are  significant  concerns
    with the evidence given by the Appellant".  This included "the issue of
    his brothers" and whether there  was  one  brother  or  more  than  one
    brother.  (Paragraph 30).  The judge observed that  there  were  "other
    peculiarities in the evidence" such as whether the Appellant lived with
    his parents in Afghanistan or not (paragraph 31).  There was  also  the
    issue of the "extent of the rasp and experience  by  the  Appellant  in
    Afghanistan" because, "it was not clear to me why, if the Appellant was
    being subjected to threats and ill-treatment because of  his  religion,
    this did not extend to the rest of his family" (paragraph 32).

 6. After giving due consideration to the country guidance case of  TG  and
    Others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595,  the
    judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the  judge's  determination  fell
    into error.  It first concluded that the Appellant's  account  was  not
    credible when, in fact, the refusal  letter  had  stated  that  it  was
    credible (see paragraphs 27 to 30).  Second, it failed to consider  and
    apply the relevant country guidance decision in TG and  Others  (Afghan
    Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015]  UKUT  00595.   Third,  and  by
    implication, it failed to apply the  conclusions  arrived  at  in  that
    country guidance case to the facts of the Appellant's case.

 8. On 29th November 2016, permission to appeal was given on the  following
    basis.   First,  the  judge  found  that  the  Respondent's  concession
    regarding the Appellant's claimed adverse encounter with the Mujahedeen
    was unclear (at paragraph 7), whereas from reading the  refusal  letter
    as a whole (and in particular paragraphs 27 to 30) it is clear that the
    Respondent conceded that this element of the  Appellant's  account  was
    accepted (see also paragraph 36).  Indeed, at the hearing itself it was
    conceded by the  Respondent  through  the  Presenting  Officer  (as  is
    referred to at paragraph 17 of the determination).  Yet, the judge then
    appears to reject the appeal on the basis  that  the  Appellant  lacked
    credibility, and that the entirety of his  evidence  was  suspect  when
    taken as a whole (see  paragraphs  29  to  33).   This  amounted  to  a
    "blanket" rejection of the Appellant's claim which was not sustainable.



 9. On 10th February 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent
    to the effect that the Appellant had relied  on  new  evidence  at  the
    hearing and was  cross-examined  on  that  basis  and  this  the  judge
    rejected, such that it  was  entirely  open  to  him  to  come  to  the
    conclusions as to the Appellant's credibility as he did.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 24th April 2017,  Mr  Samra,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, made the following  submissions.   First,  the
    crux of the Appellant's claim is set out at paragraph 27 of the refusal
    letter, when it is noted how the Appellant  claimed  to  have  problems
    with the Mujahedeen in 2015.  This  recital  ends  with  the  statement
    that, "you continued to refuse their requests and on one occasion  were
    told that you had ten days to reconsider"  (paragraph  27).   Mr  Samra
    submitted that whereas the claim as a whole was accepted, namely,  that
    the Appellant was subject to ill-treatment  and  persecution  from  the
    Mujahedeen in 2015, what was not accepted was that  the  Appellant  was
    given ten days to reconsider his position, and this was clear from what
    is said by way of a follow up at paragraph 28.  Yet, the judge does not
    deal with this question at all and makes no  findings  in  relation  to
    whether the  Appellant  was  given  ten  days  to  reconsider  or  not.
    Instead, the judge goes on to directly challenge exactly that which has
    been accepted by the Respondent in her refusal letter, namely, that the
    Appellant was subject to problems with the Mujahedeen in 2015.

11. Second, at the hearing before Judge  O'Hagan,  the  Presenting  Officer
    began by saying that he accepted what was said in  the  refusal  letter
    (see  paragraph  17).   The  judge  records  that,  "in   his   closing
    submissions," the Presenting  Officer  had   'sought  to  rely  on  the
    refusal letter dated 11th March 2016" (paragraph 17).  If that was  the
    case, then it was implicitly  accepted  that  the  Appellant  did  have
    problems with Mujahedeen in 2015 as conceded in the refusal letter.

12. Third, nowhere in the refusal letter does the judge then go on to  make
    a finding as to whether the Appellant was given ten days to reconsider.
     Yet, this was the only basis upon which the rest of the refusal letter
    could be impugned.  Otherwise all else was accepted.

13. Fourth, if the core of the Appellant's claim was already accepted  then
    the only issue is whether the ten days reconsideration  period  changes
    anything, and if it does not, then the appeal should have been allowed.



14. Fifth, instead, however, without making a finding on the issue  of  the
    ten day reconsideration period, the judge then goes on to make  adverse
    findings of fact against the Appellant, basing such findings on matters
    that are wholly extraneous to the essential claim before the  Tribunal.
    This includes matters such as whether the Appellant had one brother  or
    two brothers or, why it was that the Appellant  himself  was  harassed,
    but no other member of his family was.

15. Finally, all of this leads to  it  being  easily  overlooked  that  the
    essential issue before the Tribunal was whether the Appellant was being
    required to convert to Islam by the Mujahedeen, because if that was the
    case, and it was accepted as being the case in the refusal letter, then
    the Appellant was  a  person  who  came  squarely  within  the  country
    guidance case of TG  and  Others,  and  his  appeal  should  have  been
    allowed.

16. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the Respondent Secretary of State
    is entitled  to  depart  from  the  contents  of  the  refusal  letter,
    otherwise there would be no point in cross-examining the witnesses, and
    it is in response to the answers given in cross-examination,  that  the
    judge had decided in the way  that  he  had.   Second,  the  Presenting
    Officer at paragraph 17 had accepted that, whereas he relied  upon  the
    refusal letter, certain core aspects of the claim  were  not  accepted.
    Third, the only objection that the Appellant can have to such a way  of
    proceeding at a hearing is if there is "procedural unfairness"  to  the
    Appellant, but having been given the opportunity to test the  evidence,
    and to examine the witnesses-in-chief, it cannot be said that there was
    any procedural unfairness to the Appellant.   Finally,  the  judge  had
    plainly directed himself appropriately when he had made it  clear  that
    the Appellant's claim was not "inherently implausible" but that did not
    mean to say that everything had to be accepted.

17. In reply, Mr Samra submitted  that,  once  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's claim was credible, in that he had  been  harassed  by  the
    Mujahedeen, then the appeal had  to  be  allowed  because  the  country
    guidance case of TG and Others made it clear that, "although it appears
    there is a willingness at governmental level to provide protection,  it
    is not established on the evidence that at a local level the police are
    willing, even if able, to provide the  necessary  level  of  protection
    ..." (see sub-paragraph (iv)).  If the Appellant, who came from  Kabul,
    could not return back to  the  capital  city,  then  what  the  country
    guidance case made clear was that he could not find internal relocation
    in a city like Jalalabad either, because, whatever the  willingness  of
    the Authorities to help, at a local level it had not  been  established
    that the police are able to provide such protection.

Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

19. First,  this  is  a  case  where  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    considered the Appellant's claim under the heading  "your  issues  with
    the Mujahedeen"  (see  paragraph  27).   The  Respondent  accepted  the
    Appellant had problems with the Mujahedeen in 2015.  She did not accept
    that the Appellant was  given  ten  days  to  reconsider  his  position
    (paragraph 28).  Thereafter,  consideration  was  given  to  the  human
    rights situation in Afghanistan.  It was then concluded  that,  "it  is
    considered  that  your  account  is  consistent  with  the   background
    information about societal discrimination.  Therefore, this element  of
    your claim is accepted to the lower standard of proof" (paragraph  30).
    If  this  was  not  clear,  what  followed  thereafter  left  no  doubt
    whatsoever in the Secretary of State's mind that the Appellant, on  the
    lower standard of proof applicable to asylum cases,  succeeded  in  his
    claim.

20. At paragraph 36 of the determination, it is stated that  three  aspects
    of the Appellant's claim are  accepted.   First,  his  nationality  and
    identity.  Second, the fact that he is a  Sikh.   Third,  "your  issues
    with the Mujahedeen".  (Paragraph 36).  The Respondent then goes on  to
    say that,

         "It is accepted that you have demonstrated a genuine and subjective
         fear on return to Kabul.  However, for the reasons given  below  it
         is  considered  that  your  genuine  and  subjective  fear  is  not
         objectively well-founded because  there  is  sufficient  protection
         provided by the Authorities in Afghanistan and there is an area  of
         Afghanistan to which you could reasonably relocate ..."  (paragraph
         37).

21. Put thus, the issue as to whether the Appellant was given ten  days  to
    reconsider his position, pales into insignificance.  Whether or not  it
    was true,  the  Respondent  had  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    subjective fear of, a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  because  his
    story about being required to convert to Islam by  the  Mujahedeen  was
    accepted.

22. The judge, however, while setting out the  issue  about  the  Appellant
    being given ten days to reconsider (see paragraph 4 and  see  paragraph
    7) does not then make any findings in relation to this issue, which  he
    had to if he was to reject the Appellant's claim in  relation  to  what
    had already been accepted by the Respondent Secretary of State.

23. Second, and no less importantly, in  relation  to  those  matters  with
    respect to which the judge does find the Appellant's credibility to  be
    impugned, it is highly arguable that these matters were  peripheral  to
    say the least, if not entirely irrelevant.  For example, whether or not
    the Appellant had one or two brothers was irrelevant to the question of
    whether the Mujahedeen had come to his  shop  no  less  than  some  ten
    times, and hence to his house no less than some  four  or  five  times,
    requiring him to  convert  to  Islam.   This  is  a  matter  which  the
    Respondent had accepted.  In the same way, "the nature  and  extent  of
    the experience by the Appellant" (at paragraph 32) is irrelevant, if it
    is to be said that, "it was not clear to me why, if the  Appellant  was
    being subjected to threats and ill-treatment because of  his  religion,
    this did not extend to the rest of his family".  This  is  because  the
    Appellant, as a male member of the family, was being approached in  his
    shop.  He was then being approached  at  home.   As  the  head  of  the
    family, the Mujahedeen may well have taken the view (although this  can
    only be speculated upon), that if they were to convert the head of  the
    household, then the others in the family would follow  suit.   Whatever
    the reason, it is irrelevant to the question of  the  Appellant  having
    been visited at his shop, being required to  convert,  and  then  being
    given ten days to reconsider his position.

24. Finally, there is the  question  of  the  application  of  the  country
    guidance case of TG and Others.   The  judge  does  cite  this  country
    guidance case (at paragraph 34) but does  not  then  apply  it  in  its
    essence to the facts of the Appellant's case.  That case makes it clear
    that,

         "Whereas members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan
         do not face a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment,  the
         consideration of whether an individual member of the Sikh and Hindu
         communities  is  at  risk  real  of  persecution  upon  return   to
         Afghanistan is fact sensitive".

25. Such an individual may face difficulties, including threats, extortion,
    and seizure of land.  On the facts of this case, the Appellant  already
    faced threats, and this was accepted by the Respondent in  the  refusal
    letter.   The  question  then  is  whether  the  Appellant   may   seek
    relocation.  He cannot return to Kabul because  the  capital  city,  to
    which most returnees  are  relocated,  is  one  where  he  has  already
    suffered ill-treatment.  The question then is  whether  he  may  go  to
    another part of Afghanistan.

26. The case of TG makes it  clear  that  it  is  not  established  on  the
    evidence that at a local level the police are willing, even if able, to
    provide the necessary level of protection.  There is no  evidence  that
    the Appellant has relatives in any  other  part  of  the  country.   In
    addition, the case of TG makes clear that those without  access  to  an
    independent income are unlikely  to  be  able  to  reasonably  relocate
    because of depleted support mechanisms.

27. Given that the Appellant only has to satisfy the standard of  proof  at
    the lower level, such as to show that there is a reasonable  likelihood
    of ill-treatment, I find that he has met that standard and the  appeal
    must be allowed.





Notice of Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

29. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th May 2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of the entire  amount  that  has  been  paid  or  is
payable.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th May 2017




