
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02056/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th June 2017                         |On 26th June 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                    a k j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford of Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge Graham of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 22nd July 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male  Afghan  citizen  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom illegally on 27th April 2015 and claimed asylum.  He  gave  his
    date of birth as 25th September 2002, but following an  age  assessment
    carried out by Staffordshire County Council on 28th April 2015, he  was
    assessed as having been born on 6th June 2001.

 3. The Appellant's asylum and human rights claim was  made  on  the  basis
    that he lived with his family in Baghlan Province in  Afghanistan,  and
    he was approached at the mosque by the Taliban, and he and  other  boys
    were spoken to about jihad, and shown how to operate guns and  detonate
    a suicide vest.

 4. The Appellant's father complained, and was threatened with death.   The
    family left their village, but the Appellant's father was taken away by
    the Taliban.

 5. The Appellant was helped to leave Afghanistan,  and  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom with the assistance of agents.  The  Appellant  has  not
    been in contact with his family in Afghanistan  since  his  arrival  in
    this country.  He feared being returned to Afghanistan because he would
    be taken or recruited by the Taliban, and could be forced to  become  a
    suicide bomber.

 6. On 12th October 2015 the Respondent decided that the Appellant was  not
    entitled to a grant of asylum or humanitarian protection, and  that  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom would not breach any  of  his  human
    rights protected by the 1950 European Convention on Human  Rights  (the
    1950 Convention).

 7. The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by  the  FtT  on  10th
    June 2016.  The FtT heard evidence from the  Appellant  and  found  his
    account to be credible.  The FtT accepted therefore that the  Appellant
    would be at risk if returned to his home area in Baghlan Province which
    is an area where there is a high degree of Taliban  activity.   However
    the FtT noted that the Appellant had been granted  discretionary  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom  as  an  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
    child, and he had been given such leave until 12th April 2018.  The FtT
    found that the Appellant would not be returned to Afghanistan until  he
    became an adult and his leave had expired.  The FtT  assessed  risk  on
    return, on the basis that the Appellant would be  an  adult  and  found
    that he had a reasonable option of internal relocation to another  area
    within Afghanistan, such as Kabul.  He would be  returned  as  a  young
    healthy adult, and would not be  at  risk  in  Kabul,  where  he  would
    receive a sufficiency of protection.  The appeal was dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal.  There was no challenge
    to the credibility findings made by the FtT, which were  favourable  to
    the Appellant's case, but the challenge related to the FtT finding that
    the Appellant had a reasonable internal relocation.  It  was  contended
    that the FtT was wrong in law  in  assessing  the  internal  relocation
    option on the basis that the Appellant would not be returned  until  he
    was 18 years of age.  It was submitted that the risk should  have  been
    considered as at the date of hearing, when the Appellant was  a  minor.
    The FtT should have considered whether there was a reasonable  internal
    relocation option to Kabul on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  was  an
    unaccompanied child, who would have no family support in Kabul.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused, but subsequently granted by
    Vice President Ockelton of the Upper Tribunal.

10. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, in which it was accepted that the FtT had materially erred in law
    by failing to determine risk on return at the date of hearing.

11. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. The Appellant did not attend but was  represented  by  Mr  Bedford  who
    explained that his absence was caused by  undertaking  examinations  at
    school.  I found that it was appropriate to proceed in the  Appellant's
    absence because I was asked to do so and Mr Mills conceded that the FtT
    decision should be set aside, and  the  Appellant's  appeal  should  be
    allowed.

13. Mr Mills clarified that the Respondent accepted that the FtT had  erred
    in law by not considering risk  on  return  at  the  date  of  hearing.
    Credibility findings made by the FtT had not been  challenged,  and  on
    the basis of those findings Mr Mills conceded,  with  reference  to  AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC)  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk if returned to his home area, and there  was
    no reasonable option of internal relocation to Kabul, where he would be
    returned as a child without family support.

14. In view of the concession made on behalf of the Respondent, I  did  not
    need to hear further from Mr Bedford.  I announced at the hearing  that
    the decision of the FtT was set aside, and the Appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed, and written reasons for my conclusion would be issued.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. I set aside the decision  of  the  FtT  because,  as  conceded  by  the
    Respondent, the FtT should have considered risk on return at  the  date
    of hearing, and not assessed what the risk would be in the future, when
    the Appellant had reached 18 years of age.  As there was  no  challenge
    to the credibility findings, those findings were preserved.

16. I re-make the decision by  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  the
    following reasons.

17. The burden of proof is on the Appellant, and the standard of proof is a
    balance of probabilities.  I summarise below the FtT findings.

18. The FtT found the Appellant to be a minor.  This was  accepted  by  the
    Respondent.  It was accepted that the Respondent  had  been  unable  to
    trace the Appellant's family in Afghanistan, and the Appellant had  not
    had contact with his family since arriving in the United Kingdom.

19. The FtT found the Appellant to have been born and  resided  in  Baghlan
    Province.  The  FtT  did  not  make  any  adverse  inference  from  the
    Appellant's failure to claim asylum  while  travelling  to  the  United
    Kingdom, because of his age, and the fact that he was under the control
    of agents.

20. The FtT was satisfied that the Appellant had given a consistent account
    of his problems in  Afghanistan.   Objective  evidence  indicated  that
    there was a high degree of Taliban activity in Baghlan  Province.   The
    FtT was satisfied that the Appellant was recruited by the Taliban as  a
    potential suicide bomber.

21. The FtT found that the Appellant faced a  risk  upon  return  from  the
    Taliban if he returned to his home area.

22. The above findings having been preserved, my task was to assess whether
    the Appellant had a reasonable option of internal relocation to another
    area  within  Afghanistan.   Kabul  City  was  the  suggested  internal
    relocation option.

23. I have to assess whether the Appellant as a 16  year  old  child  could
    safely and reasonably return to Kabul City without family support.   It
    was conceded on behalf of the Respondent that he could not.   Mr  Mills
    referred to AA  (Afghanistan)  CG  and  I  set  out  below  the  second
    paragraph of the head note to that decision;

         (2)  However, the background evidence demonstrates that  unattached
             children  returned  to  Afghanistan,  depending   upon   their
             individual circumstances and the location to  which  they  are
             returned may be exposed to risk of serious  harm,  inter  alia
             from  indiscriminate  violence,  forced  recruitment,   sexual
             violence, trafficking and a lack of adequate arrangements  for
             child protection.  Such risks  will  have  to  be  taken  into
             account when addressing the question of whether a return is in
             the child's  best  interests,  a  primary  consideration  when
             determining a claim to humanitarian protection.

24. There is  considerable  background  and  objective  evidence  contained
    within the Appellant's bundles, including two reports prepared by  Lisa
    Schuster, but in view of the Respondent's concession, I find it is  not
    necessary to set out an analysis of that background evidence.

25. The appeal is allowed  because  it  was  found  by  the  FtT  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk if returned to his home area,  that  finding
    was not challenged by the Respondent, and the Respondent concedes  that
    there is no reasonable internal relocation option.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I allow the appeal on asylum grounds, and with reference to Articles  2  and
3 of the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.  This direction is made because  the  Appellant  is  a
minor, who has claimed international protection.


Signed                              Date: 19th June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 19th June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

