
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
PA/02242/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                        |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On September 27, 2017                 |       On October 4, 2017            |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                   Mr Y A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Howard (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I make an anonymity direction in this matter pursuant to Rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt.

 3. On August 17, 2016 the appellant lodged an application for  asylum  but
    following an interview the respondent  refused  his  application  under
    paragraph 336 HC 395 on February 15, 2017.

 4. The appellant  appealed  that  decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on March 1, 2017  and  the
    matter was  listed  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Burns
    (hereinafter called the Judge) on  June  1,  2017  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on June 6, 2017 his appeal was dismissed.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision on June 19, 2017 and permission to
    appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Shaerf on July 5, 2017.

 6. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard submissions  on
    the error or law from both representatives.  Having  heard  their  oral
    submissions, I reserved my decision.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Howard adopted the  grounds  of  appeal  that  had  previously  been
    submitted and submitted the grounds  disclosed  an  error  in  law.  He
    argued:

      a) The Judge concluded the appellant was not "high profile" finding at
         best he wrote a weekly column. Mr Howard submitted the Judge should
         have explained why this  employment  would  not  place  him  at  an
         enhanced risk of persecution.

      b) The background material identified that  journalists  faced  arrest
         and prosecution. The Judge failed to consider this evidence.

      c) The Judge failed to have regard to the risk  of  persecution  as  a
         failed asylum seeker.

      d) The Judge failed to engage with article 8 and paragraph  276ADE  HC
         395 and address why the appellant would not face  very  significant
         obstacles  of  being  re-integrated   having   written   anti-Daesh
         articles.

      e) The Judge failed to engage with the expert's finding on the  police
         investigation letter.

 8. Mr Bates adopted the Rule 24 response dated July 21, 2017 and submitted
    there was no error in law. He responded to the grounds as follows:

      a) The Judge found the appellant was not a famous journalist and  gave
         reasons for his finding. The appellant's first ground of appeal was
         based on the argument that he  would  be  persecuted  for  being  a
         journalist but there was no country evidence supporting this claim.
         There was no evidence that he personally  was  known  or  had  been
         missed so the Judge was entitled to make the  finding  he  was  not
         high profile.

      b) Whilst there was evidence that Daesh targeted journalists there was
         nothing in the evidence that showed this  happened  in  Egypt.  The
         authorities may target some journalists but this was  not  what  he
         feared.

      c) The expert witness did  not  see  the  original  document  and  his
         opinion only went to support a submission that  documents  in  this
         format could be genuine. As he had not seen the  original  document
         the Judge as entitled to make the findings he did.

      d) The authorities in Egypt did not support Daesh and it was  open  to
         the Judge to find support and protection would be available.

    ERROR OF LAW

 9. It was accepted by the Judge that the appellant worked as a  journalist
    but the Judge concluded he was not  as  famous  as  he  made  out.  The
    Judge's approach to this issue is found between [46] and  [49]  of  his
    decision. Based on the evidence adduced the Judge concluded he was  not
    a high-profile journalist because  little  information  about  him  was
    adduced and his absence had never been reported in the press. The Judge
    concluded that if he had been well-known then  there  would  have  been
    reports of his absence and the fact there were none led  the  Judge  to
    find he did not have a high profile as  a  journalist.  The  Judge  was
    entitled on the evidence to make the finding he did on this point.

10. The appellant's claim had been that  as  a  journalist,  regardless  of
    whether he was high profile or not, he would be targeted.  He  produced
    some documents relating to court proceedings and he relied on an expert
    report to support his case. The Judge considered the evidence from  the
    expert but concluded the report  did  not  assist  the  appellant.  The
    expert had not identified other cases like the appellant's.  Mr  Howard
    submitted the Judge erred by not considering risks as a journalist  and
    in his grounds of appeal he referred to an Amnesty International Report
    dated 22.2.2017 and a report provided  by  the  UK  Home  Office  dated
    26.5.2017. However, the Judge also had before him the  appellant's  own
    expert  evidence  which  suggested  that  the  biggest   challenge   to
    journalists was the curbs on press freedom. The expert did not  support
    his claim that Daesh targeted journalists in Egypt which was of  course
    his case. The articles highlighted in the grounds  of  appeal  did  not
    address the Judge's conclusions in [54]  of  the  decision.  The  Judge
    found there was no evidence that journalists were targeted  as  alleged
    and it is not the Judge's job to trawl the internet  or  other  sources
    for evidence to support the appellant's case. To do so would in  itself
    be an error in law.

11. When considering his role as a journalist the  Judge  accepted  he  had
    written articles that were anti-Daesh but the country evidence did  not
    support his claim he was at risk in Egypt.

12. The appellant and Mr Howard relied on the copy Egyptian court papers as
    evidence he was wanted but the document considered by  the  expert  was
    only a  copy.  The  expert  was  entitled  to  find  the  document  was
    consistent with the format seen of such documents but this did not mean
    the document he looked at could be relied on. The Judge considered  the
    report alongside other evidence and concluded the documents  could  not
    be relied on and gave reasons for this in his decision.

13. In giving permission all grounds were  found  to  be  arguable  and  in
    particular the grounds criticised the Judge  for  not  carrying  out  a
    detailed analysis. I am satisfied he did carry out an analysis  against
    the background of the  claim  advanced  by  the  appellant.  The  Judge
    rejected the claim presented and in particular he  rejected  his  claim
    that the appellant was at risk for writing anti-Daesh articles.

14. The Judge's decision needs to be considered as a whole and none of  the
    grounds, on the risk of persecution, identified an error in law.

15. The remaining ground raised under article 8 ECHR and  paragraph  276ADE
    HC 395 were based in the facts of his asylum claim. It is effectively a
    further argument on the same grounds albeit to  a  higher  test  namely
    were there "very significant obstacles" to re-integration into Egyptian
    life in the case of paragraph 276ADE HC 395. The findings above equally
    apply here and there was no error in law.

16. There is nothing in the Judge's article 8 ECHR assessment that suggests
    an error in law.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision.

Signed                              Date     03.10.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made as I have dismissed the appeal.



Signed                              Date     2.10.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
