
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/02219/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                      |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 10 October 2017                    |           On 7 December 2017         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Gayle of Elder Rahimi Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a determination  to  which  both  members  of  the  Panel  have
    contributed.

 2. We make an anonymity order under rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the respondent who claims asylum.  This  order
    prohibits the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead to
    members of the public identifying the respondent (MH).   A  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
     This order shall remain  in  force  unless  revoked  or  varied  by  a
    Tribunal or court.



Introduction

 3. The claimant (as we shall hereafter  refer  to  the  respondent)  is  a
    national of Iran.  He has given various dates of birth in 1988 and 1989
    and he has also used different identities in the UK.

 4. The claimant entered the United Kingdom in March  2008.   In  September
    2008, he claimed asylum.  The basis of that claim was that  he  was  at
    risk on return to Iran as a result of his (and his family's)  political
    involvement, including his paternal uncle's execution in  1984  due  to
    him being a member of the opposition, Mujahedin.

 5. On 22 October 2008, the Secretary of State refused the claimant's claim
    for asylum.  His appeal against that decision was  dismissed.   In  his
    decision dated 21 January 2009, Judge  J  F  W  Phillips  rejected  the
    claimant's account on the basis that he did not  believe  the  claimant
    was telling the truth "about any aspect of his  claim  other  than  his
    nationality".

 6. The claimant subsequently lodged  further  sets  of  submissions,  most
    recently on 13 September 2016.   In  those  submissions,  the  claimant
    relied upon a risk on return to Iran on the basis that he had converted
    to Christianity since his arrival in the UK.  On 15 February 2017,  the
    Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claimant's   claims   for   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the claimant claimed to have  converted
    to Christianity since his arrival in the  UK  and  to  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return to Iran as an apostate.  Judge I D Boyes set  out
    the claimant's claim at paras 13-19 and 50 as follows:

         "13. The appellant's case was helpfully  set  out  in  his  witness
         statements at pages 15 and 16 of the Respondent's bundle and  pages
         1-6  of  the  appellant's  bundle.   The  appellant  developed  and
         expanded upon his evidence orally.  In addition, I had sight  of  a
         number of documents from members of the Church  including  Reverend
         [O] and [VC]  who  gave  live  evidence.   I  will  no  repeat  the
         appellant's evidence in full here.

         14. In summary the appellant explained that he was a  follower  and
         adherent of Islam.  He regularly prayed and  his  religion  was  an
         important aspect in and of his life.  He had arrived in the UK some
         years before and was returned to  France  to  continue  his  asylum
         claim however came back to England and claimed asylum in the UK.

         15. He accepted that the Judge on the previous occasion  had  found
         against him but relied upon the fact that this was  a  fresh  claim
         based entirely on matters which had arisen since that last  appeal.
         He did not accept the findings in terms of his credibility.

         16.  The appellant explained that it was whilst watching the events
         of the 'Charlie Hebdo' attack that he began to question  his  faith
         in Islam.  He spoke to persons at  a  funeral  about  the  attacks,
         Islam and Christianity (sic).   He  spent  the  evening  discussing
         religion with his friends.  The friends he refers to  are  [S]  and
         [M], both Iranian Christian converts.

         17. The appellant stopped attending the Mosque and started  reading
         the Bible given to him, a Persian language version, by  [M].   Soon
         after he  attended  Church  and  became  involved  in  service  and
         worship.  He was baptised on 29th May 2016.

         18. In furtherance of his faith and seeking to  display  faith  the
         appellant had used his Facebook profile to post  images  synonymous
         with a belief in  Jesus  Christ.   He  had  received  messages  and
         produced one message/chat between a person he stated to be a friend
         who had told him his behaviour was heretic and  that  he  would  be
         punished for it upon return to Iran.

         19. The appellant further relied upon an email said to be from  his
         Sister which showed that the village knew  of  his  conversion  and
         that his Mother had faced some difficulties as a result.

         ....

         50. The appellant states that his Facebook account is open and that
         it contains  a  number  of  postings  which  are  indicative  of  a
         conversion to and a belief in Christianity.  It is argued that  the
         Iranian authorities would either be aware of the  postings  on  two
         grounds; one, that there is general monitoring of activity  in  the
         UK by the Iranian authorities and secondly,  it  has  come  to  the
         attention of a former friend of the appellant who has indicated  in
         trenchant terms that there will be retribution for his conversion."

 8. Judge Boyes accepted that the claimant had attended a Christian  Church
    in the UK and had been baptised.  In robust terms, however, Judge Boyes
    rejected the claimant's claim to be a genuine convert to  Christianity.
    He found that the claimant had attended Church and undergone baptism as
    a rouse to found  his  asylum  claim.   As  a  consequence,  the  judge
    rejected the claimant's claim to be at risk on return to Iran  on  that
    basis.

 9. Further, although the judge  accepted  that  the  claimant  had  placed
    material on his Facebook page indicative of  a  conversion  to,  and  a
    belief in, Christianity, the judge found that not to be genuine and, in
    the absence of evidence that it was open to  the  public,  he  was  not
    satisfied that the Iranian authorities would  have  any  knowledge  and
    therefore interest in the claimant  on  the  basis  of  his  sur  place
    activities in  the  UK.   Judge  Boyes  also  rejected  the  claimant's
    evidence that, based upon an e-mail  from  his  sister,  it  was  known
    locally in Iran that he was a Christian (see para  28).   At  para  53,
    Judge Boyes found that:

         "... there is no reason for the Iranian  authorities  to  have  any
         interest in the appellant."

10. The judge, however, allowed the claimant's appeal on  a  further  basis
    put forward by the  claimant.   The  judge  accepted,  relying  on  the
    Supreme Court's decision in HJ (Iran) and another v  SSHD  [2010]  UKSC
    31; [2010] Imm AR 729 that the claimant could be presumed to  tell  the
    truth when questioned by the Iranian authorities on  return  at  Tehran
    Airport.  That would, the judge found, include telling "the truth about
    the baptism, telling the truth about attendance at Church, telling  the
    truth about helping his friend [H]" (a failed asylum  seeker)  to  find
    his own faith.   As  a  result,  the  judge  found  that  there  was  a
    reasonable likelihood that the claimant would  be  persecuted  "not  on
    account of his faith,  but  on  a  perception  of  his  conversion  and
    perception of his faith."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had  misapplied  the  case  of  HJ
    (Iran) namely:

         "The judge unfortunately viewed [the  encounter  with  the  Iranian
         authorities on return] from an entirely skewed standpoint -  namely
         that the A would tell the Iranian  authorities  that  he  had  been
         baptised without also taking into account that  this  was  a  false
         conversion and that the A has no genuine interest  in  Christianity
         at all".

12. On 28 April 2017, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Pedro)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

13. On 28 June 2017, the claimant served  a  rule  24  response.   In  that
    response, the claimant contended that the judge was correct to conclude
    that if the claimant told the truth  when  questioned  by  the  Iranian
    authorities he would be  in  danger  of  persecution  as  an  apostate.
    Reference was also made to the Court of Appeal's decision in  Danian  v
    SSHD [2000] Imm AR 96 and a passage in  the  judgment  that  recognises
    that an asylum claim based upon sur place activities carried out in bad
    faith can succeed under the Refugee  Convention  if  that  nevertheless
    creates a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason.

14. The judge's adverse credibility finding leading him  to  conclude  that
    claimant is not a genuine Christian convert has not been challenged  by
    the claimant either by seeking permission to appeal or in the  rule  24
    response.  Neither has there been any challenge to the judge's  finding
    that the claimant will not be at risk on return as a result of his  sur
    place activities.  Those findings, therefore, stand.

15. The sole issue raised in this appeal is whether the judge was  entitled
    to find that the claimant was a refugee  based  upon  him  telling  the
    Iranian authorities on return about his involvement with the  Christian
    Church in the UK.

16. The appeal was initially listed, and a hearing took place,  on  4  July
    2017 before UTJ Grubb.  Subsequent to that hearing, on  7  August  2017
    the Upper Tribunal issued directions that the appeal  would  be  listed
    for further oral argument on the  point  of  principle  raised  in  the
    grounds and Rule 24 notice and in order  to  hear  submissions  on  the
    country background material.  It was proposed that the  Upper  Tribunal
    should consist of a panel consisting of UTJ Grubb and another judge  of
    the Upper Tribunal and the parties were invited to indicate if they had
    any objection to the  constitution  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  being  as
    proposed at a resumed hearing.  In the result, neither party raised any
    objection.

17. The appeal was consequently  relisted  on  10  October  2017  with  its
    present constitution.  At the hearing, it was agreed that  the  hearing
    should proceed as an entirely new hearing rather than a continuation of
    the earlier hearing.  As a result, both representatives (Mr Richards on
    behalf of the Secretary  of  State  and  Mr  Gayle  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant) addressed us on all the relevant points  they  wished  to  in
    order for us to dispose of the appeal.



Discussion

    1. The Context of the Claim

18. We begin with the  judge's  reasoning,  which  led  him  to  allow  the
    claimant's appeal, set out at paras 56 - 58  of  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "56. I must therefore presume that  the  appellant  will  tell  the
             truth and if and when questioned by the  Iranian  authorities.
             This includes telling the truth about the Baptism, telling the
             truth about his attendance at Church, telling the truth  about
             helping his friend Hassan.  These factors and  matters  would,
             in my judgment, place the appellant in a position that it is a
             reasonable  likelihood  he  would  be   persecuted   for   the
             perception that would be present that he is an  apostate.   To
             this end I apply FS and others (Iran-Christian Converts)  Iran
             CG [2004] UKIAT 00303.

         57.  I reach this conclusion based  not  on  the  evidence  of  the
             appellant but on the evidence of Reverend Ollive.   It  maters
             not  in  my  judgment  that  the   appellant's   motives   are
             scurrilous, it is in  fact  that  he  has  been  Baptised  and
             according to the Supreme court one must presume the  appellant
             would tell the truth about such.

         58.  I apply HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD)  [2010]  UKSC  and
             find that there is a reasonable likelihood that the  appellant
             will be persecuted, not on account of his faith,  but  on  the
             perception of his conversion and the perception of his faith."

19. The core of the Judge's reasoning was that the claimant would  come  to
    the attention of the Iranian authorities on  return  because  he  would
    tell them about his activities with the Christian  Church  in  the  UK.
    Once that was discovered, despite his conversion being disingenuous, he
    would nevertheless be treated as if he were a convert and  at  risk  on
    the basis of imputed religious belief.

20. It is, of course, trite law that a  refugee  claim  may  succeed  based
    wholly upon sur place  activities  (see,  for  example  Art  5  of  the
    Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC)).

21. Equally, a claim under the Refugee  Convention  is  not  debarred  from
    success simply  on  the  basis  that  an  individual  has  created  the
    circumstances which would put him at  risk  disingenuously  or  in  bad
    faith (see Danian and Art 4.3(d) of  the  Qualification  Directive  and
    para 339J(iv) of the Immigration Rules (HC 395) as amended).

22. In the latter case, a claim may succeed if,  despite  the  individual's
    disingenuous or bad faith, nevertheless he is treated, in fact,  as  if
    he actually held the political opinion, was of the  relevant  religious
    faith etc. or his potential persecutors are disinterested  whether  his
    behaviour was "opportunistic".  In such circumstances,  the  individual
    will have imputed to him the relevant Convention reason and,  if  there
    would be a real risk of persecution as a result, then a claim under the
    Refugee Convention will succeed (see Sepet and another  v  SSHD  [2003]
    UKHL 15; [2003] Imm AR 428).

23. In effect, that is the claimant's case in this appeal  given  that  his
    conversion  to  Christianity  was  rejected.   The  claimant  contends,
    putting it in a neutral way, that if the Iranian  authorities  discover
    his opportunistic activities from his own revelations they  will  still
    attribute or impute to him that he is an apostate and there will  be  a
    real risk of persecution as a consequence.  The fact that the  claimant
    has acted disingenuously by undertaking activities in the UK to bolster
    his claim does not, in principle, take him outside  the  protection  of
    the Refugee Convention.  The fact that he is not, in fact, a  Christian
    and therefore actually an apostate does not matter provided the Iranian
    authorities would impute that characteristic to him.

24. Of course, in order to succeed the claimant must first  establish  that
    the Iranian authorities will become aware of his sur place  activities.
    Then, having done so, the issue arises whether they will treat  him  as
    (if he were) an apostate and serious ill-treatment and persecution will
    follow.

25. Where an individual relies upon activities in  the  UK,  typically  the
    issue of whether the authorities of the individual's own  country  will
    be  aware  of  those  activities  raises  questions  of,  for  example,
    surveillance and intelligence gathering at demonstrations or monitoring
    of internet activity (see, for example, YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA
    Civ 360 and AB & others (internet activity - state  of  evidence)  Iran
    [2015] UKUT 00257 (IAC)).  He was  unsuccessful  before  the  judge  in
    establishing that his internet activity would come to the attention  of
    the Iranian authorities.  Likewise, it was not suggested, nor  was  any
    evidence  relied  upon,  before  the   Judge   that   any   monitoring,
    surveillance  or  informants  in  the  UK  would  apprise  the  Iranian
    authorities of the claimant's attendance at Church or of his  religious
    activities.

26. Before us, Mr Gayle referred us to a passage in the Danish  Immigration
    Service report entitled "Human Rights Situation for  Minorities,  Woman
    and Converts, and Entry and Exit  Procedures,  ID  Cards,  Summons  and
    Reporting, etc" dated 30 April 2009 at pages A36 - A64 of  the  bundle,
    in particular at para 6.54 under the  heading  "Sur  place  conversion"
    (page A57) which states that:

         "In general, asylum seekers and  refugees  are  kept  under  strict
         surveillance by any Iranian embassy and its network  of  informers.
         Thus, conversion abroad may very likely come to  the  knowledge  of
         the Iranian authorities.  The embassy explained  that  the  Iranian
         Embassy in their home country has at its  disposal  a  very  strong
         network of informants, who keep an eye on Iranians living  in  that
         country."

27. It is unclear to us whether Judge Boyes was referred to this passage in
    the Danish Immigration Service's report.  However, it does  not  appear
    to us that the claimant put forward his case on this basis  before  the
    judge.  Rather, his claim was (and it is clearly set out in his witness
    statement (at P1-P6 of the bundle)) that he was a genuine  convert  and
    he would openly practise his faith, including proselytising  on  return
    to Iran.  The only other matters, relevant to this issue relied upon by
    the claimant in his statement, was that because of  his  Facebook  page
    (and on the basis of the email from his sister) he would be of interest
    to the Iranian authorities.  That too, was, of course, rejected by  the
    judge.  As Mr Gayle frankly accepted before us, despite  his  reference
    to the Danish Immigration Service report, the judge's factual  findings
    against the claimant were not subject to a cross appeal or challenge in
    the rule 24 notice.  We see no basis upon which we should approach this
    appeal other than by accepting the judge's findings.  In any event, the
    one reference in a report dating from 2008 does not  cause  us  to  re-
    examine and reach any different conclusion from the judge.

28. As a result, the claimant's case is that his sur place activities  will
    come to the attention of the Iranian authorities when he is  questioned
    on return to Tehran  Airport  because  he  will  tell  them  about  his
    activities in the UK.

    2. HJ(Iran)

29. In her grounds, the Secretary of State relied upon the Supreme  Court's
    decision in HJ (Iran) and contends that the claimant should be expected
    to  tell  the  truth  including  that  his  purported   conversion   to
    Christianity was not genuine and that he is, in effect, still a Muslim.
     In other words, the claimant is required  to  tell  the  whole  truth,
    rather than, as the judge presumed he  would  tell,  only  the  partial
    truth.

30. Mr Gayle also submitted that the claimant could not be expected to  lie
    following HJ (Iran).  He would tell  the  Iranian  authorities  at  the
    airport that his two claims for asylum had failed.  He would also  tell
    them  about  his  Church  attendance,  his  baptism  and   his   Church
    activities.  Mr Gayle submitted that even  if  the  claimant  told  the
    Iranian authorities he had falsely claimed asylum on religious  grounds
    in the UK, he would still be at risk.  They would, Mr Gayle  submitted,
    attribute to him a religious belief.  He submitted that, on  the  basis
    of the background evidence, it was highly likely that he would have  to
    disclose this information and he would then be passed on to the  second
    stage of interrogation which, on the basis of SSH and HR (illegal exit:
    failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) (hereafter  "SSH"),
    would create a real risk of serious ill-treatment or persecution.

31. We do not consider  that  HJ(Iran)  assists  in  determining  what  the
    claimant would  tell  the  Iranian  authorities  on  return  about  his
    activities in the UK.  It is principally  concerned  with  a  different
    question, namely whether an individual can be required  to  modify  his
    conduct (including what he says) if that conduct or what he says  would
    otherwise put him at risk of serious ill-treatment or  persecution.  In
    other words, whether an individual can be expected to  act  differently
    from how he otherwise would act (including what he would say) in  order
    to avoid any persecution.

32. In HJ  (Iran),  the  Supreme  Court  was  concerned  with  two  appeals
    involving gay men.  It was accepted  that  gay  men  were  at  risk  of
    persecution in their respective countries of return.  The issue for the
    Supreme Court was whether an individual could be expected on return  to
    his country to take reasonable steps to avoid any persecution.  In  the
    context of the two appeals, this meant behaving  'discretely'  or  with
    'discretion' so as not to lead the life of an openly gay man.

33. The accepted position prior to the Supreme Court's decision was that an
    individual could not succeed under the Refugee  Convention  if  it  was
    reasonable for him to behave in a way that would avoid the  persecution
    in his home country (see J v SSHD [2007] Imm AR 73).  The Supreme Court
    unanimously concluded that was not the law.  The court held that sexual
    orientation and the right to live freely and openly as a gay man  is  a
    fundamental right and freedom protected by the Refugee  Convention  and
    to require an individual to behave 'discretely'  would  frustrate  that
    human rights' objective and, in itself, would amount to persecution  if
    the reason for behaving discretely was to avoid the persecutory conduct
    that would follow from exercising that fundamental right  and  freedom.
    At [110], Sir John Dyson SCJ put it succinctly as follows:

         "If the price that a person must pay in order to avoid  persecution
         is that he must conceal his race, religion, nationality, membership
         of a social group or political opinion, then he is  being  required
         to surrender the very protection that the Convention is intended to
         secure for him.  The Convention would be failing in its purpose  if
         it were to mean that a gay man does not have a well-founded fear of
         persecution because he would conceal the fact that he is a gay  man
         in order to avoid persecution  on  return  to  his  home  country."
         (emphasis in original)

    (See also, Lord Hope at [29] and [35]; Lord Rodger at  [64]  and  [78];
    and Lord Collins at [103]).

34. The same approach was adopted the Court  of  Justice  of  the  European
    Union in Minister voor Immigratie en Asiel v X and Y; Z v Minister voor
    Immigratie en Asiel (Joined Cases C-199/12 to C-201/12) [2014]  Imm  AR
    440, again in the context of an asylum claim by a gay  man  who  feared
    persecution in his own country.  The same point was made by the CJEU in
    the  context  of  religious  practices  exposing   an   individual   to
    persecution in Bundersrepublik Deutschland v Y and Z (Cases C-71/11 and
    C-99/11) [2013] Imm AR 87.

35. HJ (Iran) was, therefore,  concerned  with  the  issue  of  whether  an
    individual can be required to behave or conduct him or herself in their
    own country in a way which avoids persecution.  Consequently, a gay man
    or lesbian woman cannot be expected to act in a way that restricts  his
    or  her  fundamental  right  to  express  their   sexual   orientation.
    Likewise, in the religious  context,  a  person  cannot  reasonably  be
    expected to avoid persecution by practising his faith in a discrete way
    so as to avoid persecution which would follow if he did so openly.

36. The underlying rationale of HJ (Iran) is that an individual  cannot  be
    required or expected to behave in a way that is inconsistent  with  the
    exercise of a fundamental right or freedom reflected in the  Convention
    reason, for example his political or religious beliefs.  Leaving  aside
    that this claimant has been found not to possess a fundamental right or
    freedom based upon his religious  beliefs  because  his  conversion  to
    Christianity was found to be disingenuous, HJ (Iran) is  not  concerned
    with how the individual will in  fact  behalf  in  their  own  country.
    Rather, it is concerned with whether, if he or she would  behave  in  a
    way that would expose them  to  persecution,  they  can  be  reasonably
    expected to modify their behaviour in order to avoid  persecution.   In
    other words, HJ (Iran) cannot assist to determine whether the  claimant
    would tell the whole truth (including that his conversion was false) or
    whether he would only tell the partial truth (omitting reference to his
    disingenuousness).

37. One further case we should make reference to  is  the  Supreme  Court's
    decision on RT (Zimbabwe) and another v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38; [2012] Imm
    AR 6.  That case  concerned  returnees  to  Zimbabwe  and  whether,  in
    particular,  they  would  be  at  risk  from  the  militia  and  others
    supporting the ruling ZANU-PF Party.  The basis of the claim was  that,
    at least in some areas of Zimbabwe, returnees were  at  risk  of  being
    confronted by militia and  required,  in  effect,  to  establish  their
    loyalty to ZANU-PF.  The case  gave  rise  directly  to  the  issue  of
    whether HJ (Iran) applied to the expression of political  beliefs  such
    that an individual who did not support ZANU-PF or was apolitical  could
    be expected to dissemble or lie  by  falsely  stating  that  they  were
    actual supporters of, or loyal to, ZANU-PF.

38. The Supreme Court held that the principle in HJ  (Iran)  applied  to  a
    person who had political beliefs and was obliged  to  conceal  them  in
    order to avoid the persecution that he  would  suffer  if  he  were  to
    reveal them.  At [26] Lord Dyson stated:

         "The HJ (Iran) principle applies to any person  who  has  political
         beliefs and is obliged to  conceal  them  in  order  to  avoid  the
         persecution that he would suffer if he were to reveal them."

39. The Supreme Court, however, went further and  concluded  that  approach
    applied not only to those who held opposing political beliefs but  also
    to those who did not hold any political belief.   In  both  cases,  the
    claimant had a fundamental right which  is  protected  by  the  Refugee
    Convention either to hold a political belief or to  hold  no  political
    belief at all and such a person could not be expected  or  required  to
    dissemble on pain of persecution.  At [42] Lord Dyson said:

         "... The right not to hold the protected belief  is  a  fundamental
         right which is recognised in international human  rights  law,  and
         for the reasons that I have  given,  the  Convention  too.   Nobody
         should be forced to have, or express a political opinion and  which
         he does not believe.  He should not be  required  to  dissemble  on
         pain of persecution.  Refugee law does  not  require  a  person  to
         express false support for an oppressive regime, any  more  than  it
         requires an agnostic to pretend to be a religious believer in order
         to avoid persecution.  A focus on how important the  right  not  to
         hold a political or religious belief is to the applicant  is  wrong
         in principle."

40. RT (Zimbabwe), therefore, provides support for the application  of  the
    principle in HJ (Iran) where, for example, an individual is  questioned
    about his political or religious beliefs.  A genuine Christian  convert
    could not be expected to lie when asked about that on return to Iran if
    giving the answer "I am a Christian convert" would put that  individual
    at  risk  of  persecution.   The  individual  would  fall  within   the
    protection of the Refugee Convention either if he were to  disclose  it
    or if he were forced to lie in order to avoid the persecution.

41. What, however, RT (Zimbabwe) does not establish, any more than does  HJ
    (Iran), is what an individual would actually say if  questioned.   That
    is a factual finding which must be made  upon  the  basis  of  all  the
    evidence.  If what the individual would say would put them at  risk  of
    persecution, a combination of HJ (Iran) and  RT  (Zimbabwe)  would  not
    disentitle an individual to Refugee Convention protection simply on the
    basis that he ought to lie in order to avoid the  persecution.   He  is
    entitled to express his political opinion  or  religious  faith  rather
    than conceal it.

    3. The Judge's application of HJ(Iran)

42. In our judgment, the Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  correctly
    identify that the Judge misapplied HJ (Iran).  However, they  obfuscate
    when asserting that HJ(Iran) required the claimant to  tell  the  whole
    truth, i.e. his sur place Christian activities  including  his  baptism
    were disingenuous and undertaken purely  to  bolster  an  unmeritorious
    asylum claim.  The focus should have been on what  the  claimant  would
    say on return to Tehran which required a factual finding on  the  basis
    of all the  evidence.   HJ(Iran)  tells  us  nothing  about  what  this
    claimant would say.

43. Whilst, therefore, we do not consider that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    reliance upon HJ (Iran) makes good her contention that the judge should
    have found that the claimant would tell the  whole  truth,  the  ground
    does point up an error by the judge in finding that the claimant  would
    (because he would be presumed to) tell the truth (albeit partial) about
    his baptism,  Church  attendance  etc  (at  paras  56  and  57  of  the
    determination).  In para 57 the judge  said:  that  "according  to  the
    Supreme court (sic) one must presume that the [claimant] would tell the
    truth" about his baptism etc.  His reliance on HJ  (Iran)  -  no  doubt
    reflecting the way the case was argued  before  him  -  to  reach  that
    finding is a misapplication of HJ (Iran)  which  did  not  entitle  the
    judge  to  "presume"  what  the  claimant  would  say  to  the  Iranian
    authorities.  The principle  derived  from  HJ(Iran)  (and  applied  in
    RT(Zimbabwe)) would only become relevant if it was found as a fact that
    the claimant would tell the authorities something about his  background
    in the UK which would put  him  at  risk  of  persecution  and  it  was
    contended that he should modify what he said (including having to  lie)
    in order to avoid that persecution.

44. It follows that in paras 56 and 57 of his determination the judge erred
    in law in reaching his finding that the claimant would tell the  truth,
    in the sense of the partial truth about his religious activities in the
    UK in reliance upon HJ (Iran).  In the course of his oral  submissions,
    Mr Gayle acknowledged that the judge  had  erred  in  this  regard  but
    contended that the error was immaterial as the  claimant  would  be  at
    risk even if he told the whole truth.  We will return  to  this  latter
    point shortly which requires us to consider the background material and
    existing country guidance case law.

45. Consequently, we set aside the judge's decision to allow the appeal  on
    asylum grounds which we must, therefore, remake.

Remaking the Decision

46. We heard detailed argument from both representatives, in particular  in
    relation to the position of the claimant on return to Tehran.

47. The basis of the claimant's claim arises, as we have already noted,  on
    the basis that he would be at risk because of what he  would  tell  the
    Iranian authorities on return.  In SSH, the Upper  Tribunal  recognised
    that a failed asylum-seeker would not as such be at risk on  return  to
    Iran nor would an individual be at risk simply on the basis of  illegal
    exit.  Judge Boyes found  that  there  was  no  basis  upon  which  the
    claimant's  activities  in  the  UK  would  be  known  to  the  Iranian
    authorities and so, the only basis upon which he would be at  risk  (at
    least potentially), is if he told them about his  religious  activities
    in the UK (but see above at para 27 an  additional  point  made  before
    us).

48. That, then, raises two principal  questions.   First,  what  would  the
    claimant tell the Iranian authorities on return to Tehran?  That, as we
    have already identified, is a factual question which must be determined
    on the basis of all the evidence.  Secondly, having determined what the
    claimant would tell the authorities, is it established that that  would
    put him at risk of persecution.  The basis of that risk was,  at  least
    in respect of how it might arise, common ground  between  the  parties.
    In SSH the  Upper  Tribunal  recognised  that  there  was  a  two-stage
    questioning process on return.  At the first stage, there would not  be
    a real risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment.   However,  if  at
    that first stage of questioning, "any particular concerns arising  from
    their previous activities either in Iran or in the  United  Kingdom  or
    whichever country they had returned from" arose, there would be a  risk
    of further questioning,  detention  and  potential  ill-treatment  (see
    [23]).

49. A third question,  which  may  therefore  arise,  is  whether,  if  the
    claimant were to tell the authorities something  which  would  lead  to
    that second stage of questioning, he is entitled to lie or modify  what
    he says in order to avoid the real risk of persecution or serious  ill-
    treatment.  That, of course, is where HJ (Iran) is relevant.

50. We turn now, therefore, to make the relevant findings to determine this
    appeal.  In doing so, we apply the lower standard of  proof  applicable
    in international  protection  cases  namely  that  of  'real  risk'  or
    'reasonable likelihood'.

51. What, then, would the claimant tell the Iranian authorities on  return?
    There is no directly relevant evidence from the claimant  himself.   In
    his witness statement, he said that on return it would be his "duty  to
    share my faith" and:

         "If I was returned to Iran,  it  is  inevitable  that  I  would  be
         interrogated.  I would not be able to deny my faith.  I could never
         be discrete in the practise of my faith.   Therefore,  I  would  be
         considered a proselytising apostate."

52. That statement by the claimant was, of course, made on the  basis  that
    he was a  genuine  Christian  convert.   Judge  Boyes  disbelieved  the
    claimant and did not  accept  that  he  was  a  genuine  convert.   The
    underlying premise for the claimant's  statement  that  he  would  feel
    compelled  to  disclose  (and  practise)  his   Christian   faith   is,
    consequently, removed and so there is no underpinning for his  evidence
    that he would consider it his duty to disclose his faith.

53. Consequently, we have no direct evidence from the claimant as  to  what
    he would say in relation to his failed asylum claims in  the  event  he
    accepted  the  Judges'  conclusions  that  the  basis  of  his  claims,
    including to be a Christian convert, had been  an  entire  fabrication.
    As we noted earlier (para 44), Mr Gayle  appeared  to  accept  that  in
    telling about his sur place activities, it was also incumbent upon  the
    claimant to reveal the  judicial  finding  that  his  claims  were  all
    disingenuous.

54. It is clear from the decision in SSH (and the evidence presented to the
    Upper Tribunal in that case) that the questioning at the  first  stage,
    although  not  reaching  the  level  of  Art  3  ill-treatment,   would
    nevertheless be of  an  intensity  that  an  individual  is  likely  to
    cooperate.  In that context, the Upper Tribunal at [23]  noted  that  a
    returning failed asylum seeker who had exited illegally and who  "could
    be expected to tell the truth when questioned" would not  face  a  real
    risk of ill-treatment at the airport.  The Tribunal's chosen phrase  of
    "expected to tell the truth" is,  in  our  judgment,  no  more  than  a
    reflection of the reality of interrogation  at  Tehran  Airport.   That
    pressure would, in our view, apply to this claimant also.  He would, as
    a result, we find, disclose in answer to questions about  what  he  had
    done in the UK.  Namely, he had claimed asylum on political grounds but
    that had been unsuccessful having been found to  be  disingenuous.   He
    had followed that by claiming asylum on religious  grounds  based  upon
    his involvement with the Christian Church and  had  been  baptised  but
    that claim had also been found to be false  and  disingenuous,  carried
    out in order to bolster a claim for asylum.  He would disclose that  he
    was, and remains, a Muslim.   In  our  judgment,  it  would  simply  be
    irrational for the claimant to continue to persist in the lie  that  he
    is a genuine Christian convert or to deny that he was Muslim.  To do so
    would, on any view, run the risk of enhancing the chances that he would
    be persecuted and we see no reason to infer  that  the  claimant  would
    deliberately  'put  himself  in   harms   way'   at   Tehran   Airport.
    Consequently, we  find  that  the  claimant  would  disclose  his  full
    circumstances in the UK relating to his two failed claims for asylum.

55. The second question, to which we now turn, is whether, as a  result  of
    that, the claimant would be at risk  of  persecution  or  serious  ill-
    treatment.

56. As we have already identified, that issue arises if what  the  claimant
    says would result in further questioning, detention and potential  ill-
    treatment as recognised by the Upper Tribunal as the  process  followed
    at Tehran Airport (see [23] of SSH).  That, as Mr Gayle  submitted,  is
    the 'pinch point'.

57. We begin with the most recent Country Guidance decision  in  SSH.   The
    Upper Tribunal concluded that a failed asylum seeker, who had illegally
    exited Iran, and who had no history other than being  a  failed  asylum
    seeker would not face a risk of persecution on  return  (see  [23]  and
    [32]).  The context in which the Upper Tribunal  reached  that  finding
    was that the failed-asylum seeker (at [23]) "could be expected to  tell
    the truth when questioned ...".

58. It does not appear that the arguments presented  to  us  were  directly
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in SSH.   Nevertheless,  the  decision
    provides no support for the claimant's case before  us.   The  Tribunal
    may well have implicitly considered the position of a claimant who  had
    made a failed asylum claim and who had confessed  his  disingenuousness
    to those who questioned him at Tehran  Airport.   It  is  difficult  to
    conceive that the Upper Tribunal only considered the risk on return  on
    the basis that by "telling the truth" when questioned  the  individual,
    whom they were considering, would only say he had  claimed  asylum  and
    his claim had been rejected but would  not  be  asked,  and  would  not
    elaborate, to explain the basis of his failed claim.  It may  well  be,
    and we consider this may lie at the heart of Mr Gayle's position,  that
    the Upper Tribunal was only concerned  with  individuals  who  had  "no
    history" other than being a failed asylum  seeker.   Indeed,  Mr  Gayle
    placed reliance upon the fact that the claimant had actually  undergone
    baptism in the UK.   He is,  perhaps,  therefore,  someone  who  has  a
    "history" albeit one created.  For the present purposes, we are content
    to accept that the Upper Tribunal did not  consider  the  circumstances
    which we find would apply to the claimant on return to Tehran  and,  it
    may be, that he cannot be said to be someone who has "no history" other
    than being a failed asylum seeker because he has,  in  fact,  undergone
    baptism albeit mendaciously.

59. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Gayle placed reliance upon para 6.5.4  of
    the  Danish  Immigration  Service  document  entitled   "Human   Rights
    Situation for Minorities,  Woman  and  Converts,  and  Entry  and  Exit
    Procedures, ID Cards, Summons and Reporting, etc." (dated  April  2009)
    which relates to a fact-finding mission to Iran in August  -  September
    2008.  There under the heading "Sur place conversion" the  report  says
    this:

         "6.5.4 Sur place conversion

         A western embassy (2) stated that if an  Iranian  refugee  converts
         abroad, he/she can not go back to Iran as  there  is  an  effective
         control system amongst many Iranians  abroad  with  connections  to
         Iranian embassies.

         In general, asylum seekers  and  refugees  are  kept  under  strict
         surveillance by any Iranian embassy and its network  of  informers.
         Thus, conversion abroad may very likely come to  the  knowledge  of
         the Iranian authorities. The embassy  explained  that  the  Iranian
         Embassy in their home country has at its  disposal  a  very  strong
         network of informants, who keep an eye on Iranians living  in  that
         country.

         According to an international organisation  in  Turkey,  a  British
         group of Evangelists conducted a mass conversion in the city of Van
         in Turkey four years ago. The group filmed the episode to  document
         their missionary activities. This created problems for the converts
         as there is now visual evidence of their conversion that  might  be
         used against them by Iranian authorities upon return.

         A Christian church in Tehran confirmed that if a convert returns to
         Iran  from  a  country  where  he  has  converted,  he  might  face
         difficulties. However, the source has not heard of any  such  cases
         but added that sometimes converts  might  risk  the  death  penalty
         should they return to Iran."

60. First, we note that the judge's (unchallenged)  finding  was  that  the
    Iranian authorities would not have any prior knowledge of the  claimant
    before his arrival in Tehran 9see para 27 above).  They would  have  no
    knowledge of the claimant's activities prior to his arrival in  Tehran.
    Secondly,  the  difficulties  identified  relate  to  actual  Christian
    converts and not those  that  confess  to  a  disingenuous  conversion.
    Although Mr Gayle did not refer us to the Home Office, "Country  Policy
    and  Information  Note  -  Iran:  Christians  and  Christian  converts"
    (February 2017) at A126 of the claimant's bundle, we note that at  page
    A139, citing from a Danish Immigration Service update  in  relation  to
    Christian converts in Iran from June 2014 the following is set out:

         "With regard to the situation of converts who return to Iran  after
         being baptized abroad, be it in  Turkey,  Amenia,  UAE  or  another
         country, the source found that they may return to Iran quietly  and
         not encounter any problems.  If the person is already monitored  by
         the authorities, he or she could risk consequences upon  return  to
         Iran.'

         'According   to   AIIS   [Amnesty   International's   International
         Secretariat] it is difficult to  obtain  information  on  potential
         risks  an  individual  may  face  upon  returning  to  Iran   after
         conversion abroad.  If Iranian informants have gathered information
         regarding an individual who ha returned to  Iran,  the  authorities
         may arrest them for questioning.  It is possible that charging  and
         conviction will ensure the arrest and questioning.  A wide group of
         people could be in that position: students,  political  activities,
         family members of political persons might  even  be  questioned  as
         well as Christian converts.'

         'Regarding whether baptism abroad would put a person at  risk  from
         the authorities in Iran, AIIS considered  that  the  importance  of
         baptism should be balanced  against  how  the  Iranian  authorities
         perceive a convert.   A  person  who  has  attended  trainings  and
         sessions abroad may be considered a convert, although he or she may
         not have officially been baptized.'

         'Asked about the situation for a convert who returns to Iran  after
         having converted abroad, i.e.  in  Europe  or  a  Western  country,
         Mansour Borji (Advocacy Officer for Article 18]  found  that  there
         would be no difference in the way  the  Iranian  authorities  would
         deal with the case.  If the person is known to the authorities  and
         they have shown an interest in him or her before he or she left the
         country, there could be a risk to him or her  upon  returning.   If
         the person is unknown  to  the  authorities,  the  source  did  not
         consider that there would be a huge threat towards him or her.  The
         source referred to a case of a family that went back  to  Iran  and
         upon return, they were threatened and followed around/harassed.  It
         was considered that perhaps relatives or others had  reported  them
         to the authorities causing the harassment.  Ultimately, the  family
         left Iran again.   They  had  secretly  begun  to  attend  a  house
         church.'

         'Concerning the consequences for an individual upon return to  Iran
         after having converted abroad, CSW [Christian Solidarity Worldwide]
         said that any convert who wishes to practice his or her faith  upon
         return, would face serious risk.'

         'When asked about the  consequences  of  returning  to  Iran  after
         having  been  baptized  abroad,  Elam  Ministries  said  that  many
         Iranians do go abroad and return to Iran after  a  while.   If  the
         authorities in Iran became aware of the fact that a person has been
         baptized abroad such an  individual  may  risk  interrogations  and
         repercussions.  The source considered that the authorities may find
         out that an individual has  been  baptized  through  informers  and
         telephone/internet tapping.'

         'It was considered that persons who return from  Western  countries
         after converting would have to be  very  careful  about  doing  any
         evangelizing.  When considering the situation of an individual  who
         has converted in Europe who then returns to Iran,  their  situation
         would be much the same as that of Iranians  who  convert  in  Iran.
         Such individuals would have to lay low and not speak  openly  about
         their  conversion.   If  their  conversion  is  uncovered  and  the
         authorities are notified, there is a risk that such  an  individual
         will be suspected of links with foreign organizations much the same
         as a convert who has been living in Iran.'

         'The source added that those who are outside of Iran  for  extended
         periods of time may be more at risk in  that  the  authorities  may
         suspect them of spying.  It was further added that this counts  not
         only for Christian converts but also for other Iranians.'

         'Asked about the situation of Christian converts who return to Iran
         after coming to Turkey or another country, and meeting  with  other
         believers, the representatives of the  Union  Church  informed  the
         delegation that if the converts stay 'quiet';  i.e.,  they  do  not
         associate with other believers, they may not be discovered and  the
         visits to a foreign country will then not make a lot of  difference
         for them.'

         'According to the representatives of the Union Church, even if  not
         known to authorities, converts can face shunning and  even  'honour
         killing' by their families.'"

61. We make a number of comments about this evidence.  First,  it  is  also
    concerned with  those  who  genuinely  convert  to  Christianity.   The
    reported comments relating to the position of those who  return  having
    been "baptised abroad" must, therefore, in our judgment be seen in that
    light.  Secondly, the document goes on to identify at para  8.1.1  that
    Christian converts  are  more  likely  to  face  difficulties  if  they
    evangelise.  At para 8.1.2 quoting a Finish Immigration Service  report
    from 2015, the risk factor of the "public  practise  of  religion"  and
    "proselytising" is again emphasised:

         "8.1.2   A Finish Immigration Service report on Christian  converts
                in Iran,  dated  21  August  2015,  citing  various  sources
                stated:  'No  research  data  on  the  return  of  Christian
                converts to Iran is available, but the common pre-ception is
                that they will get  into  trouble  mainly  if  they  try  to
                proselytise or otherwise make their religious  view  public.
                The state's interest is focused more on the public  practice
                of  religion  and  proselytising  than  on   one's   private
                convictions.'"

62. There is no evidence (to which we were referred) concerning the risk to
    disingenuous Christian converts on return to  Tehran.   The  background
    evidence to which we have made reference does  not,  in  our  judgment,
    establish a real risk that  an  individual  such  as  the  claimant  on
    telling the truth about his failed  asylum  background  (whether  as  a
    political opponent or religious convert) would be at real risk of being
    transferred to the second-stage of questioning and then subjected to  a
    real risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment.

63. Mr  Gayle  placed  some  reliance  upon  the  Iranian  regime  being  a
    repressive one and, applying what was said by the Upper Tribunal in  AB
    & Others, he submitted  that  the  Iranian  authorities  would  not  be
    interested in the motives of an individual making a claim for asylum in
    the UK.

64. In AB & Others at [464] the Upper Tribunal said this:


         "We do not find it at  all  relevant  if  a  person  had  used  the
         internet in an opportunistic way.  We are aware of examples in some
         countries where there is clear evidence that  the  authorities  are
         scornful of people  who  try  to  create  a  claim  by  being  rude
         overseas.  There is no evidence remotely similar to  that  in  this
         case.  The touchiness of the Iranian authorities does not  seem  to
         be in the least concerned with the motives of the person  making  a
         claim but if it is interested it makes  the  situation  worse,  not
         better because seeking asylum is being rude about the government of
         Iran and whilst that may not of itself be  sufficient  to  lead  to
         persecution it is a point in that direction."

65. Likewise, at [472] the Upper Tribunal, noted in  the  context  of  risk
    arising from internet activity, that:

         "It is not relevant if  a  person  has  used  the  internet  in  an
         opportunistic way.   The  authorities  are  not  concerned  with  a
         person's motivation."

66. We make two observations about what is said in AB.  First, it is not  a
    country guidance case and any findings made by the Upper Tribunal  were
    necessarily made on the basis of the evidence before it.  Secondly,  in
    the context of political dissent, the Upper Tribunal in SSH (which is a
    country guidance case) effectively reached the  opposite  view  on  the
    evidence before it at [30]:

         "We can understand the sensitivity that the Iranian authorities may
         have towards perceive slights against their own state in  the  form
         of untruthful allegations about  the  conduct  of  the  state,  but
         equally one can expect  a  degree  of  reality  on  their  part  in
         relation to  people  who,  in  the  interests  of  advancing  their
         economic circumstances, would make up a story in  order  to  secure
         economic betterment in a wealthier country."

67. The evidence before us does not, in our judgment, gainsay that position
    and its application in the  context  of  a  person  who  disingenuously
    converts to Christianity  and  confesses,  in  effect,  that  he  'went
    through the motions' of baptism in order to remain in the UK.

68. Consequently, we find, he would tell the truth  about  his  two  failed
    claims for asylum  in  the  UK  based  upon  political  opposition  and
    disingenuous conversion to Christianity.   We find  that  he  would  be
    subject to the second stage of questioning at Tehran  Airport.   Taking
    into account all the evidence, we are not satisfied that that there  is
    a real risk that the claimant would suffer persecution or serious  ill-
    treatment on return to Iran.

69. Since, on our findings, the claimant would not be at risk on the  basis
    of what he would tell the Iranian authorities, the issue does not arise
    in this appeal whether he could be expected  to  modify  what  he  said
    (perhaps by lying) in order to avoid persecution.  In other words,  the
    HJ (Iran) point does not arise in this  appeal  on  the  basis  of  our
    findings.  It is not, therefore,  necessary  for  us  to  consider  the
    application of what was said obiter in SSHD v MSM (Somalia) [2016] EWCA
    Civ 715 at [35]-[48] in  relation  to  whether  an  individual  may  be
    required or expected to modify their behaviour when, in fact,  they  do
    not possess the protected characteristic under the  Refugee  Convention
    but their potential persecutor will impute that characteristic to them.
     On the basis of our findings, there is no real risk to the claimant on
    the basis of imputed religious opinion as a result  of  what  he  would
    tell the Iranian authorities on return  and,  therefore,  there  is  no
    question  of  him  modifying  what  he  says  in  order  to  avoid  any
    persecution.

Decision

70. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the claimant's  appeal
    on asylum grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR involved the making of  a
    material error of law.  We set the decision aside.

71. We remake the decision dismissing the claimant's appeal on all grounds.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             6 December 2017




