
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02136/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 January 2020                             |On 17 January 2020            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     F A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes of Counsel instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity  direction.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the appellant.

 2. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Alty promulgated on 9 April 2019 dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 20  February  2019
    to refuse her protection claim in her own right made on  5  July  2018.
    It should be noted that the appellant was a dependant in  her  mother's
    protection claim which was refused and the appeal  dismissed  in  2017.
    The most recent claim is based  upon  the  appellant's  claimed  sexual
    orientation.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher refused permission on 7 June 2019  but
    when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal, Upper  Tribunal
    Judge O'Callaghan granted permission on all grounds on 9 November 2019.



Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out below I find no material error of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. In essence, the appellant's claim is that in Pakistan she  faced  being
    forced by her uncle into  an  arranged  marriage  with  an  older  man.
    However, from the age  of  11  she  had  realised  that  she  was  more
    emotionally connected to girls.  At first she knew only that  she  felt
    different from other girls and that she was never  attracted  to  boys,
    however on her account it was only on coming to the UK in 2014 that she
    began to understand her feelings and realised that she was  a  lesbian.
    In 2018 she was introduced to a LGBT organisation but has continued  to
    live effectively discreetly with her sexuality  in  the  UK.   She  has
    never had a sexual relationship with anyone else and continues to  live
    with her family in the UK, her mother and brother, but according to her
    they are unaware of her sexual orientation.  She fears that, were  they
    to become aware, they would never speak to her again and if returned to
    Pakistan and her family members knew of her claimed sexuality she would
    be killed and in any event, she claimed that on  return  she  would  be
    forced into an arranged marriage with a man.

 6. Judge Alty noted that the previous Tribunal had considered but  clearly
    rejected the claim of  the  risk  of  being  forced  into  an  arranged
    marriage and pursuant to the Devaseelan principles Judge Alty found  no
    reason to depart from that finding and observed that  she  was  not  in
    fact requested to do so by Mr Holmes.

 7. At paragraph 29 of the  decision  Judge  Alty  accepted  that  same-sex
    relationships remain illegal and that LGBT persons can be subjected  to
    societal discrimination and violence  in  Pakistan.   However,  in  the
    following paragraphs  and  by  paragraphs  35  and  36  the  judge  had
    concluded that the appellant had failed to  demonstrate  to  the  lower
    standard of proof that she is a lesbian and concluded she did not  face
    any risk of being treated as  such  on  return  to  Pakistan.   In  the
    alternative, in very brief terms, the judge also concluded that even if
    the appellant were  a  lesbian,  which  was  not  accepted,  she  would
    actually continue to live discreetly in Pakistan as she has done in the
    UK so for that reason there would be no risk, but obviously that is  an
    alternative finding.

 8.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal   Judge
    O'Callaghan  considered  the  first  four  of  six  grounds   arguable,
    suggesting  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  core  elements  of  the
    appellant's evidence  had  not  been  adequately  considered.  Although
    permission was granted on all grounds the judge observed that grounds 5
    and 6 had limited merit and I certainly agree with  that.   In  summary
    the grounds can be set out as follows, bracketed  into  pairs  as  they
    were by Mr Holmes.  The first ground is that the judge failed  to  take
    into account material evidence the appellant was reluctant  or  fearful
    to disclose her sexuality to her family members.  Allied  to  that  was
    the fourth ground that at paragraph 32  the  judge  took  into  account
    irrelevant factors in reaching a conclusion that her family  would  not
    take a negative view of  her  sexuality  on  the  basis  that  she  had
    obtained  good  GCSE  results  suggesting  the  household  was  not   a
    repressive one.  The second and  third  grounds  were  that  the  judge
    failed to make any findings on the  appellant's  own  evidence  and  in
    particular "the narrative of her sexual journey"  and  that  the  judge
    failed to provide adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's  case.
    Finally, the last pair of grounds 5 and 6 were that at paragraph 35  of
    the decision the judge applied the wrong standard of proof when stating
    "when weighed in the balance against the findings ..." when the correct
    standard was of course that of a reasonable likelihood,  and  (6)  that
    the judge erred in the alternative conclusion that the appellant  would
    live discreetly in Pakistan.

 9. The accordance of weight to evidence  is  a  matter  entirely  for  the
    judge, it is not an arguable error of law  for  a  judge  to  give  too
    little or too much weight to a relevant factor unless that exercise  is
    in fact irrational.  Nor is it an error of law for a judge to  fail  to
    deal with every factual issue of argument.  Disagreement with a judge's
    factual conclusions or the appraisal of the evidence or the  assessment
    of credibility or the evaluation of risk does not by itself  give  rise
    to an error of law.

10. Dealing with the first and fourth grounds together,  the  first  ground
    alleges that the judge failed to take into account material evidence in
    assessing the appellant's claimed fear or reluctance  to  disclose  her
    sexuality to her family. This  is  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  as
    evidence to support the claimed sexuality  and  the  grounds  refer  to
    statements made by the appellant as recorded in the respondent's bundle
    to the effect that she did not want her family finding  out  about  her
    sexual orientation, but it is clear the judge was fully aware of  that.
    As Mr Tan has pointed out,  at  paragraph  6,  very  early  on  in  the
    decision, the judge noted that  the  appellant's  claim  rests  on  her
    sexuality and her fear of her family finding  out.   It  was  for  that
    reason the judge made an anonymity direction. Whilst  the  evidence  is
    not specifically mentioned it is not incumbent on a judge to deal  with
    every aspect or every matter that is in contention provided it is clear
    from the decision that there has been a comprehensive consideration  of
    the evidence in the round or relevant  evidence  has  been  taken  into
    account.  At paragraph 8 the judge also noted that  the  appellant  had
    sought a direction  that  the  decision  be  sent  to  the  appellant's
    representative, not to her directly.  Clearly the judge was  aware  the
    reason for that was that she allegedly feared her  family  finding  out
    about her sexual orientation, and between paragraphs 13 and 17  of  the
    decision the judge noted in summary form the  evidence  that  had  been
    taken into account and considered, all before the findings and  reasons
    were given. It was at paragraph 32, which both Mr  Holmes  and  Mr  Tan
    have taken me to, that the judge addressed the submission of Mr  Holmes
    at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing  that  the   appellant's
    narrative was characterised by fear, that  is  a  fear  of  her  family
    finding out about her sexuality, and that might also  be  expressed  as
    reluctance or unwillingness  and  fear  of  the  consequences  of  them
    finding out, as I have already mentioned.  But the judge noted  all  of
    that and at  33  of  the  decision  the  judge  noted  the  appellant's
    explanation as to why she  failed  to  mention  her  sexuality  in  the
    preliminary  information  questionnaire.   She  said  she   felt   more
    comfortable talking about that than writing it  down.   The  judge  had
    taken all these factors into account. It was  not  the  case  that  the
    judge was stating that because she had achieved excellent GCSE  results
    or that she was described as usually a very happy girl that  the  claim
    was rejected.  The judge was looking to see what evidence there was  to
    support the claim that there was a fear of disclosure  to  her  family,
    and an explanation which justified (1) a fear to explore her sexuality,
    and (2) supported the claim of sexual orientation.  It is  quite  clear
    on reading the decision as a whole that the judge was  fully  aware  of
    and took fully into account this aspect of the claim and weighed it  in
    the assessment of the evidence.  I am satisfied the judge did take into
    account all material evidence. I am not satisfied that the  judge  took
    into account irrelevant factors and the way  in  which  the  ground  is
    expressed in that term misconstrues the decision.

11. I am not satisfied that the second and third grounds, again treated  in
    parallel by Mr Holmes and Mr Tan, disclose any  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   I  bear  in  mind
    reliance on the policy of the Home Office that  feelings  of  shame  or
    secrecy or small indications of a similar nature are factors which  may
    point to the truthfulness of an account, but reading the decision as  a
    whole it is clear that the judge gave detailed consideration  and  made
    an anxious scrutiny of the evidence. Ground 3 in this regard is  simply
    a rephrasing of ground 2.  The judge in my view is not saying what  the
    appellant should have done but observing what  evidence  there  was  to
    support her claim and what had not been done. The judge  was  carefully
    considering the evidence, and found it surprising that although she had
    been aware of her sexual orientation since about the age of 16 and  was
    now 19 years of age that she had taken little if any steps  to  explore
    that sexuality.  The judge pointed out that she had been introduced  to
    an LGBT foundation and had numerous sources of support but up  to  that
    date had not accessed any of those resources.

12. In my view, the judge was  entitled  to  note  the  limitation  of  the
    evidence  supporting  the  appellant's  account   or   justifying   the
    appellant's case why there is a limitation of  evidence  of  sexuality.
    The judge was entitled to take  into  account  inconsistencies  in  the
    account and in my view the decision  is  cogently  reasoned.   In  that
    regard I also note that at paragraph 32 the judge pointed out that  the
    witness Mr Shabbir was a long  term  friend  of  the  family  but  even
    thought the appellant's mother  was  suspicious  about  his  sexuality,
    nonetheless she had not prevented her daughter from developing a  close
    relationship  with  him,  all  of  which  suggested  to  the  judge  an
    environment of tolerance, or, the way the judge expresses it, does  not
    indicate an environment of intolerance in the family.  Again,  this  is
    not the judge stating what was to be expected but  observing  what  was
    there and what was not there, when having to consider what the evidence
    was as to the appellant's sexuality.

13. In relation to the fifth and sixth grounds  I  am  satisfied  there  is
    absolutely no merit in the fifth ground alleging the application of the
    incorrect standard of proof.  It is clear from reading the decision  as
    a whole including paragraph 23 that the  judge  made  a  correct  self-
    direction on the burden and standard of proof stating that the evidence
    being weighed in the  balance  does  not  demonstrate  the  balance  of
    probabilities threshold was applied as the standard of proof  and  that
    ground is no more than grasping at straws in an  attempt  to  undermine
    the decision.  Similarly, there is no merit in the sixth ground and  in
    any event, the alternative finding is not material  given  the  primary
    findings of the appeal that the appellant is not a lesbian as  claimed.



14. In all the  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  the  judge  has  made  an
    adequate, cogently reasoned assessment  of  the  evidence  and  reached
    conclusions  that  were  entirely  open  on  the  evidence.    In   the
    circumstances, I do not find any material error of law and consequently
    this appeal to the Upper Tribunal must fail.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such as to require  it  to  be
    set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.


     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 15 January 2020


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 15 January 2020
