
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02247/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 May 2016 & 15 September 2016            |On 20 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                  Ahmed [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Seelhoff, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer (26 May
2016)
     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer (15 September 2016)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Abebrese) who dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision dated 15 October 2015 refusing him asylum.


Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Yemen born on 19 April 1932.   His  wife,
    also a citizen of Yemen, born on 9 February 1942 is  his  dependant  in
    this application.  The appellant and his wife left their home in  Yemen
    in early April 2015 travelling by boat.  They  were  transferred  to  a
    larger ship and then travelled to Djibouti arriving on 11  April  2015.
    They stayed for four nights in a refugee camp and then took a flight to
    the UK arriving on 15 April 2015.  The appellant  had  previously  been
    granted visit visas for  the  United  Kingdom  and  had  most  recently
    applied for a visit visa on 26 March 2014, the visa being issued  on  7
    April 2014 with an expiry date of 7 April 2019.  The appellant  applied
    for asylum on 27 April 2015.

3.   He claimed that he  was  forced  to  flee  Yemen  due  to  the  general
    security situation there.  He had not suffered any direct problems  but
    had lost all his property.  The respondent found that the appellant had
    failed to demonstrate that he fell into any specific risk category:  on
    his own admission nothing had happened directly to him nor did he  fear
    anyone or anything other than the general security situation in  Yemen.
    The  respondent  considered  whether  it  would  be  right   to   grant
    humanitarian protection but she was not  satisfied  that  the  security
    situation met the threshold required to amount to a real risk of threat
    to his life or person.  She did not accept that he would be at risk  on
    the basis of his generalised fear.  Further, she was not satisfied that
    the appellant was able to meet any of the requirements of the Rules for
    leave to enter or that there were exceptional circumstances  warranting
    a grant of leave outside the requirements of the Rules.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  respondent  argued
    that the objective material on Yemen showed that  the  country  was  in
    conflict and undergoing a general deterioration which was  particularly
    acute in north and central Yemen but the situation was better in  south
    Yemen.  It was submitted that the situation  in  the  appellant's  home
    area was not as bad as represented and that the high threshold had  not
    been satisfied for a grant of humanitarian protection.

5.   On behalf of the appellant it was argued  that  the  country  situation
    was such that so far as the appellant and his wife were  concerned  the
    requirements of  article  15(c)  were  met.   Reliance  was  placed  in
    particular on the position of the Foreign Office on Yemen (para  17  of
    the appellant's skeleton argument) and the position of the Home  Office
    (para 18) which, although  more  cautious,  indicated  that  particular
    factors relevant to a person's individual circumstances might place him
    at risk and  that  each  case  would  need  to  be  considered  on  its
    individual merits taking into account up-to-date  country  information.
    It was further argued that the appeal should be allowed under Article 3
    of the ECHR.

6.   The judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection for the following reasons:

         "21. The Tribunal considered all of the objective material provided
             by both parties and notes that it agreed by both parties  that
             the position in Yemen is one that affects all citizens and  it
             is dangerous.  The Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  in  their
             report dated 17 April 2015  observed  that  the  situation  in
             Yemen  remains  very  tense  and  changeable.   The   evidence
             provided by the appellant and the respondent does suggest that
             the security situation  over  the  last  few  months  has  not
             improved.   The  Tribunal  having  carefully  considered   the
             objective evidence makes a finding that the situation in South
             Yemen is improving more so than in the North and Central areas
             of the country and the appellant's evidence to the contrary is
             not accepted because it is a situation which affects  all  the
             population in the area.


         22.  The appellant admits that he is not politically active and  he
             has no Convention ground therefore relies on Article 3 of  the
             European Convention on Human Rights and the  EU  Qualification
             Directive 2006.  The Tribunal finds that based on the evidence
             he has not provided evidence to show that there is a  risk  on
             his return  to  Yemen  as  the  evidence  especially  his  own
             suggests  that  he  does  not  fall  into  any  specific  risk
             categories and that nothing  has  happened  to  him  directly.
             Furthermore the evidence  indicates  that  he  does  not  fear
             anything or anyone other than the general situation in  Yemen.
             The Tribunal accepts the conclusions of the respondent and the
             case of AK  (Article  15c)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  that  the
             general  security  situation  does  not  meet  the   threshold
             required to amount to a real risk of threat  to  his  life  or
             person.  The Tribunal finds therefore that the appellant  will
             [not] be at risk on his return to Yemen on the  basis  of  his
             general fear.


         23.  The Tribunal also finds that based on the  evidence  that  the
             appellant  is  not  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  in
             accordance with Paragraph 339C of the Rules because as  stated
             above evidence of general fear is insufficient and that  there
             are no substantial grounds to believe that  there  is  a  real
             risk of serious harm on his return to Yemen.  The  appellant's
             appeal is similarly dismissed under Article 2 of the  European
             Convention on Human Rights as he has not demonstrated  through
             the evidence that there is evidence to suggest that there is a
             real risk of treatment  that  would  amount  to  a  breach  of
             Article 2."

7.   The judge went on to consider article 8 and for  the  reasons  he  gave
    found that his appeal could not succeed on that  ground.   Accordingly,
    the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the grounds  it  is  argued  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    objective evidence was inadequate in respect of article 15(c)  in  that
    he made a bare assertion that  he  had  considered  all  the  objective
    evidence but he failed to recognise  or  consider  the  fact  that  the
    conditions recorded in the Home Office COIS Report expressly recognised
    the potential for a successful article 15(c) claim.  In particular,  he
    failed to recognise that there could be particular factors relevant  to
    a person's individual circumstances making them sufficiently vulnerable
    that article 15(c) would apply.  It is further argued  that  the  judge
    failed to address background evidence from  the  UN  showing  that  the
    situation in Yemen was possibly the worst in the  Middle  East.   There
    was compelling evidence from credible international sources yet none of
    these were addressed directly by the judge.   It  is  argued  that  the
    conclusion that the situation in south Yemen was improving  was  flawed
    when the evidence in fact showed the opposite and that the judge failed
    to consider age and health issues relating to  the  appellant  and  his
    wife when considering article 15(c) or whether there  were  significant
    obstacles to return under para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.   Permission
    to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the  following
    reasons:

         "The grounds are arguable.  A fuller consideration of the situation
         in Yemen was required and the return of an elderly couple  in  that
         context arguably received insufficient treatment.  The grounds  are
         arguable and permission to appeal is granted."


9.   Mr Seelhoff  adopted  his  grounds  arguing  that  the  judge  had  not
    properly considered the evidence relating to humanitarian protection or
    article 8.  The judge, so he submitted, had  not  properly  grasped  or
    dealt with the objective evidence and had failed to make any  reference
    to the age and health problems of the  appellant  and  his  wife.   The
    objective  evidence  had  been  specifically  drawn  to   the   judge's
    attention, indicating that there  were  very  significant  problems  in
    Yemen but he had discounted that evidence with no proper explanation.

10.  Mr Kandola submitted that the judge had given  sufficient  reasons  for
    his findings.  As he put it, the judge had done "just enough".  In  any
    event, even at its highest, this case could not meet the high threshold
    to establish a case under article 15(c)  or  to  meet  the  significant
    obstacles test under para 276ADE(1)(vi).

Assessment of the Issues

11.  The issue for me is whether the  judge  erred  in  law  such  that  his
    decision should be set aside.  In [9] of his decision the judge set out
    the evidence that had been submitted in support of the  appeal  (bundle
    A)  including  medical  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's  wife,
    objective evidence from UNHCR, a Foreign Office travel document, the UN
    Report into Saudi led strikes in Yemen, the UN Overview on Humanitarian
    Needs and the Home Office Country Information and  Guidance  Report  of
    November 2015 (CIG November  2015).   However,  when  setting  out  his
    findings in [20]-[23] save for a reference in [21] to the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office  Report  observing  that  the  situation  in  Yemen
    remained very tense and changeable, the judge did not make any specific
    reference to any other aspect of the objective evidence  relied  on  by
    the appellant.

12.   The  appellant's  bundle  A  included  not  only   the   Comprehensive
    Humanitarian  Needs  Overview  2016  produced  on  behalf  of  the   UN
    Humanitarian country team but also the Home Office CIG  November  2015,
    which at 2.6.1-12 considers the issue  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    Yemen.  At 2.6.9 it is reported that the current security situation  in
    Aden and other areas of southern Yemen is unlikely  to  breach  article
    15(c) but adds at 2.6.11 that even where there is  no  general  article
    15(c)  risk,  the  decision-maker  must  consider  whether  there   are
    particular factors relevant to the  person's  individual  circumstances
    which might nevertheless place them at risk.

13.  In this context I am not satisfied  that  the  judge  dealt  adequately
    with the age and health of the appellant and his wife when  considering
    whether there would  be  a  real  risk  to  them  in  their  individual
    circumstances on return to Yemen or that he gave adequate  reasons  for
    his decision by failing to make it clear that all relevant matters were
    taken into account when he reached his findings and conclusions.  I  am
    therefore satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and  that
    the decision should be set aside.

14.  I am satisfied the proper course is for the decision to be  re-made  in
    the Upper Tribunal and following the issue of directions at the earlier
    hearing, the appellant produced in addition to  the  documents  already
    submitted,  HC352,  the  House  of  Commons  International  Development
    Committee Report entitled Crisis in Yemen,  Fourth  Report  of  Session
    2015-16.  The respondent relied on the Home Office Country  Information
    and Guidance, Yemen: Security  and  Humanitarian  Situation  Version  2
    April 2016 (CIG April 2016).  No application  has  been  made  to  call
    further oral evidence.

Further Submissions

15.  Mr Seelhoff submitted  that  the  background  evidence  indicated  that
    Yemen was probably facing the worst humanitarian crisis in the world at
    the current time in the  light  of  the  civil  war  between  the  Shia
    alliance fighting the government and forcing  them  into  exile  for  a
    while.  A Saudi led coalition had intervened but was widely reported to
    have engaged in indiscriminate attacks including  the  use  of  cluster
    munitions on civilian targets.

16.  He submitted that the position was confirmed by the policy  summary  in
    the CIG April 2016 at 3.1.1.  Although at 3.1.2 it was  said  that  the
    security situation in Aden and in some  areas  of  southern  Yemen  was
    currently  in  general  unlikely  to  breach  article  15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive, Mr Seelhoff argued that this  understated  the
    crisis when considered in the light of other background  evidence  such
    as the Guardian report at A 33 to 34 and the  UN  Report  at  1A  38-76
    which confirmed that of a population of 26 million, 21.2 million people
    needed immediate humanitarian assistance.  Further, the Foreign  Office
    had advised against all travel to Yemen  and  advised  those  there  to
    leave immediately.  He further submitted that Aden  could  not  now  be
    regarded as relatively safe in the light of  para  6.5.14  of  the  CIG
    November 2015, which referred to the streets of Aden  remaining  highly
    insecure with no police presence to maintain order.

17.  Even if there was no general risk reaching the article 15(c)  standard,
    Mr Seelhoff argued that the appellant was  a  person  whose  individual
    circumstances and profile might nonetheless place him at risk.  He  was
    in relatively good health but he was 83 years  old  with  the  inherent
    vulnerabilities of that age.  His wife was younger but she was in  poor
    health having been hospitalised for eighteen days in January 2016  when
    she suffered two heart attacks whilst  having  kidney  treatment.   The
    evidence showed that there was no functioning healthcare in Yemen,  the
    Select Committee Report noting that the UN  had  described  the  health
    system as in a state of collapse in Yemen.  He submitted  that  it  was
    self-evident that in a country where even the healthy and those capable
    of working were struggling, two very elderly returnees  would  struggle
    even more being  less  able  to  move  around,  to  cope  in  temporary
    accommodation or to obtain food.

18.  Mr Tarlow relied on the decision letter and the  CIGs.   He  relied  in
    particular on 3.1.2 of the CIG April 2016 that the  security  situation
    in Aden and some areas of  southern  Yemen  was  currently  in  general
    unlikely to breach article 15(c)  and  submitted  that  the  appellants
    failed to show their individual circumstances were such that they would
    be at real risk on return.

Re-making the Decision

19.  The issue I must assess is whether the appellants are able to meet  the
    requirements of article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  adopted
    into HC395 at para 339C(iii) and to show that substantial grounds  have
    been shown for believing that, if he returned to Yemen, they would face
    a real risk of suffering serious harm and are unable, or owing to  such
    risk, unwilling to avail himself of the  protection  of  that  country.
    Serious harm in this context consists of serious and individual  threat
    to a civilian's life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence  in
    situations of international or internal armed conflict.

20.  In QD (Iraq) [2009] EWCA Civ 620 the Court  of  Appeal  identified  the
    question to be asked as:

         "Is there in [Yemen] or a material part of it such a high level  of
         indiscriminate  violence  that  substantial   grounds   exist   for
         believing that [the  applicant]  would,  solely  by  being  present
         there, face a real risk which threatens his life or person?"

    In the CJEU judgment in Elgafaji C-465/07 the Court said that whilst it
    was true that collective factors would play a significant role  in  the
    application of article 15(c) in that the person concerned belonged like
    other people  to  a  circle  of  potential  victims  of  indiscriminate
    violence in situations of international or internal armed conflict,  it
    was nevertheless the case that the provision  must  be  interpreted  by
    close reference to a similar individualisation as required by the  harm
    defined in article 15(a) and (b).  Therefore, the more an applicant was
    able to show that he was specifically affected by factors particular to
    his particular circumstances, the lower  the  level  of  indiscriminate
    violence required for him to be eligible for subsidiary protection.


21.   I  have  been  referred  to  the  report  of  the  House  of   Commons
    International Development Committee at HC532.  The summary at pages 3-5
    confirms how bleak the situation is in Yemen where it is said that that
    country is facing one of the worst humanitarian  crises  in  the  world
    with 82% of the population in need of assistance and that the situation
    can  be  described  as  a  civilian  protection  crisis,  the  evidence
    suggesting that civilians are bearing the brunt  of  the  fighting  and
    there is a serious risk that the destruction of the health system there
    will have consequences for the  country  far  beyond  the  end  of  the
    conflict.   The  report  also  records  that  evidence  received   from
    humanitarian actors operating on the  ground  in  Yemen  and  respected
    human  rights  organisations   including   UN   commissioned   evidence
    unanimously suggested that humanitarian law was being  breached  making
    the relief effort difficult and dangerous.

22.  The CIG April 2016 refers at 2.3.4 to Yemen  experiencing  one  of  the
    most severe  humanitarian  crises  in  the  world  with  the  situation
    deteriorating across  the  country  following  the  escalation  of  the
    conflict in  March  2015.   It  is  also  recorded  that  the  security
    situation in Yemen has deteriorated during 2015  with  the  erosion  of
    central authority and the fragmentation  of  the  Yemeni  army:  2.4.1.
    There is a reference at 2.4.5 to reports of the use  of  indiscriminate
    violence by both sides including the use of cluster bombs  and  attacks
    on civilian  homes,  hospitals,  schools,  markets  and  factories  and
    reports of civilians fleeing airstrikes being chased  and  shot  at  by
    helicopters.

23.  The report draws a distinction between the situation in  the  northwest
    and centre of the country where levels of indiscriminate violence  were
    currently likely to be at such level that substantial grounds exist for
    believing that a person solely by being present there faces a real risk
    of serious harm whereas in  the  south  of  Yemen  including  Aden  the
    situation whilst harsh was not in general at such a level as to  breach
    article 3 but this is qualified by saying  it  may  do  for  vulnerable
    people (e.g. single women or disabled people etc.) and each case should
    be assessed on its individual merits.

24.  The UN  Humanitarian  Needs  Overview  Yemen  November  2015  at  A  38
    describes the ongoing conflict as devastating and reports that millions
    of people in Yemen need assistance to ensure their basic survival (40).
     It records that nearly six in  ten  Yemenis  need  food,  security  or
    livelihood  support  and  that  basic  food  commodities  remain   only
    sporadically available in most governorates and that the health  system
    is in a state of collapse.

25.  The Yemen travel advice from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office is  to
    advise against all travel to Yemen and  that  anyone  in  Yemen  should
    leave immediately.  The latest update, albeit dated  19  January  2016,
    noted that on 18  January  2016  the  Aden  police  imposed  a  ban  on
    motorcycles within the city, following  several  days  of  killings  or
    attempted killings by armed men on motorbikes.   It  records  that  the
    situation remains very tense and unstable and  the  security  situation
    throughout the country is dangerous and in some  areas  it  is  unclear
    which faction has control.  There  is  a  high  threat  from  terrorism
    throughout the country and specific methods of attack are evolving  and
    increasing in sophistication and  there  is  ongoing  fighting  between
    competing factions across the country.

26.  It is against this background that I must assess whether the  appellant
    and his wife would be at risk on return. Even if it is  the  case  that
    the security situation in Aden and other areas  of  southern  Yemen  is
    currently such that it is in general unlikely to breach  article  15(c)
    nonetheless  particular  factors  relevant  to  a  person's  individual
    circumstances or profile might place them at such risk  and  each  case
    must be considered on its individual merits taking into account  up-to-
    date  country  information.   There  has  been  no  challenge  to   the
    appellant's account of events that they left Yemen in early April  2015
    due to  the  general  security  situation.   The  appellants  have  not
    suffered any  direct  problems  but  have  lost  their  property.   The
    appellant is said to be in relatively good health but is 83  years  old
    but his wife although younger is in poor health and since being in  the
    UK has been in hospital for eighteen days when she suffered  two  heart
    attacks while having kidney treatment.

27.  Taking into account their age and vulnerability when looked at  in  the
    light of the current situation in Yemen, I am satisfied that there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that they would be at  real  risk  of
    serious harm from the high level of indiscriminate violence  in  Yemen.
    I accept the submission made on their behalf that as two elderly people
    they are less able to move around,  less  able  to  cope  in  temporary
    accommodation and less able  to  obtain  food  and  sustenance.   These
    factors, taken with the poor health of the appellant's wife, satisfy me
    that, in their particular circumstances in the light of the  background
    evidence, there are substantial grounds for believing that they face  a
    real risk threatening their life or  person  from  the  high  level  of
    indiscriminate violence in Yemen. I need not make a finding on  whether
    the situation in Aden is such that their presence  by  itself  in  Aden
    would meet the requirements of article 15(c)  because  I  am  satisfied
    that there are particular factors relating to the appellant's  and  his
    wife's circumstances putting them at risk from indiscriminate violence.



28.  In these circumstances I need not consider the alternative  submissions
    made under article 8 or para 276ADE.


Decision

29.  The appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.


Signed        H J E Latter                            Date: 18 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
