
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02182/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 June 2016                          |On 18 August 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MO
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Cogan of Counsel instructed by Immigration
Advice Service


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State brought against a  decision
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wylie  allowing  an  appeal  by  MO
    (hereinafter referred to as "the claimant").   The  claimant  made  his
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds.  The appeal was dismissed on asylum and human
    rights grounds but allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

 2) The claimant's immigration history is set out by the Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal in the decision of that Tribunal.  The  claimant  entered
    the UK as a student in September 2007.  He had leave extended  on  more
    than one occasion until April 2011.  The claimant's spouse entered  the
    United Kingdom as his dependant in February 2011.  A human rights claim
    was refused in August 2011.  An asylum claim was made in April 2015 and
    refused in a decision dated 13 October 2015.

 3) The claimant and his wife have 2 daughters, born in  October  2011  and
    March 2013, and a son born in February  2016.   The  claimant  contends
    that if his family return to Nigeria his daughters will be at  risk  of
    female genital mutilation (FGM).  The claimant's wife was subjected  to
    FGM as a teenager and her sister's two daughters, aged 11 and  6,  were
    both subjected to FGM in October 2015 in Nigeria.  The claimant  states
    that family members will force his daughters to undergo FGM if they are
    in Nigeria.

 4) In addition the claimant is HIV positive, as is his wife.  The claimant
    was diagnosed around 2010.  The claimant is treated with  a  medication
    called Stribild, which was prescribed after he was unable  to  tolerate
    other medications.  His medication  is  understood  either  not  to  be
    available in Nigeria or, if it is available, it is at a cost of  nearly
    3000 dollars per month.  The claimant's two daughters are clear of  HIV
    but the baby son requires to be monitored for 18 months before  it  can
    be ascertained if he has acquired HIV from his mother.

 5) The claimant was brought up as a Christian after his  father  converted
    to Christianity.  He claims that his family threatened  his  father  to
    try and make him return to  the  family's  traditional  religion.   The
    claimant contends that two of his siblings were  poisoned  and  killed.
    He heard from his brother around 2008 that his parents had disappeared.
     He further claims that he was attacked and shot in 2009 because  of  a
    dispute over money from a property belonging to his father which he had
    sold to raise funds for his studies in the UK.   The  claimant  further
    alleges that his wife was attacked after their marriage  when  she  was
    still living in Nigeria before she joined him in the UK.

 6) Owing to inconsistencies in the evidence the Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not accept that there was any threat to the claimant  from
    his extended family  in  Nigeria.   In  any  event,  according  to  the
    evidence relied upon by the claimant, he was able to report the  attack
    upon him to the police for investigation.  The  claimant  was  able  to
    return to the UK to continue his  studies  shortly  after  the  alleged
    incidents.

 7) In relation to the claim that the daughters would be at risk from  FGM,
    an expert report was provided  from  a  public  health  specialist,  Dr
    Comfort Momoh.  According to the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  this
    report did not make any comment about the likelihood of FGM  where  the
    parents were opposed to it and there was no pressure from the  father's
    family.  As the claimant had said that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  his
    family's whereabouts and believed his parents were dead, it would  seem
    that there was no question of pressure from his family.   The  evidence
    indicated that the subjection of the claimant's wife's  nieces  to  FGM
    was done with the consent of both their parents.  The judge noted  that
    in May 2015 the Nigerian government made FGM illegal.   In  Dr  Momoh's
    report it was stated that there was still considerable support for  the
    practice in areas where it was deeply rooted and there was no plan  for
    appropriate  enforcement.   The  judge  found  that  certain   of   the
    conclusions of Dr Momoh did not appear to be evidence based.  The judge
    further noted that before the claimant left Nigeria he  had  lived  and
    worked in Lagos, rather than in a rural village.  The judge found  that
    there would be state protection available to the claimant in seeking to
    keep his daughters safe and free from FGM.

 8) The judge then considered the claimant's HIV status.  The  judge  noted
    that  in  2012  approximately  3.5  million  people,  or  4.1%  of  the
    population, were living with HIV/AIDS in Nigeria.  There was widespread
    societal  discrimination  against  persons  with   HIV/AIDS.    Medical
    treatment was available.

 9) Before the judge there was a consultant's letter  of  2  October  2015.
    This  stated  that  the  claimant  had  responded  reasonably  well  to
    treatment, although he had considerable damage to  his  immune  system.
    Due to side effects and toxicities he had had to change his HIV therapy
    a number of times until he was prescribed  medication  which  he  could
    tolerate.  He is able to tolerate Stribild, which he takes once a  day.
    If his treatment were to be interrupted or terminated,  it  was  likely
    that his disease would advance relatively quickly.  Within a few months
    he would be ill  and  within  a  few  years  he  would  be  dead.   The
    medication Stribild was said not  to  be  available  in  Nigeria.   The
    average wholesale price of this medication was around 2948 dollars  per
    month for  a  daily  dose.   According  to  the  judge,  the  treatment
    available in Nigeria was not considered optimum by  the  consultant  in
    the UK.  However, there was no evidence that  there  was  no  treatment
    available to alleviate the symptoms of the claimant's  illness,  albeit
    subject to  side  effects.   The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    discrimination in  Nigeria  against  a  person  with  HIV  amounted  to
    persecution.

10) Having made these findings, the judge then went on to review them under
    the heading "humanitarian protection".  The judge noted that  the  risk
    of FGM for the claimant's daughters  depended  on  the  claimant  being
    likely to withstand any pressure from his wife's family and being  able
    to protect his daughters.  If the claimant were to  die  within  a  few
    years, the children would still be of  an  age  when  they  were  at  a
    significant and serious risk of being subjected to FGM.  Given that the
    claimant's wife's sister's daughters had  recently  been  subjected  to
    FGM, it appeared to the judge that if the children  were  in  the  sole
    care of their mother,  they  would  be  within  the  influence  of  the
    maternal family and it was very probable that their mother would not be
    able to protect them.  On this basis there were substantial grounds for
    believing that the family would be at real risk  of  suffering  serious
    harm and would not be able to avail themselves of the protection of the
    state.

11) So far as the claimant's HIV condition was concerned, the  judge  found
    that this would not exceed the Article 3 threshold.  It  would  not  be
    disproportionate under Article 8 to remove the family.

12) The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on  the  basis  that
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had made  perverse  or  irrational
    findings.  The judge  found  first  that  there  was  no  risk  of  the
    claimant's daughters being subjected  to  FGM  and  that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of state protection.   The judge then made a  contradictory
    finding to the effect  that  the  family  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm if returned to Nigeria and the  daughters  would
    not have the protection of the state.  It is submitted that  the  judge
    found there was a sufficiency of state protection when considering  the
    asylum grounds but not when  considering  the  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.   In  making  the  decision  in   relation   to   humanitarian
    protection, the judge appeared to have  relied  on  the  report  by  Dr
    Momoh, although  earlier  the  judge  had  criticised  certain  of  the
    conclusions in this report as not  appearing  to  be  clearly  evidence
    based.  This amounted to a further contradictory finding.

13) Permission to appeal was granted on these grounds.

Submissions

14) In his submission at  the  hearing.   Mr  Bramble,  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, relied on the  grounds  of  the  application.   The
    judge made findings that the claimant was not a refugee and there  were
    findings that the daughters were not at risk of FGM.   The  judge  then
    turned to the issue of humanitarian protection and allowed  the  appeal
    on the premise that if  the  claimant  died  within  a  few  years  the
    daughters would be at risk.  The judge was, however, tied to  the  date
    of the hearing and the foreseeable future.  Mr Bramble said he was  not
    trying to lessen the claimant's situation but the judge had moved  from
    finding there was no threat to  the  claimant  on  medical  grounds  to
    finding at paragraph 56 that he would die in the next couple of  years.
    This was speculation.  The judge then postulated a scenario  where  the
    claimant's wife would be on her own with the children and  because  her
    older sister's children had been subjected to FGM,  she  would  not  be
    able to protect her daughters from  this.   The  judge's  decision  was
    irrational and perverse.  The judge did  not  make  clear  findings  in
    relation to the expert's report by Dr Momoh.   There  was  no  evidence
    that the claimant was going to die in a few years.

15) Mr Bramble further observed that  there  was  no  cross-appeal  by  the
    claimant.

16) For the claimant, Mr Cogan submitted that the Secretary  of  State  was
    confusing considerations relevant to a grant of humanitarian protection
    with  those  relevant   to   asylum   or   human   rights.    Different
    considerations applied to each claim.  The finding in relation  to  the
    asylum claim that there was protection for  the  daughters  meant  that
    their father was in a position to protect them.  State protection would
    be available only after the event.   This  protection  was  conditional
    upon the presence of the daughters' father.  The judge had  taken  into
    account the medical report on the claimant and it was on this, and  not
    on Dr Momoh's report, that the  humanitarian  protection  risk  to  the
    daughters was based.  This was not "crystal ball gazing" but was  based
    on the fact that without appropriate medication the claimant would fall
    ill and die.  The judge was entitled to take the view that  this  would
    happen sooner rather than later, while the children were still  minors.



17) Mr Cogan further stated that there was no reference in the judgment  to
    section 55, which had been a central issue in the appeal.  Although the
    law on FGM changed  in  Nigeria  in  May  2015,  in  October  2015  the
    claimant's wife's nieces were subjected to FGM and this was accepted by
    the judge.

18) Mr Cogan acknowledged that there was no cross-appeal on behalf  of  the
    claimant.  If the judge was wrong to allow the appeal  on  humanitarian
    grounds it should have been allowed under Article 3.  The decision as a
    whole was not illogical  but  was  compartmentalised.   The  judge  was
    obliged to deal with each issue separately.  The same  criticisms  were
    not appropriate to each part of the judge's findings.   The  judge  had
    said that if the claimant was on the appropriate drug regime  he  would
    stay fit but if  his  condition  deteriorated  because  of  a  lack  of
    suitable drugs he would not be able to protect his daughters from  FGM.
    Mr Cogan pointed out that although the claimant's drug,  Stribild,  was
    not available in Nigeria, the drugs being taken by the claimant's  wife
    were available.

19) There followed some discussion of what submissions might have been made
    to the judge at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   According
    to Mr Bramble, the best interests  of  the  daughters  were  implicitly
    considered in relation to FGM.  The judge was wrong  then  to  consider
    what might happen if the claimant were to die in a few years.  This was
    speculation.  If the children were considered  on  their  own  then  it
    would be the responsibility of the state to protect them.

20) Reference was made to the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,
    in which the issue of FGM  was  raised,  but  not,  directly  the  best
    interests of the children.  The skeleton argument before the First-tier
    Tribunal also referred to FGM and  to  the  medical  condition  of  the
    claimant and his wife and the  inability  of  the  claimant  to  obtain
    medication in Nigeria.

Discussion

21) Mr Cogan submitted that different  considerations  applied  to  refugee
    status, humanitarian protection and human  rights.   Nevertheless,  the
    same findings of fact may  be  relevant  to  more  than  one  of  these
    categories.  The judge found, at paragraphs 45-47 of the decision, that
    if the claimant's treatment  was  interrupted  or  terminated,  it  was
    likely that his disease would advance relatively quickly and  he  would
    die within a few years.  The medication he currently  takes,  Stribild,
    is not available in  Nigeria.   There  was,  however,  other  treatment
    available in Nigeria.  According to the judge this was  not  considered
    to be the optimum treatment but there was no evidence that there was no
    treatment available, albeit that treatment would have side effects.

22) The finding of the judge at paragraph 47 of the decision was that there
    would be treatment for the claimant in Nigeria, although this  was  not
    the optimum treatment.

23) The judge found that the claimant would be in a position to protect his
    daughters from being subjected to FGM in Nigeria.  There  would  be  no
    pressure from his side of the family and he would be able to resist the
    pressure from his wife's family.  The judge then went  on  to  find  at
    paragraph 56 of the decision that if the claimant were to die within  a
    few years the children would face a significant  and  serious  risk  of
    being subjected to FGM.  At paragraph 54 the judge stated that  medical
    evidence was accepted to the effect that if  the  claimant  ceased  the
    therapy he presently receives his  health  was  likely  to  deteriorate
    within a few months and he would die within a few years.

24) The finding at paragraph 54 in relation to the short life expectancy of
    the claimant entirely contradicts the finding at paragraph 47,  to  the
    effect that the claimant would  receive  treatment,  although  not  the
    optimum treatment.  The finding at paragraph 54 appears to be based  on
    the  proposition  that  if  the  claimant's   current   treatment   was
    interrupted or ceased this would lead to illness and eventually  death.
    These contradictory findings are perverse, not adequately reasoned, and
    amount to an error  of  law.   At  this  stage  in  proceedings  it  is
    difficult for me to be satisfied that either finding fully reflects the
    medical evidence which was  before  the  Tribunal,  having  regard,  in
    particular, to the consultant's letter of 2 October  2015,  which  does
    not refer to optimum treatment but states that if the claimant returned
    to Nigeria it was "almost certain his HIV therapy  would  be  stopped".
    Because of the contradictory findings made  by  the  judge  the  entire
    decision should be set aside and will have to be remade.

25) A further question was raised at the hearing  by  Mr  Cogan  about  the
    judge's approach to the children and, in particular, whether their best
    interests were taken into account.  The submissions made at the hearing
    are not recorded in detail by the judge  in  the  decision.   There  is
    nothing in the grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  the
    skeleton argument  placed  before  the  Tribunal  to  suggest  that  an
    argument was presented to judge in terms of the best interests  of  the
    children.  The judge clearly approached the issue of FGM on  the  basis
    that if there was a real risk of the children being subjected  to  this
    then this would constitute serious harm.  The  judge  was  entitled  to
    form this view, although the judge erred in relation to the findings in
    respect  of  the  claimant's  health.   There  is  no  doubt  that  FGM
    constitutes serious harm.

26) Mr Cogan appeared to suggest that even if the issue of  FGM  would  not
    lead to an outcome in the claimant's favour in respect of  humanitarian
    protection, it should do so in relation to  Article  3.   There  is  no
    basis for the suggestion.  If the findings made by the judge would  not
    support a decision in the claimant's favour in respect of  humanitarian
    protection, neither would it  support  an  outcome  favourable  to  the
    claimant under Article 3.

27) The place where the best interests of the  children  should  have  been
    raised was in relation to Article 8.  Although the judge did not  refer
    directly to the best interests of the children, reference was  made  to
    sections 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act.  The judge clearly contemplated
    that the family would be removed to  Nigeria  as  a  unit.   The  judge
    pointed out that all the children were born after the claimant's  leave
    expired.  At the date of the hearing the oldest child was under 5 years
    old.  The removal of the claimant to Nigeria would constitute a  breach
    of his private life but his family life would  continue  as  the  whole
    family would return with him.  The interference with his  private  life
    would not be disproportionate.  These findings are  not  in  themselves
    objectionable but they cannot stand where proper findings have not been
    made in respect of the  claimant's  health.   Accordingly  no  findings
    should be preserved.

28) In view of  the  inadequacy  of  the  findings  based  on  the  medical
    evidence, the proper course is for the appeal to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for fresh findings to be  made.   If  the  claimant
    considers that the medical evidence should  be  clarified  or  up-dated
    then this provides an opportunity for so doing.

Conclusion

29) The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

30) I set aside the decision.

31) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  before
    a different judge with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

32) The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity and I continue that
    order.   No report of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the claimant or any member  of  his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the claimant and to the Secretary of State.  Failure to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt or court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 17th August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

