
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02486/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st August 2018                     |On 27th February 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           mr Adam Hussain Yaqoub
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Ashraf (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of IJ  Herwald,  promulgated  on
    5th April 2018 in Manchester, following a hearing on 20th  March  2018.
    In the decision, the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant successfully  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Sudan,  and  was  born  on  1st
    January 1999.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    refusing his application for asylum  and  for  humanitarian  protection
    under paragraph 329C of HC 395.  The essence of the  Appellant's  claim
    was that he belonged to the  Massaleit  tribe,  which  was  a  non-Arab
    Darfuri tribe, and that he had been arrested,  tortured,  and  detained
    for two weeks for involvement with anti-Government groups and political
    organisations.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge rejected the Appellant's claim that he had been  arrested  or
    accused or tortured, or had been detained for two weeks, or that he had
    been involved in anti-Government activity of any kind.  The judge found
    the Appellant to have been lacking in credibility in this respect  (see
    paragraph 14(j)).  However, the judge went  on  to  consider  the  core
    issue in this appeal, which was that the Appellant faced  ill-treatment
    purely on account of the fact that he was a  member  of  the  Massaleit
    tribe, which was a non-Arab Darfuri  tribe.   There  were  two  country
    guidance cases to refer to.  First there was AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris  -
    relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056.  Second, there was the case of
    MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10.  Both of these,  suggested  that
    those who are non-Arab Darfuris cannot be expected to relocate to Sudan
    because they would be at risk of persecution to them.

 4. At the hearing before Judge Herwald reliance was placed by both parties
    to the appeal, to the CPIN of August 2017.  The refusal letter referred
    to paragraph 67 of this document, quoting sources at paragraphs  2.3.10
    onwards.  The Appellant referred to the  section  on  "Rejected  Asylum
    Seekers".  As the judge observed "both parties seek to rely on the same
    document, the Respondent to persuade me  to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance, and the Appellant to dissuade me from doing so".  The  reason
    why the Respondent asked the judge to depart from the country guidance,
    was that there was evidence now, particularly from the joint  Danish-UK
    fact-finding Mission of early 2016, an Australian Government report  of
    April 2016, and the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  report,  which
    indicated there is a significant and established  population  of  (non-
    Arab) Darfuris living in Khartoum and surrounding areas.  This includes
    people who have moved from Darfur since the conflict began in 2003, who
    are able to go about  their  business  and  daily  lives  in  Khartoum.
    Moreover,  there  were  people  operating  at  the  senior   level   in
    Government, in academia, and as university students.

 5. For the Appellant, part reliance was placed on the fact  that  non-Arab
    Darfuris  do  face  harassment,  discrimination  and  generally   worse
    treatment from the state, whenever they  come  into  contact  with  the
    state (see e.g. paragraph 2.3.11 and  paragraph  14).   Moreover,  non-
    Darfuris face a moderate  risk  of  discrimination  and  violence  (see
    paragraph 5.2.9).  Sources also recounted (see paragraph  5.2.12)  that
    it was difficult to say what was happening in Khartoum.  Moreover, four
    sources indicated that non-Arab Darfuris could be at risk on the  basis
    of their ethnicity  alone  (see  paragraph  5.2.13).  There  were  also
    continued  reports  of  returnees  being  mistreated  on  return   (see
    paragraph 7.1.8).

 6. The judge, however, for his part went on to conclude that:-

         "The evidence, when considered in its entirety, does not  establish
         that the authorities target  non-Arab  Darfuris  are  subjected  to
         treatment  amounting  to  persecution  simply  because   of   their
         ethnicity.  Rather, a person's  non-Arab  Darfuri  ethnicity  is  a
         factor which may increase the likelihood  of  them  coming  to  the
         attention of the authorities and, depending on  their  profile  and
         activities, may then lead to treatment  amounting  to  persecution"
         (see paragraph 11 (2.3.15).

    The judge dismissed the appeal.

Application for Permission

 7. The application for permission is based on a matter described as  being
    of "wider significance, namely, departure from the  applicable  country
    guidance", which indicated that the return  of  non-Darfuris  to  Sudan
    would on the basis of ethnicity alone lead to their  persecution,  such
    that there had to be "cogent" evidence to support the  contention  that
    there should be a departure from existing country guidance practice.

 8. On 3rd May 2018 permission to appeal  was  granted  precisely  on  this
    basis, namely, "whether a non-Arab Darfuri with  no  political  profile
    can still rely on the country guidance given in AA and MM  to  show  he
    qualifies for protection in the light of new materials now relied on by
    the Respondent".  It was  said  that  this  was  a  point  that  merits
    consideration by the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was therefore granted.



Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me,  Miss  Ashraf  submitted  that,  although  Mr
    McVeety for the Respondent, Secretary of State, had submitted that this
    matter could be adjourned in the light  of  the  fact  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal was apparently considering a case of precisely this issue, she
    was not agreeable to an adjournment, and would wish  the  issue  to  be
    resolved now, in the interests of her  client.   She  relied  upon  the
    grounds of application.

10. She emphasised the fact that in IM and AI (Risks - membership  of  Beja
    Tribe, Beja Congress and JEM) Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 00188, the point had
    been made that involuntary returnees and failed asylum seekers  are  at
    risk of persecution on the basis of their ethnicity (see paragraphs 216
    to 217).  She  submitted  that  although  the  judge  had  reached  the
    conclusion that he had, he had not applied the  correct  test,  namely,
    whether there were very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence  to
    depart from the country guidance cases.  The judge simply  referred  to
    the evidence from the British Embassy which was suspect.   It  was  not
    objective evidence.

11. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that the judge had given very  clear
    reasons at paragraph 13(c) as to why he would depart from  the  country
    guidance given and the decision was one that was open to him.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First,  both  sides  are  agreed
    that country guidance is to be followed as a starting point.  Moreover,
    as SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ  940  makes  clear,  "unless  very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence, are adduced justifying their  not
    doing so" the decision maker is not at liberty to depart  from  country
    guidance.

13. This being so, the judge in this case was faced with the CPIN of August
    2017, which was being  relied  upon  by  both  parties  (see  paragraph
    13(a)).  The judge considered the evidence in considerable detail  over
    some three pages.  He then went on to apply exactly the  test  that  he
    was required to before he could depart from country guidance.  He makes
    this clear when he observes (at paragraph 13(c)) that:-

         "I am driven to the conclusion that were there to be a new  country
         guidance case, it would have  to  take  into  account  the  'cogent
         information' now produced in the most recent CPIN, and I vented  to
         suggest that a higher court would reach the conclusion  that,  even
         taking into account the paragraphs from 5.2 onwards  of  the  CPIN,
         matters have moved on and changed in Sudan.  Thus despite  examples
         of  individuals  from  Darfur  being  targeted  in  Khartoum  (e.g.
         paragraph  5.2.9)  overall,  the  views  of  the  British  Embassy,
         reported above, prevail.  On that basis, I am persuaded  to  depart
         from the country guidance cases ...".

14. Second, insofar as reliance was placed by Miss Ashraf on the case of IM
    and AI [2016] UKUT 188, it is useful to bear in  mind  that  the  basic
    premise of that case was that:-

         "In order for a person to be at risk on return to Sudan there  must
         be evidence known to the Sudanese authorities which implicates  the
         claimant in activity  which  they  are  likely  to  perceive  as  a
         potential threat to the regime to the extent  that,  on  return  to
         Khartoum there is a risk to the claimant that he will  be  targeted
         by the authorities ..." (see head note 1.).

15. That case also established that:-

         "The evidence draws a  clear  distinction  between  those  who  are
         arrested,  detained  for  a  short  period,  questioned,   probably
         intimidated, possibly rough handled  without  having  suffered  (or
         being at risk of suffering) serious harm and  those  who  face  the
         much graver risk of serious harm.  The distinction does not  depend
         upon the individual being classified, for example, as a teacher  or
         a journalist (relevant as these matters are) but is the result of a
         finely  balanced  fact-finding  exercise   encompassing   all   the
         information that can be gleaned about him.  The decision  maker  is
         required to place the individual in the airport on return  or  back
         home in his community and assess how the authorities are likely  to
         re-act on the strength of the information known to them about  him"
         (see head note 2.).

16. This was a  case  where  the  judge  had  found  the  Appellant  to  be
    singularly lacking in credibility with respect to the claim that he had
    made about his political profile.  As the judge made it clear:-

         "I am not persuaded that the Appellant, being non-Arab Darfuri, has
         any political profile in Sudan, and I am not persuaded  as  to  the
         credibility of his story generally, nor  of  how  or  why  he  left
         Libya" (see paragraph 14(l)).

17. In the  circumstances  whilst  I  recognise  that  any  future  Country
    Guidance may take any  view  that  is  open  to  the  Tribunal  upon  a
    consideration of the evidence, there can be  no  doubt  that  the  view
    reached by this particular judge, on the evidence presented to  him  on
    this particular occasion, was one, which was open to him, given that he
    did have regard to "cogent evidence" which was based  on  "very  strong
    grounds" raised by the Respondent Secretary of State.

18. There has been a delay in sending out this Determination to the parties
    concerned, because although it was dictated on the day of the Hearing,
    and typed up shortly thereafter, it appears to have been held up in the
    system, before promulgation.

Notice of Decision

19. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    decision shall stand.

20. No anonymity direction is made.

21. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th February 2019





