
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02980/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 August 2019                |On 21st August 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. S.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The Appellant, a national  of  Iraq,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
         illegally in 2016 and claimed  asylum.  His  protection  claim  was
         refused on 15 March  2019.  The  Appellant's  appeal  against  that
         decision was heard on 9 May 2019, and was  allowed  by  First  Tier
         Tribunal Judge Moran on asylum and Article 3 grounds in a  decision
         promulgated on 15 May 2019.
      2. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal by decision  of  19
         June 2019 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on  the  basis  it
         was arguable the Judge  had  erred  in  failing  to  give  adequate
         reasons for accepting the  Appellant  had  lost  contact  with  his
         family. Whether or not he were in  contact  with  his  family,  the
         Judge had arguably failed to give adequate reasons to  explain  why
         he would be unable to use the nationality certificate that had been
         used when he had been returned to Iraq from  Finland  in  2009,  in
         order to acquire a CSID either from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK, or
         upon return to Iraq.
      3. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to  Rule
         15(2A) for permission to  rely  upon  further  evidence.  Thus  the
         matter came before me.


    The hearing
      4. The hearing of the appeal was originally listed for 2 August  2019,
         but on that occasion the entire list had to  be  adjourned  because
         the presenting  officer  was  indisposed  on  the  morning  of  the
         hearing. At that point the Appellant was  represented  by  Counsel.
         Having consulted all of the Appellants and their representatives to
         ascertain their availability, and secured a court room, the  entire
         list was adjourned to 7 August 2019 in an effort  to  minimise  the
         expense and delay that the parties would otherwise face (two of the
         appeals being privately funded). Time for the service of the Notice
         of Hearings was thereby abridged.
      5. On 6 August 2019 the Respondent applied by email of 1255 hours  for
         an adjournment of the entire list on the basis it  was  anticipated
         that it would not be possible to provide a presenting officer as  a
         result of seasonal staff shortages. That application was refused by
         email of 1414 hours on the basis there remained ample time for  the
         Respondent to  secure  adequate  representation,  if  necessary  by
         resort to the services of the Bar. The  application  has  not  been
         renewed. The Respondent did not attend the hearing.
      6. In the circumstances I was satisfied that the Respondent was  aware
         of the hearing. I was not  satisfied  there  was  any  good  reason
         demonstrated as to why the appeal should be adjourned once again of
         the Tribunal's own motion. The issues were simple, and  it  was  in
         the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing without  delay
         and  with  minimal  further  expense,  and  the  appeal   therefore
         proceeded in the Respondent's absence, having considered paragraphs
         2, 36, and 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
         2008.
      7. On 6 August 2019 by email of 1413 hours the  Appellant's  solicitor
         applied for an adjournment of the hearing  of  the  appeal  on  the
         basis there was inadequate time to arrange  representation  at  the
         hearing, or prepare for it, since the principal of the firm was  on
         holiday. This application was refused by return email on the  basis
         the Appellant had been represented by Counsel on  Friday  2  August
         2019, who had confirmed that he  was  available  to  represent  the
         Appellant on 7 August 2019. The Appellant had also confirmed he was
         available to attend. No suggestion had been  made  that  there  had
         been any supervening event preventing the attendance of either.
      8. The application was not renewed, but when the appeal was called  on
         for hearing on 7  August  2019  there  was  no  attendance  by  the
         Appellant, or on his behalf.
      9. In the circumstances I was satisfied that the Appellant  was  aware
         of the hearing. I was not  satisfied  there  was  any  good  reason
         demonstrated as to why the appeal should be adjourned  once  again.
         The issues were simple, and it was in the interests of  justice  to
         proceed with the hearing without delay  and  with  minimal  further
         expense, and the appeal  therefore  proceeded  in  the  Appellant's
         absence, having considered paragraphs 2, 36, and 38 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


    The challenge raised in the grounds
     10. The grounds lack brevity and focus, but  the  first  ground  offers
         both a complaint that the Judge failed to provide adequate  reasons
         for his conclusion that the Appellant had  lost  contact  with  the
         members of his family in Iraq, and, a complaint that the Judge  had
         overlooked material evidence, namely  the  Appellant's  ability  to
         travel  in  2009  from  Finland  to  Iraq   using   a   nationality
         certificate, and his acceptance that he had  supplied  the  Swedish
         authorities in 2007 with his CSID which they had  not  returned  to
         him.
     11. The second ground is a complaint that the  Judge  failed  to  apply
         accurately the current country guidance for Iraq to the facts as he
         had found them to be.


    Conclusions
     12. The Judge's credibility findings are not themselves the subject  of
         individual challenge, and nor is his conclusion that the  Appellant
         faced a real risk of  persecution  for  a  convention  reason.  The
         grounds can therefore only go to the ability to internally relocate
         within Iraq to avoid that risk of harm.
     13. The Appellant's home area is Kirkuk (which lies outside  the  KRG).
         He is an adult Kurd whose language is Sorani, who has no  siblings,
         and whose parents have both been killed. The only  area  identified
         by the Respondent as suitable for him to relocate to upon  physical
         removal from the UK to Baghdad was the KRG. It was not argued  that
         he should relocate to Baghdad. It was not  argued,  and  could  not
         sensibly be argued, that the Appellant could be expected to  travel
         in safety to Kirkuk to seek to access any records held in  relation
         to him, or to obtain the issue to him of any  replacement  identity
         document, since the current country guidance is to the effect  that
         Kirkuk lies within the "contested areas" of  Iraq  within  which  a
         civilian faces an Article 15(c) risk of harm.
     14. The Judge accepted that the Appellant had no identity  document  in
         his possession, and this finding is not challenged in the grounds.
     15. The Appellant had never admitted to  the  Respondent  that  he  had
         previously been issued with an Iraqi passport,  and  there  was  no
         evidence to suggest otherwise.
     16. Although the Appellant had accepted that  he  had  held  a  genuine
         original nationality certificate when he was in Sweden and  Finland
         in 2007-9, and that he had been able  to  use  it  as  a  temporary
         travel document when removed from Finland  to  Iraq  in  2009,  his
         evidence was that this was now  lost.  There  was  no  evidence  to
         suggest otherwise. Accordingly the Judge had to consider whether he
         would be able to obtain the issue of a replacement.
     17. Although the Appellant had accepted that he had  held  his  genuine
         original CSID card when he claimed asylum in Sweden in 2007 he  had
         said  that  he  had  submitted  this  document   to   the   Swedish
         authorities, and that he had never received its return.  There  was
         no evidence to suggest otherwise and the  Respondent  had  made  no
         enquiry of  the  Swedish  authorities  to  ascertain  whether  this
         account was true, or, whether the CSID could even now  be  located,
         or supplied to him,  or  a  copy  produced.  There  was  no  proper
         evidential basis upon which the  Judge  could  have  inferred  that
         these were realistic possibilities. Accordingly the Judge was bound
         to look not to the issue of whether the original could  be  located
         and then used by the Appellant, but rather to the issue of  whether
         he could obtain a replacement CSID either  whilst  in  the  UK,  or
         within a reasonable period of time of his arrival in Iraq.
     18. Neither the existence of the original nationality certificate,  nor
         the original CSID were overlooked by the Judge, and  the  complaint
         that they were overlooked by him has no  proper  foundation  within
         his decision.
     19. Critical to the question of whether the Appellant would be able  to
         obtain the issue of either a replacement  nationality  certificate,
         or a CSID, was whether he was in contact with any  members  of  his
         extended family in Iraq, and thus able to provide their details  to
         the Iraqi authorities so that they could vouch for  him.  The  only
         extended family members in Iraq that the Appellant admitted  having
         retained contact with after his most recent departure in April 2016
         was a maternal uncle, his wife and children who were then living in
         Kirkuk [16]. He claimed to have lost contact with them, so that the
         last contact he had with them was in October 2016.
     20. The first ground asserts that the Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons for his decision to accept this loss of contact, but in  my
         judgement this challenge is misconceived. The Respondent  does  not
         assert that the decision is perverse in the sense that  it  is  one
         that was not open to the Judge on the evidence before him. A  large
         number of people have been displaced from  the  Kirkuk  area  as  a
         result of events since the Appellant left that city in April  2016.
         The decision that the Judge reached upon the weight that  he  could
         give to the different elements of the evidence relied upon  by  the
         Appellant  is  adequately  reasoned  by  the   standards   of   the
         appropriate test; MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA  Civ  1958.  The  correct
         burden and standard of proof were employed. It may be that  another
         Judge might have reached a different conclusion, but that is beside
         the point. The Judge had the benefit  of  hearing  the  Appellant's
         evidence tested under cross-examination and  it  is  not  suggested
         that any material answer was given by him that was overlooked. Thus
         his findings must stand.
     21. Absent any sustainable challenge to the Judge's  relevant  findings
         of primary fact, the conclusions that he reached in relation to the
         ability of the Appellant to internally relocate to the KRG to avoid
         the risks of harm he would face if he were to  seek  to  return  to
         Kirkuk were well open to him. It was open to the Judge to  conclude
         in the light of the guidance to be found  in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
         internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 that  in  reality  the
         Appellant would be unable to gain the issue of either a replacement
         nationality certificate or CSID in the UK, Baghdad or the KRG.
     22. On the basis of the guidance to be found in AAH, absent a CSID  the
         Appellant would be unable to board an internal flight from  Baghdad
         to the KRG. He would face considerable difficulty  in  making  that
         same journey overland without either a CSID or valid passport,  and
         would face a real risk of detention at the variety  of  checkpoints
         en route until his identity  could  be  ascertained  and  verified.
         Absent the presence of a male family member with his  own  suitable
         identity documents, and/or family connections  sufficient  to  make
         that journey a safe one,  and  to  avoid  detention,  it  would  be
         unreasonable to expect the Appellant to make such a journey.  Thus,
         upon removal from the UK, he would be stuck in Baghdad, a city that
         the Respondent did not suggest it was open to him  to  relocate  to
         (no doubt in the light of the guidance to be found in  BA  (Returns
         to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18).
     23. Even if the Appellant could physically travel to the KRG,  then  in
         the absence of family members living in the KRG with whom he was in
         contact, his accommodation options within the KRG would be  limited
         to a "critical shelter arrangement", since it  was  not  reasonably
         likely that he could gain access to a  refugee  camp  in  the  KRG,
         since they are all overcrowded and closed to  newcomers.  He  would
         also be unable  to  take  employment  without  a  CSID  to  support
         himself, or to allow him to find private rented accommodation.
     24. Accordingly it was well open to the Judge,  and  entirely  in  line
         with the current country guidance in  AAH,  to  conclude  that  the
         Appellant could not in reality be expected to seek to  relocate  to
         the KRG, even if his removal from the UK to Iraq was assumed to  be
         feasible. Not all of this chain of reasoning is set  out  expressly
         in the Judge's decision but it cannot properly  be  said  that  his
         approach ignored or failed to apply the current  country  guidance.
         On the contrary it was entirely consistent with it.
     25. In the circumstances, and notwithstanding the grant  of  permission
         to appeal, I am not satisfied that the Judge fell into any material
         error of law when he allowed the appeal on  asylum  and  Article  3
         grounds, notwithstanding the terms in which  permission  to  appeal
         was granted. In my judgement  the  grounds  fail  to  disclose  any
         material error of law in the approach taken by  the  Judge  to  the
         evidence before him that requires his decision to be set aside  and
         remade.


    DECISION
    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    15 May 2019 contained no material error of law in the decision to allow
    the Appellant's appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds  which  requires
    that decision to be  set  aside  and  remade,  and  it  is  accordingly
    confirmed.


    Direction regarding anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008
         Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is
         granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
         proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
         direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
         Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
         being brought for contempt of court.




    Signed




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 14 August 2019


