
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02538/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle House, Glasgow                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2018                             |On 19 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                omar alyusfi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Melville, Drummond Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mill promulgated on 11  July  2017  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 16 September 2016
    to refuse him leave to remain and to refuse his protection claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Libya. It is his case that his removal to
    Libya would, inter alia, result in treatment contrary article 15 (c) of
    the Qualification Directive. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that  he
    would not.  Permission to appeal against that decision  was  sought  on
    the basis that in reaching such a  conclusion,  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to have regard to ZMM (Article 15 (c)) Libya  CG  [2017]  UKUT
    00263.  Permission was granted on that basis.

 3. The parties agreed that the judge  had  erred  in  law,  and  that  the
    decision was to be remade. I am satisfied that the  judge  did  err  as
    averred, and that the decision should be remade in light  of  ZMM,  and
    should be allowed on that basis. Neither party objected to this.

 4. Rule 40 (1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    provided that the Upper Tribunal  may  give  a  decision  orally  at  a
    hearing. Ruled 40 (3) provides that the  Upper  Tribunal  must  provide
    written reasons for its decision with  a  decision  notice  unless  the
    parties have consented to the Upper Tribunal not giving written reasons
    which both Mr Melville and Ms Pettersen did.

 5. In the circumstances, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved
    the making of an error of law and is set aside. The appeal is remade by
    allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set  it  aside  insofar  as  it  relates  to  humanitarian
    protection. The dismissal of the appeal on asylum grounds is preserved.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection
    grounds.


Signed                                  Date:  4 January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul




