
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02561/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision  & Reasons promulgated      |
|On 23 August 2017                     |On 12 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer


                                   Between

                                 FAISAL ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    None
Respondent:   Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent dated 9 March 2017 wherein the appellant's protection  claim
    was refused, whilst he was detained at Harmondsworth.


Background

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, lodged  an  appeal  against  this
    decision with the assistance of solicitors based in Manchester,  on  14
    March 2017, giving a 'c/o' address in Bolton.   He  was  released  from
    detention on 17 March 2017, when he went to reside in Bolton.

 3. On 31 March 2017 the 'detention co-ordinator courts clerk' requested  a
    transfer of the hearing to a hearing centre nearer to  the  residential
    address.  This was followed by a letter dated 3  April  2017  from  the
    appellant's solicitors asking for the hearing to be  transferred.   The
    letter states that the appellant now lives in Manchester and was unable
    to attend a hearing in  Harmondsworth  given  financial  concerns.   It
    appears that there was no written response to  these  requests  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appeal proceeded to take place in Harmondsworth on  4  April  2017.
    In a decision dated 27 April 2017 the First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that
    there was no appearance by the appellant or his  representatives.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal   considered   the   solicitors'   representations
    requesting an adjournment / transfer but concluded that  there  was  no
    acceptable or reasonable explanation for the appellant's absence.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal, finding the appellant  to
    have provided incredible evidence.  In so doing the First-tier Tribunal
    took into account the appellant's failure to attend the hearing and his
    failure to provide any further evidence in support of his asylum claim.



 6. When granting permission to appeal against this decision on 1 June 2017
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson observed that there was an arguable
    failure to note that requests had been made prior to the  hearing,  and
    an arguable failure to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the  decision  to
    proceed in the appellant's absence, which  resulted  in  the  appellant
    being denied an opportunity to put his case.


 7. In a rule 24 notice dated 12 June 2007 the  respondent  submitted  that
    any error in approach is not material.


Hearing

 8. The appellant did not attend the hearing before me and  no  reason  has
    been offered for his non-attendance.  The  same  Manchester  solicitors
    remain on record and were provided with a notice of this  hearing,  yet
    there is also no explanation for their failure to attend.


 9. In these circumstances Mr Bates invited me to dismiss the appeal.



Consideration

10. There has been no unfairness in the First-tier Tribunal proceeding with
    the hearing at Harmondsworth.  The appellant  cited  financial  reasons
    for not being able to attend yet no explanation was offered as  to  how
    he was able to afford solicitors or why he could not be  assisted  with
    transport  from  the  same  source,  presumably  his  surety  from  the
    successful bail application, that recently drove him from Harmondsworth
    to Bolton.  I also note  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  refer  to  the
    appellant residing at his sister's address.  No attempt has  been  made
    to explain why she could not offer financial assistance.

11. The solicitor's letter did not indicate  that  the  appellant  was  not
    ready to proceed.  If  the  appellant  was  sufficiently  concerned  to
    attend the hearing in person he could and should have done  so.   After
    all there had been no indication that his hearing would be adjourned or
    transferred.  The fact that the appellant failed to attend the  hearing
    before me and has provided no explanation for this  together  with  the
    insufficiently explained failure  to  attend  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing or chase up a response,  is  not  indicative  of  an  appellant
    intent on taking an active part in appeal proceedings.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and is not set aside.




Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                       Dated: 23 August 2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



