
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02064/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2017                                |On 14 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     A L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda who was born  on  [  ]  1996.   He
    claims to have last entered the UK clandestinely in a lorry  travelling
    from Belgium on 4 August 2015.  Entry clearance  which  had  previously
    been granted to him and upon which he had previously entered the UK  on
    5 March 2015 and again on 14 July 2015 before leaving clandestinely  to
    travel to Belgium, expired on 9 August 2015.

 3. On 24 August 2015 the appellant contacted the Home  Office  and  on  27
    August 2015 he claimed asylum.

 4. On 12 February 2016, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appellant's Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision dated
    17 November 2016 Judge M Loughridge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.
    He rejected the appellant's account that he was at risk  on  return  to
    Uganda as a result of inter-clan violence.

 6. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  16
    January 2017, but on 13 March  2017  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Finch)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 7. On 22 March 2017, the Secretary of  State  filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's adverse findings and his dismissal of the
    appellant's appeal.

The Appellant's Claim

 8. The appellant's claim is that he is from the Pageya clan in Uganda.  In
    2005, his clan was attacked by a clan from a nearby village, the  Nguni
    clan; the leader of which is Ogle Sevic (aka  Ogwara  Peter  who  is  a
    police officer).  The attack took  place  at  night  and  many  of  his
    village were killed, including his father,  grandparents,  brother  and
    sister.  He and his uncle managed to  escape  and  went  to  stay  with
    friends in Kenya for two or three years.

 9. Around 2008, he returned to Uganda to live with his  mother.   However,
    shortly after he went to live at an orphanage called the "S" which  was
    arranged by his uncle.  The appellant's uncle was  concerned  that  the
    Nguni clan would eventually track them both down and kill them.

10. In 2015, the appellant's uncle considered that it was  no  longer  safe
    for the appellant to remain in the main buildings of the "S" and so the
    appellant moved to a building used by the staff and  others.   However,
    the appellant went to the main premises every day which  was  about  45
    minutes away by taxi.

11. On 1 July 2015, at around 10.00pm men came to the "S" and the appellant
    heard gunshots.  But they ran away when an armed guard  shot  at  them.
    The appellant, and others, ran away.

12. The next day a group of ten armed men with their faces covered returned
    to the "S" and asked where the appellant  had  gone  and  searched  the
    premises.

13. The appellant subsequently learned that his uncle was killed in a  clan
    fight on 5 July 2015.

14. On 14 July 2015, the appellant left Uganda and flew to the UK.

15. The appellant had a girlfriend in Uganda whom he  had  met  in  January
    2014 who lived in the village where he was born with her parents.   She
    also rented a room where they  met.   When  he  left  Uganda,  she  was
    pregnant and in late August 2015 her family were attacked at their home
    which was burnt down and they had to move.

The Judge's Decision

16. First, the judge  noted  that  the  appellant's  account  was  "broadly
    consistent" (at para 27) where, he said this:

         "In some respects the Appellant's account  is  broadly  consistent.
         For example, he has always said that when he was  eight  years  old
         his clan's village was attacked  by  a  clan  from  a  neighbouring
         village, and many people were killed including most of his  family;
         that he managed to escape, with his uncle; that they initially went
         to Kenya, but then returned to Uganda, to Jinja, at which stage  he
         initially lived with his mother  but  then  started  living  at  an
         orphanage called [the "s"]; that his uncle was always worried  that
         the rival clan would track them both down; and that, in July  2015,
         precisely that happened and although he managed to escape his uncle
         was killed several days later."

17. Secondly, at para 28 the judge concluded that certain  aspects  of  the
    appellant's account were not plausible.  He said this:

         "Conversely,  in  many  respects  the  Appellant's  account   lacks
         plausibility.   For  example,  if  the  Appellant's  uncle   became
         sufficiently concerned about the Appellant's safety for him not  to
         be able to live at [the "S"], and to have to move  to  a  different
         address some considerable distance away, why  was  it  nevertheless
         considered safe for him to  be  physically  present  at  [the  "S"]
         during the day, and in the evenings?  It simply doesn't make sense.
          Also, why did it take Ogale Sevic 10 years to trace the  Appellant
         and his uncle?  If finding them was within his power, it is  likely
         to have happened far more quickly.  It is also highly improbable in
         my view that if Ogale Sevic and other members of his clan  went  to
         the effort to travel 400 km from Gulu to  Jinja,  they  would  have
         made such an incompetent attempt to kill the Appellant  on  1  July
         2015.  The  Appellant's  account  is  that  several  men  exchanged
         gunfire with a security guard at [the "S"], and that  the  security
         guard managed to fend them off, and they left, albeit two dogs were
         killed; and that the next day a group of 10 armed men with  covered
         faces went back to [the "S"] and asked whether they knew where  the
         Appellant had gone,  and  searched  the  premises.   It  is  highly
         unlikely my view that Ogale Sevic would send just two men  to  [the
         "S"] initially, who were fended off  by  a  single  armed  security
         guard, if he had 10 men at his disposal."

18. Thirdly, the judge  identified  an  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's
    account concerning his uncle's involvement with the "S" at para 29:

         "I also consider there to be several significant inconsistencies in
         the Appellant's account.  For example, as far as I am aware he  did
         not mention in his asylum interview, or in his  witness  statement,
         that his uncle was a leader at [the "S"], whereas in oral  evidence
         he claimed this to be the case albeit that his uncle was rarely  at
         the premises because his role was not a  day-to-day/hands-on  role.
         It seems very odd that he would not mention his uncle's  connection
         with [the "S"] earlier on.  Indeed, he gave the impression  in  the
         asylum interview  that  he  didn't  know  much  about  his  uncle's
         movements at all, and that they essentially lived separate lives."

19. Fourthly, the judge dealt with the background evidence and the  absence
    of any such evidence concerning inter-clan violence at paras  31-33  as
    follows:

         "31.      However,  the  Appellant  does  not  fear   the   Ugandan
             government, his fear is of the Nguni clan, and  no  meaningful
             objective evidence has been submitted in  relation  to  inter-
             clan violence.  I raised this with Ms Francina towards the end
             of the hearing.  She said that it is well known that  violence
             between clans, and between tribes, has been  taking  place  in
             Uganda  for   centuries,   and   is   still   the   situation.
             Effectively, her position seems  to  be  that  I  should  take
             judicial notice of  inter-tribal/inter-clan  violence/warfare,
             and that it is not necessary for the  Appellant  to  establish
             this by way of objective evidence.

         32.  I believe Ms  Francina  has  significantly  misunderstood  the
             present-day situation in Uganda.  There have undoubtedly  been
             difficulties in the past, and widespread violence between  the
             various factions which exist in  Uganda.   However,  this  has
             largely been because of political issues, and  the  quest  for
             power within the country as  a  whole.   I  am  not  aware  of
             problems either  now  or  in  the  recent  past  of  the  type
             described by the Appellant namely one village  being  attacked
             and  destroyed  by  a  neighbouring  village.    The   ongoing
             difficulties are between President Museveni's  government  and
             his  political  opponents,  or  those  perceived  to   be   in
             opposition to the government, and not at a local, clan level.

         33.  I therefore decline the suggestion that I should take judicial
             notice of ongoing inter-tribal/inter-clan violence of the type
             alleged by the Appellant, either now/in 2015, or back in 2005.
              Accordingly I find the Appellant's account of the  attack  on
             his village in Gulu in 2015, and the attack on  [the  "S"]  in
             July 2015, to be implausible.  Lack of plausibility  does  not
             inevitably mean that the account is not credible,  but  it  is
             the background against which I assess credibility."

20. Fifthly, the judge then dealt with  a  crucial  part  of  the  evidence
    relied upon by both parties.  This consisted in a number of emails  and
    correspondence.  There was an email  dated  4  February  2016  from  Ms
    Maertens who was head of the International  Team  of  the  organisation
    based in Canada which was responsible for the "S".  That email was sent
    following an enquiry  from  the  Home  Office  concerning  the  claimed
    incident on 1 July 2015 when  the  appellant  said  the  "S"  had  been
    attacked.  That email confirmed that no such attack had  occurred.   In
    addition, there was an email from Ms  Maertens  the  following  day  (5
    February 2016) confirming that the appellant had been at the "S" for  a
    couple of months but it was later found that he was too old to stay  in
    the home and he was sent back to his family.

21. However, an email dated 22 February 2016 by  an  individual  ("J")  who
    claimed to be the "Head  of  Staff"  at  the  "S"  confirmed  that  the
    appellant was one of the boys at the "S"  and  sought  to  confirm  the
    appellant's account, including the attack in July 2015.  A letter  from
    the "Head of Devotions" ("R") at the "S" dated 1  August  2016  was  in
    similar terms.

22. In a further email dated 6 November 2016 from J, it was suggested  that
    Ms Maertens had sent an email to the Home Office confirming what J  had
    said and recognising that she had not provided the correct  information
    in her email of 4 February 2016 for "safety reasons".

23. The judge noted the documentary evidence at para 26 together  with  the
    fact that no email from Ms Maertens had been produced by  either  party
    and there was no evidence that the  appellant's  legal  representatives
    had attempted to contact Ms Maertens to obtain a copy of it:

         "The first point to make is that I must determine the appeal on the
         basis of the evidence before me.  This does not  include  an  email
         from Ms Maertens confirming  that  the  email  from  [J]  dated  22
         February 2016 is accurate.  There is, however, an  email  from  [J]
         dated 6 November 2016, which appears to suggest that such an  email
         from Ms Maertens exists.  If it does, I do  not  really  understand
         why Ms Maertens has not been asked by  Ms  Francina  to  provide  a
         copy.   Although  there  was  not  a  lot  of  time   between   the
         Respondent's Response to the directions dated 9 September 2016  and
         the hearing, Ms Francina certainly appears to  have  contacted  [J]
         himself after that Response,  but  there  is  no  evidence  of  any
         attempt to contact Ms Maertens.  That is  unfortunate  because  the
         existence of such an email is a critical issue.  I will have to  do
         the best I can to determine whether such an  email  exists  on  the
         basis of the other evidence available."

24. Before the judge, in response to directions was  a  statement  made  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State by  Kelvin  Hibbs  attaching  all  the
    relevant emails held by the Home Office  noting  that  the  responsible
    person ("RM") no longer worked for the Home Office and  his  electronic
    account had been deleted.  The printed email  whilst  containing  those
    from Ms Maertens dated 4 February 2016 and 5 February 2016 to  which  I
    have referred, did not  include  any  email  from  her  confirming  J's
    account and retracting what she had previously said.

25. At paras 34-42, the judge gave  detailed  reasons  for  preferring  the
    evidence of Ms Maertens set out in her emails of 4 and 5 February  2016
    to that of J and R set out in their documents as follows:

         "34.     The most important evidence is, in my  view,  the  emails,
             and the letter from [R].  There is a stark difference  between
             what Ms Maertens told [RM] in early February  2016,  and  what
             [J] said in an email  dated  22  February  2016,  an  email  6
             November 2016, and the letter from [R] dated  1  August  2016.
             The  Appellant's  argument  in  relation  to  the  emails  is,
             essentially, that Ms Maertens felt unable to disclose the full
             picture because she did not know who [RM] was,  and  that  she
             subsequently confirmed to [RM] that the 22 February 2016 email
             from [J] was true.  I have already dealt with  that  situation
             in paragraph 26 above.

         35.  The first observation I would make in relation to  the  emails
             is that it is unlikely that [RM] would print off  hard  copies
             of some emails but not others.  It is not impossible,  but  it
             is unlikely, in my view.

         36.  My second observation is that although  it  is  possible  that
             [the "S"] did not inform Ms Maertens or  anyone  else  at  her
             organisation of the incident in July 2015, in  an  attempt  to
             keep it secret, what is not plausible  is  that  Ms  Maertens'
             comments about the Appellant being found to be too old  to  be
             living there, and being sent away, were wrong.  Given that she
             is the head of the sponsoring organisation she will  obviously
             be aware of whether there is an age limit for the boys at [the
             "S"].  In contrast, the Appellant said in oral  evidence  that
             there was no age limit, and that many boys just as old as  him
             stayed at  [the  "S"],  and  some  even  older;  and  that  he
             continued to live at [the "S"] until he was  about  18�  years
             old, and was never sent away.

         37.  On balance, I prefer the  evidence  from  Ms  Maertens,  which
             means that what the  Appellant  has  said  is  not  true,  and
             undermines his overall credibility.  It cannot  even  be  said
             that Ms Maertens was simply not aware of the position 'on  the
             ground' because she has clearly personally spent time at  [the
             "S"] including, it seems, subsequent to  the  months  in  2010
             when she says the Appellant was there.

         38.  Do the 22 February 2016 and 6 November 2016 emails  from  [J],
             and the letter from [R],  constitute  reliable  evidence?   Or
             have they been fabricated in order to support the  Appellant's
             case?

         39.  Some aspects of the 22 February 2016 email  are  difficult  to
             make sense of.  For example,  [J]  talks  about  the  man  who
             killed the Appellant's family trying to shut  down  [the  "S],
             having to change the name to [], and  ongoing  concerns  about
             the safety of the boys.  Why would closing down the  orphanage
             be an objective for Ogali Sevic, given that in July  2015  the
             Appellant's  uncle  was  killed  and  the  Appellant   himself
             disappeared?  Surely, from Ogali Sevic's perspective, it was a
             case of 'mission accomplished'.

         40.  Of even more difficulty for the Appellant is the reference  in
             the 22 February 2016 email to volunteers from Canada not being
             received anymore because of the  situation.   This  email  was
             written just a couple of weeks after an email from Ms Maertens
             in which he made no mention of staff having had to stop  going
             to [the "S"].  Similarly, the 6 November 2016 email refers  to
             the international ["S"] staff facing an "immigration ban", and
             yet no confirmation of this has been provided by Ms  Maertens.
             Whilst I accept this email was only  a  few  days  before  the
             hearing, it would  have  been  relatively  straightforward  to
             obtain a corroborating email from her, which could  have  very
             significantly supported the Appellant's case.

         41.  Overall, I do not find the emails from [J], or the letter from
             [R], to be reliable, and I do not place any  weight  on  them.
             It is inconceivable, in my view, that, as at 22 February  2016
             volunteers from Canada were  no  longer  going  to  [the  "S"]
             because of the problems  alleged  to  have  been  experienced,
             including the murder of a member  of  staff  some  six  months
             previously, given that Ms Maertens said in an email  just  two
             weeks or so earlier that nothing happened in  July  2015,  and
             made no mention of any problems at all at [the "S"].

         42.  In contrast, I place considerable weight on the emails from Ms
             Maertens, and I reject the suggestion that she  did  not  feel
             able to disclose information  about  the  July  2015  incident
             because of fears for the safety of  the  boys  at  [the  "S"].
             [RM] had clearly identified himself in his initial email as  a
             Senior Decision Maker with the Home Office, and he appears  to
             have been using an official Home Office  email  address.   The
             fact that Ms Maertens has clearly stated  that  the  Appellant
             was at the "S"] "in 2010 for a couple of months" and  that  he
             subsequently volunteered at the sister project to help  run  a
             soccer program, adds considerable weight to the cogency of her
             evidence.  Put simply, she clearly recalls the Appellant,  and
             I find her evidence compelling.  I note that there was a short
             delay between the initial enquiry by [RM] on 28  January  2016
             and the reply by Ms Maertens on 4 February  2016,  which  gave
             ample opportunity for her to check the position with the staff
             at [the "S"] if  she  felt  the  need.   There  may  be  other
             evidence which contradicts what she has  said,  and  indicates
             that she was not aware of the full situation  when  she  wrote
             those emails, but if so it is not evidence which is before.  I
             am not persuaded that I should set aside her  evidence  purely
             on the basis of an email from [J] which claims that  she  sent
             another email, effectively retracting  that  evidence.   There
             was an opportunity for  such  an  email  to  be  obtained  and
             include in the Appellant's bundle, but that has not happened."



26. Finally, at para 43, the judge  noted  the  absence  of  any  objective
    evidence to support the inter-clan violence described by the  appellant
    as having occurred in 2005 and thereafter:

         "Similarly, no objective evidence has been put forward to  indicate
         that inter-clan violence on the scale described by the Appellant in
         2005 was an ongoing problem at that time, and without such evidence
         I regard it as implausible.  Clearly I  cannot  say  with  absolute
         certainty that it did not occur.  However, even on  the  relatively
         low standard of proof applicable in protection claims, I find  that
         it did not happen."

27. Consequently, the judge found that the appellant's account was "largely
    false" (at para 44) and dismissed his  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and
    under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

Discussion

28. In the grounds, which Mr Sharif supplemented in his  oral  submissions,
    the appellant challenges the  judge's  adverse  factual  finding  on  a
    number of bases.

29. First, Mr Sharif submitted that it was contradictory for the  judge  to
    state in para 27 that the appellant's account was "broadly  consistent"
    and then in para 29 to  go  on  and  identify  inconsistencies  in  his
    account.  Mr Sharif pointed out that, in any event, although the  judge
    said that there were "several significant inconsistencies", in para  29
    he only identified one.  Mr Sharif submitted that, in  fact,  that  was
    not even an inconsistency because  when  the  full  transcript  of  the
    appellant's asylum interview was considered, at  page  20  of  71,  the
    appellant had said "my uncle had connection there who  took  me  there"
    referring to the "S".

30. As Mr Mills submitted, that the fact that the appellant's  account  was
    "broadly consistent" did not mean that it was true.  In fact,  all  the
    judge was seeking to state in para 27 (set  out  above)  was  that  the
    elements of the appellant's account starting with  the  attack  on  his
    village in 2005 and ending with the attack on the "S" in July 2015  was
    part of his account throughout.

31. I do not accept Mr Sharif's submission.  The judge was not required  to
    accept the account simply because it was "broadly consistent" and  went
    on  to  identify  aspects  of  the  appellant's  account   which   were
    implausible or inconsistent in paras 28 and 29.   He  also  noted  that
    there was  no  background  evidence  consistent  with  the  appellant's
    claimed inter-clan violence.  Further, he grappled with the  apparently
    conflicting  documentary  evidence  concerning  the  events  in   2015.
    Provided those matters were properly matters that the judge could  rely
    upon to doubt the appellant's claim  as  truthful,  there  was  nothing
    inherently wrong and legally incoherent in the judge  noting  that  the
    appellant's account was "broadly consistent".  It is perhaps noteworthy
    that the judge begins his statement in para 27  with  the  words  "[i]n
    some respects" the appellant's account is broadly consistent.

32. As regards Mr Sharif's contention that the judge was wrong in  para  24
    to state that there were "several significant inconsistencies", clearly
    he is correct to the extent that the judge went on only to identify one
    inconsistency.  However, again that inconsistency is  prefaced  by  the
    words "for example".  Mr Sharif nevertheless submitted that it was  not
    an  inconsistency  at  all  when  the  transcript  of  the  appellant's
    interview was read.  Whilst the  appellant  does  refer  to  his  uncle
    having a "connection" with  the  "S",  the  point  still  remains  that
    subsequently (but not in his interview) the appellant claimed that  his
    uncle was "a leader".  Although the point is, perhaps, not as strong as
    the  judge  represented  it  to  be,   it   nevertheless   remains   an
    inconsistency.  Had it been the only reason for doubting the  truth  of
    the appellant's account, the actual inconsistency might well  not  have
    been able to bear the weight required for such a finding but, in truth,
    it formed only one of a number  of  reasons  given  by  the  judge  for
    doubting the appellant's account.  I am wholly  un-persuaded  that  any
    imperfection in the judge's reasoning in para 29, if the other  reasons
    for his findings  are  sustainable,  was  ultimately  material  to  his
    adverse finding.

33. Secondly, Mr Sharif, relying  upon  the  grounds,  submitted  that  the
    judge's reasoning in para 28, setting out a number of  aspects  of  the
    appellant's account which were implausible, was unsustainable  in  law.
    The grounds relies upon the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  HK  v
    SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 where the court points  out  the  dangers  of
    reasoning based upon "inherent probability" when  considering  evidence
    relating to societies with customs and circumstances that may  be  very
    different from those to which a decision  maker  in  the  UK  would  be
    familiar.

34. It is not necessarily impermissible for a judge to rely in his  or  her
    reasoning on an aspect of an appellant's account as being  implausible.
    In Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223, having cited HK, Keene LJ (with  whom
    Ward and Carnwath LJJ agreed) accepted this at [26]:

         "None of this, however means that [the judge] is required  to  take
         at face value an account of facts proffered  by  an  appellant,  no
         matter  how  contrary  to  commonsense  and  experience  of   human
         behaviour the account may be.  The decision maker is  not  expected
         to suspend his own judgment, nor does  Mr  Singh  contend  that  he
         should.  In appropriate cases, he  is  entitled  to  find  that  an
         account of events is so far-fetched and contrary to reason as to be
         incapable of belief."

35. There are, however, dangers in doing so as was recognised by the  Court
    of Appeal in HK particularly where a particular cultural context  (with
    which a judge may not be familiar) is not taken into  account.   In  Y,
    having considered HK, Keene LJ identified the dangers (at [27]):

         "A decision maker is entitled to regard an account as incredible by
         such standards, but he must take care not to do so  merely  because
         it would not seem reasonable if it had happened  in  this  country.
         In essence, he must look through the  spectacles  provided  by  the
         information he has about conditions in the country in question."

36. Consequently, where a judge has recourse to reasoning which,  expressly
    or implicitly, doubts the plausibility or  possibility  of  the  events
    occurring as an individual claims, in the  absence  of  other  evidence
    such as documents to substantiate that reasoning, the  judge  runs  the
    risk that his or her conclusion is simply speculation  or  a  purported
    commonsense conclusion that does not stand up  to  objective  scrutiny.
    But, that is not to say that  the  implausibility  of  an  individual's
    account can never form part of the reasoning leading a judge to  reject
    an appellant's account as true.  A judge must always bear in mind  that
    sometimes  the  implausible  happens.   The  more   features   of   the
    appellant's account that are implausible, the more likely  it  is  that
    the appellant's account cannot stand up to scrutiny as true.

37. Mr Mills submitted that it was reasonably for  the  judge  to  conclude
    that the matters he referred to in para 24 were implausible.  I  accept
    that submission.  First, it was open to the judge to take the view that
    it was implausible that the appellant's uncle would move the  appellant
    from the main building of the "S" in order to protect  him  whilst  the
    appellant went back to the "S" every day  and  spent  his  time  there.
    Secondly, if, as the appellant claimed, the leader of  the  rival  clan
    was a police officer and it was the appellant's  case  that  his  uncle
    feared he could be traced, it was improbable that  it  would  take  ten
    years, between 2005 and 2015, for that individual  to  track  down  the
    appellant and his uncle.  Thirdly, it was open to the judge to find  as
    improbable the appellant's account that, having  found  the  appellant,
    the rival clan chief (being  a  police  officer)  would  make  such  an
    incompetent attempt to kill the appellant initially; only to send  back
    ten armed men the following day.

38. In my judgment, the reasoning of the judge in para 28 was properly open
    to him as a matter of law.

39. Thirdly, turning now to the  emails  and  other  documents,  Mr  Sharif
    submitted that the judge was wrong in law to state in para 35  that  it
    was unlikely that the Home Office official would fail to print  off  Ms
    Maertens' retracting email if it had been sent but all of the remaining
    ones.  He pointed out that the email trail put  into  evidence  by  the
    respondent was itself incomplete at  page  2  terminating  without  the
    substance of an email sent by the Home  Office  to  Ms  Maertens  being
    included.

40. In my judgment, Mr Sharif's submission places  far  too  much  emphasis
    upon what the judge said in para 35 that it was unlikely that the  Home
    Office Officer would fail to print off and keep on  file  all  relevant
    emails.  The fact of the matter is that no such email  was  put  before
    the judge retracting Ms Maertens' earlier emails which contradicted the
    appellant's account of the incident occurring in July 2015.  The  judge
    was entitled to have regard to the  fact  that  the  appellant's  legal
    representatives had not sought to obtain from  Ms  Maertens  the  email
    which, it could be reasonably concluded, if she had sent such an  email
    she would have retained a copy of it.  This  was  documentary  evidence
    which the judge could reasonably  expect  to  have  been  obtained  and
    which, in its absence, he was entitled to take that fact  into  account
    in assessing the veracity of the appellant's account (see TK  (Burundi)
    v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40).  In addition, the judge gave  a  number  of
    reasons at paras 36-42 (set out above) why he preferred the evidence of
    Ms Maertens - as the Head of the team in  Canada  of  the  organisation
    responsible for the "S" - as set out in her emails of 4 and 5  February
    2016.  It was clear that the enquiry came from the UK Government to her
    and it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  take  the  view  that  in  those
    circumstances there was no good reason to believe she would have  other
    than set out the true position in the emails that were before him.   In
    those emails she acknowledged the appellant's presence at the "S"  but,
    again, there were also inconsistencies between what she  said  and  the
    appellant claimed, including that there was no age  limit  at  the  "S"
    (when there was).

41. The judge gave a very  detailed  and  careful  assessment  of  all  the
    evidence, in particular the email and documentary  evidence.   For  the
    reasons he gave, it was properly  open  to  the  judge  to  accept  the
    evidence of Ms Maertens in  her  emails  of  4  and  5  February  which
    contradicted the appellant's account that an incident took place at the
    "S" in July 2015.

42. I would add that the judge was also, as Mr Mills submitted, entitled to
    take into account the absence of any background evidence to support the
    underlying basis of the appellant's claim namely that  there  was  from
    2005 ongoing inter-clan violence of which his village, his  family  and
    he were victims.  The appellant's legal representative  was  unable  to
    produce any background evidence to support that aspect of his claim.

43. For these reasons, I reject each of the appellant's grounds challenging
    the judge's adverse credibility finding and  his  conclusion  that  the
    appellant had not established that he would be at  risk  on  return  to
    Uganda.

44. The final ground  relied  upon  by  Mr  Sharif  concerned  Art  8.   He
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  consider  the
    appellant's Art 8 claim which was specifically raised in  the  skeleton
    argument relied upon by the appellant's (then) legal representative  at
    the hearing.  He accepted that there appeared  to  have  been  no  oral
    submissions made by the legal  representative  in  respect  of  Art  8.
    Nevertheless, Mr Sharif submitted that Art 8 had been  relied  upon  in
    paras 25-29 and was a matter which the judge had to determine.

45. Mr Mills accepted that Art 8 was raised in the skeleton  argument  but,
    he submitted, the skeleton was in generic terms and no oral submissions
    appear to have been made.   He submitted that the  judge's  failure  to
    consider Art 8 was not material and his claim was  weak  and  dependant
    upon him having no family in Uganda which  was  inconsistent  with  the
    judge's adverse credibility finding in the asylum claim.

46. On balance, I accept Mr Sharif's submission on this  ground.   It  does
    appear that the judge overlooked the fact that the  appellant,  in  the
    skeleton  argument,  relied  upon  Art  8  when  in  para  2   of   his
    determination he stated that:  "There is no claim under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR".  The judge, as a consequence, neither sets out  any  of  the
    evidence relevant to the appellant's Art 8 claim nor makes any findings
    in respect of para 276ADE and Art 8.  Whilst the appellant's claim  may
    be weak, it is  difficult  in  the  absence  of  any  consideration  or
    recitation  of  the  relevant  evidence  by  the  judge  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the appellant's claim under Art 8 was bound to fail and
    so the judge's omission to consider it was not material.

47. In these circumstances, I have concluded that  the  judge  should  have
    considered Art 8 and that the appropriate disposition of this appeal is
    to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and to Judge  Loughridge
    to consider the appellant's claim under Art 8 alone.

Decision

48. For the above reasons, the judge did  not  materially  err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's claim for asylum and under Arts 2 and  3  of
    the ECHR.

49. However,  the  judge  did  err  in  law  by  failing  to  consider  the
    appellant's Art 8 claim.  The appeal is, accordingly, remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard by Judge Loughridge to reach a decision
    solely on the appellant's Art 8 claim.



                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  14 July 2017








