
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02575/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2019                  |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [S K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dixon, counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a national of Iraq appealed against the Respondent's
decision, dated 10 February 2018, to refuse an asylum/Humanitarian
Protection claim made on 26 February 2014.

2.   Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott-
Baker on 26 July 2018.

3.   The two principal complaints made against First-tier Tribunal Judge
Buchanan whose decision was promulgated on 30 May 2018 were that the Judge
had misunderstood and failed to properly address the circumstances in which
the Appellant, recognised as a refugee by the State of Greece, had sought
protection in the UK.  Secondly the Judge had failed to address in the
round the evidence or misunderstood the evidence as to the risks that the
Appellant faced.

4.   This brief summary of the grounds does not fully do justice to the
elegant arguments raised by Mr Dixon who, having recently been instructed
as had his solicitors, sought to amend the grounds to add additional
grounds which iterate or to some extent seek to replace those previously
advanced upon which permission was given.

5.   His primary submission was that because the Appellant had been
recognised as a refugee in Greece that should be determinative of the issue
of his refugee status in the UK and that there were no material change in
circumstances to justify a different view.  Rather he said it was akin to
the process of revocation or cessation of refugee status. Any justification
for doing so required factors relied of material and sustained change so
that a different position could be arrived at so as to diverge from the
earlier decision made by the Greek State.

6.   I rejected his request for an amendment to include new grounds along
those lines because it seemed to me that as a matter of law the finding by
another State of refugee status, just as a finding of refugee status by the
UNHCR, was not decisive or determinative of the issue.  Rather such a grant
of status was a matter which may be given weight in the context which was
fact-specific.    There was no error of law by the Judge in dealing with
this matter as he did.  Rather it seemed to me Mr Dixon was entirely right
in making the point as identified by the cases of IA [2014] UKSC 6 and KK
[2005] UKIAT 54 that there needs to be clear and substantial grounds for
coming to a different conclusion on refugee status.  I concluded the Judge
erred because he did not address it on that basis but rather did so to see
whether or not there were other matters which qualified the decision on
refugee status.

7.   It was not the case that the earlier determination was decisive but it
was somewhat akin to the approach adopted by the Tribunal in Devaseelan
when the earlier decision of a UK Tribunal was a starting point.  I
conclude the Judge's error was in seeking to rather sweep aside the claimed
basis of risk and rather to consider, in the context as it had originally
been advanced by the Secretary of State, that essentially the Appellant
could return to Greece which of course was not what was then the
Respondent's intention.

8.   I concluded that the Judge  did  not  apply  what  was  apparently  the
    correct test of whether there were those clear and substantive  grounds
    for coming to a different conclusion on  status.   I  do  not  seek  to
    second guess what different decision might have been  reached  had  the
    correct approach been followed but it was sufficient to say that  there
    were uncertainties from the way the Judge approached the matter.

9.    In  considering  whether  or  not  there  should  be  such  clear  and
    substantial grounds existing for coming to a different conclusion  from
    the earlier grant of refugee status a consideration was, as was  argued
    before the  Judge,  whether  or  not,  since  the  Appellant  had  been
    suspected of involvement with groups or alleged to be involved  with  a
    group who were antipathetic towards a Kurdish State, whether that would
    generate from the Kurdish State to which he was  returning  an  adverse
    interest and real risk.

10.  It was clear that the Judge considered the evidence but  looked  at  it
    rather from a different standpoint: Not  how  the  Kurdish  authorities
    would regard the Appellant per se but rather whether he was  associated
    with and would pose a threat to the desires of an  independent  Kurdish
    State.

11.  In  supporting  that  argument  various  news  articles  were  provided
    relating to the  issues  of  the  Appellant's  arrest,  detention,  the
    attempt to extradite him and the attitude of the Italian State.   Those
    articles said that the men, including the Appellant at  one  time,  who
    were arrested were allegedly  plotting  kidnappings  of  Norwegian  and
    British diplomats abroad to secure an  exchange  release  of  Najmuddin
    Fara Ahmad: Ahmad had  been  sentenced  to  some  eighteen  months  for
    praising the killing of Charlie Hebdo a French cartoonist.  In addition
    it was said that Ahmad was identified as the leader of a group known as
    Rawti Shax Didi Nwe and affiliated with the Ansar-al-Islam group listed
    as a proscribed organisation and a terrorist organisation  by  the  UN.
    The primary objective of that group was  the  overthrow  of  the  Iraqi
    Kurdish Government and its replacement with  a  caliphate  governed  by
    Sharia law.

12.  Finally there was an article published from the Guardian which  clearly
    identified the Appellant and indicated that the case  against  him  had
    been dropped by the Italian prosecutor's review for no known reason.

13.  In other words it was feared the authorities in the KRI were taking  an
    interest in those who had objectives against their own  and  who  would
    wish to bring down the KRI authorities.  It was said the Judge did  not
    look at the evidence from the correct approach.  I have to say  on  the
    face of it on a plain reading of the decision I rather agree with  that
    submission.  There are other points taken that I do not need to address
    because quite simply it is clear that unfortunately though as the Judge
    had been in trying  to  deal  with  the  issues  raised,  by  force  of
    circumstances he somewhat got lost in the arguments:  With  the  almost
    inevitable concentration  on  credibility  and  failed  to  see  larger
    aspects of the claim.

14.  There was of course no disputing the fact that the Appellant must  have
    been known for it to be alleged he was involved in  those  matters  and
    extradition sought. It does not seem to  me  likely  that  this  matter
    could have completely escaped the attention of  the  authorities.  Thus
    there was that inevitable concern of an adverse  interest  through  the
    processing of his return and thereafter.

15.  For these reasons, I conclude,  notwithstanding  the  adverse  findings
    which the Judge made, partly driven from the absence of direct evidence
    from Iraq, that the Judge failed to assess whether the  evidence  truly
    showed there had been that change in  circumstances  or  if  there  was
    clear and substantial evidence to show why the Appellant as  a  refugee
    recognised by  the  State  of  Greece,  should  not  have  that  status
    continued.  It was not said that his claim as to the risk he faced  was
    materially  different  from  that  which  he  had  made  to  the  Greek
    authorities and to the UK authorities.  In those circumstances although
    I do not try and second guess the outcome of the appeal it seemed to me
    that there is a reasonable basis for arguing a material error of law by
    the Original Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

The matter will have to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

List for hearing two and a  half  hours.   Not  before  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Buchanan.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 3 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

