
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal: PA/02696/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 August 2019                     |On 13 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  NADIA [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S F Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania,  born  on  7  July  1986.   She
    sought asylum in the UK on 12 October 2018.

 2. The respondent refused her claim for reasons set out in a letter  dated
    11 March 2019.

 3. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  Judge Doyle dismissed her appeal by
    a decision promulgated on 8 May 2019.

 4. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT, (i) - (iii), are  set  out
    in her application for permission dated 10 May 2019.  The  FtT  granted
    permission on 6 June 2019.

 5. The respondent filed a rule 24 response to the grounds, dated  26  June
    2019.

 6. Ground (i) is directed firstly against [12 d] of  the  decision,  which
    notes that at screening interview the appellant did not mention fear of
    her cousin or any sexual predator.  The judge is said to have failed to
    consider whether letters from a GP and from  Wellbeing  Scotland  about
    mental health issues explain the  omission.   The  ground  is  directed
    secondly against [12 l -o], where the judge refers  to  inconsistencies
    in the appellant's account of her activities for the CUF.   The  ground
    says that the judge failed to consider that both passages  of  evidence
    might be accurate, and that those suffering from mental health concerns
    might mix up information under pressure.

 7. Further to  this  ground,  Mr  Winter  submitted  that  throughout  his
    findings the judge took no account of mental health  issues,  and  that
    the omission impacted also  on  ground  (ii),  going  to  obstacles  to
    relocation, and possibly on article 8 issues.

 8. Ground (ii) is that [12 j] is not enough  of  an  explanation  to  show
    relocation to be reasonable; is speculative; and does not consider  the
    appellant's vulnerability and having nowhere to go, other than back  to
    the aunt whom she fears.

 9. Mr Winter accepted that ground (ii) depends on the appellant making out
    her claim about risk from her family.  He  said  that  if  the  judge's
    adverse credibility findings were  displaced,  this  was  not  a  claim
    necessarily defeated  by  sufficiency  of  protection  or  by  internal
    relocation.

10. Ground (iii) is that [12 f], stating that background evidence was  that
    rape was a crime taken seriously in Tanzania, was  a  contradiction  of
    that evidence, which showed there to be no enforcement.

11. Mr Winter referred  to  background  evidence  in  the  appellant's  FtT
    bundle, and in the respondent's FtT bundle at Q and Z, to show lack  of
    practical state protection for female victims of rape and violence, and
    difficulty of relocating.  He said the evidence  painted  a  very  poor
    picture.  There was no real  will  to  prevent  abuse.    The  evidence
    supported grounds (ii) and (iii).

12. Finally, Mr Winter submitted that the case should be  remitted  to  the
    FtT.

13. The most specific point made in the rule 24 response is that  the  only
    evidence about the appellant's mental health was a GP's letter  stating
    that she was treated with medication for epilepsy and depression,  with
    no information about  how  that  impacted  on  her,  and  that  further
    consideration could not have made any material difference.

14. Mr Govan relied on that response, and referred to the GP's letter at pp
    19 -20 of the appellant's FtT bundle.  He said there was nothing in  it
    about the impact of her condition on her memory or on her coherence  as
    a witness.  She had not produced a psychological or psychiatric report.
     In her statement  she  did  not  say  she  had  difficulty  in  giving
    evidence, and she made detailed responses to the refusal letter, and at
    the hearing.

15. (It was observed at this stage that the appellant does say in the  last
    sentence of her statement, "I want to clarify that  due  to  my  mental
    health problems  I  was  not  thinking  properly  and  could  not  make
    decisions myself.  I had many people telling me not to go to the UK and
    not to stay in Germany.  I am suffering  from  depression,  stress  and
    anxiety ... and epilepsy."  The response is made to paragraph 41 of the
    refusal letter, based on the appellant not having claimed  in  Germany.
    However, it is capable of being read more widely.)

16. Mr Govan submitted further as follows.  The FtT at [12 q] held that the
    claim failed even "at highest", to which the grounds made no challenge.
     On internal relocation, the  passage  quoted  and  challenged  in  the
    grounds itself showed that the judge took account  of  the  appellant's
    level of education and her history.   She  had  shown  that  she  could
    resist the aunt who was said to be a threat.  She had no reason not  to
    take help, if she wanted or needed it, from her sisters  and  from  her
    other  aunt.   The  internal  relocation  finding  was  only   in   the
    alternative.  It was for the appellant to show that she was vulnerable.
     There was little to support that.  Her actions showed that  she  could
    get by.   Rather than vulnerability being a major part of the case,  it
    had not been made much of in the FtT, and was an afterthought.   Ground
    (iii) on its own did not lead anywhere.

17. Mr Winter responded thus.  There had been evidence and  submissions  to
    raise the issues covered in ground (i).  The letters from  the  GP  and
    from Wellbeing Scotland were  not  expert  reports,  but  they  merited
    consideration, and might have  been  found  to  explain  the  perceived
    weaknesses in the appellant's account.  It was a  misapprehension  that
    the claim failed even "at highest".  If given full credit, it  was  not
    bound to fail.  If the appellant  had  not  made  much  of  her  mental
    issues, that might be because the person affected was not always  fully
    aware of their condition.  As a person with limited education and  work
    experience,  and  mental  health  issues,  relocation  might  well   be
    unreasonable.  There were very limited resources to treat the appellant
    in Tanzania, as shown by the information at AA of the respondent's  FtT
    bundle.  The respondent founded on the appellant's ability to get by in
    other European countries, but that was not the same as  getting  by  in
    Tanzania.

18. I reserved my decision.

19. The appellant's representatives have made the most of her case, in  the
    FtT and again in the UT, but even at highest it was a weak one.

20. The finding at [12 q] of no risk arising from participation in  CUF  is
    the only one which could sensibly have been reached.

21. The appellant said she was at risk of enforced marriage from her  aunt,
    but she had resisted that pressure in the past, and could do so again.

22. Even if she needed to avoid risks of enforced marriage  from  her  aunt
    and sexual assault by her cousin, those were  localised  and  avoidable
    problems.  They did not require her to avoid contact with other  family
    members, such as the other aunt she mentioned, and her sisters.

23. There was evidence that the appellant has mental health problems, which
    might go towards explaining why she did  not  make  the  best  possible
    presentation as a witness.  I also accept that  a  person  may  not  be
    aware of their own frailties, although that does not sit well with  the
    final paragraph of her statement.  However, Mr Govan made a fair  point
    that any frailty was more of an afterthought than a main theme  in  the
    FtT; it is difficult to see that it might have resulted in her  account
    being given any more credit than it was; and even if it had  been,  the
    case remained weak.

24. The FtT's alternative conclusion on internal  relocation  is  the  only
    outcome which might realistically have been expected on that issue.

25. Ground (iii) is the best taken.  The crime may be  taken  seriously  in
    law, but there was evidence that is not  reflected  in  practice.   The
    high level at which penalties are set does not count for much, if there
    is little enforcement.  Mr Winter was able to show that the finding  of
    a police force with "a will to prevent  sexual  crimes"  (a  very  high
    level of protection) goes beyond the evidence.  However, ground  (iii),
    on its own, leads nowhere.

26. The appellant has not shown that the making of the decision of the  FtT
    involved the making of any error on a point of law, such that it  ought
    to be set aside.  That decision shall stand.

27. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      6 August 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




