
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/02026/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 August 2017                     |     On 11 September 2017            |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               ZA (Sri Lanka)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Gherman, Counsel instructed by NAG Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge NMK Lawrence sitting at Hatton Cross  on  24
    March 2017) dismissing his appeal against the refusal of his protection
    claim.  The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction  in  favour
    of the appellant, and I  consider  that  it  is  appropriate  for  this
    direction to be maintained for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant's case was that he was a student who shared accommodation
    in Kandy with Tamils who were, unknown to him, linked to the LTTE.  The
    authorities raided the property on 15 April 2009 and found  a  gun  and
    other items connected to  the  LTTE.   The  appellant  was  taken  into
    custody, detained for  14  days,  assaulted  and  accused  of  being  a
    supporter of the LTTE.  He was taken to court and released on  bail.  A
    condition of his release was that he  should  report  to  a  designated
    police station. He was sexually assaulted when he went to report on  10
    June 2009, and so he stopped reporting.

 3. Some six months later he fled Sri  Lanka  in  fear  of  his  life.   He
    entered the UK as a student. He returned to Sri Lanka in December  2014
    and got married.  He thought that the charges brought  against  him  in
    2009 had been dropped, but he discovered upon his return to  Sri  Lanka
    that the charges were still outstanding and that  he  was  still  being
    hunted by the authorities. So he returned to the UK after his marriage.

 4. The appellant's last grant of leave to remain as a student ran until 14
    January 2016.  On 22 August  2016  the  appellant  was  encountered  by
    Immigration Official and detained as an overstayer.  At this point,  he
    claimed asylum.  His asylum interview eventually took place in  January
    2017, and the refusal decision was issued on 10 February 2017.

The Hearing before, and the decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Lawrence.   The  day
    before the hearing, the appellant's solicitors  served  an  appellant's
    bundle containing a witness statement from the appellant,  and  various
    documents which had been recently sent from Sri Lanka.  These  included
    a letter dated 16 March 2017 from Vernon Gunasekera ("VG") who said  he
    had been the appellant's defence solicitor in 2009; a  photocopy  of  a
    certificate evidencing that VG was registered as  a  solicitor  in  Sri
    Lanka;  a photocopy of a letter purportedly  sent  by  the  appellant's
    brother, F, to the Registrar at the Magistrates' Court in Kandy  on  23
    February 2017 requesting a certified copy of case  number  B1132/09;  a
    document purportedly generated by the Sri Lankan  Police  in  Kandy  in
    respect of case number B1132/09 detailing the progress  of  that  case;
    and a medical diagnosis ticket dated 10 June 2009 issued by a doctor in
    Sri Lanka.

 6. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Murphy,  Counsel  for  the  appellant,
    sought an adjournment in order to obtain a psychiatric report  for  the
    appellant and so as to enable the Sri Lankan documents to  be  verified
    by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  Presenting  Officer  opposed  the
    adjournment request,  submitting  that  the  appellant  had  had  ample
    opportunity to provide the documents in advance of  the  hearing.   The
    Judge agreed  with  the  Presenting  Officer.   He  ruled  against  the
    adjournment request, observing (according to Mr Murphy's detailed typed
    note of the proceedings): "App been in UK since 2009 -  had  plenty  of
    time to get docs".

 7. In the course of his oral evidence, the appellant was asked  about  how
    and from whom he had obtained  the  documents  from  Sri  Lanka.   With
    reference to the diagnostic ticket, he said that  he  had  obtained  it
    from the police at the time.  The remaining documents had been obtained
    by his older brother, F.  He was asked whether he  knew  where  he  had
    obtained them from, and he answered: "From the Court."   He  was  asked
    why he had only asked for these documents to be sent to  him  now.   He
    said that he had not known what was needed.  He had  consulted  his  UK
    solicitors: they had asked him what evidence he had, and after that  he
    had contacted his older brother.

 8. In his closing submissions, the Presenting Officer submitted that there
    were discrepancies between the Sri Lankan documents and the appellant's
    oral evidence, and he invited the Judge to find that the appellant  had
    manufactured the documents for the hearing.  He submitted that, if  the
    asylum claim was genuine, the appellant would have  claimed  asylum  as
    soon as possible and he would have produced the  Sri  Lankan  documents
    immediately.

 9.  In  his  subsequent  decision  at  paragraphs  [12]-[21],  the   Judge
    juxtaposed the appellant's evidence about the progress of his  case  in
    2009 with some of the documentary evidence.  He concluded, at paragraph
    [23], that the  appellant's  claim  for  protection  was  manufactured.
    There was no substance to the claim.  He had not demonstrated,  to  the
    lower standard, that he was in need of international protection.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

10. Mr Murphy settled the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Ground
    1 was that the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in  not  referring  to  the
    adjournment application in his decision, and as a result he had  failed
    to provide any reasoning as to why the application was refused.  Ground
    2 was that the Judge had failed adequately or at all to state  what  he
    had made of the letter from the Sri Lankan solicitor, in breach of  the
    duty to give reasons, following MK -v-  SSHD  [2013]  UKUT  641  (IAC).
    Ground 3 was that the Judge had erred in not adjourning the case, as he
    had thereby denied the appellant  a  fair  hearing,  following  Nwaigwe
    [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC).

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

11. On 16 May 2017 Judge  Chohan  granted  permission  to  appeal  for  the
    following reasons:

       It is true that in the decision the Judge makes no reference  to  an
       adjournment application made on behalf  of  the  appellant.   It  is
       established  that  on  occasions  the  refusal  of  an   adjournment
       application can amount to an error of law.  The fact that the  Judge
       has failed to mention the adjournment application certainly  amounts
       to a procedural error.  However, that, per se, does  not  mean  that
       the judge's findings in respect of other aspects of the  appellant's
       claim contain any errors.  Nevertheless,  the  matter  needs  to  be
       explored.

Discussion

Grounds 1 and 3

12. Grounds 1 and 3 can conveniently be taken together.  The Judge  made  a
    procedural error in not referring to the  adjournment  request  in  the
    course of his account of the hearing which he gave at paragraphs [4] to
    [5], and in not stating briefly in his written decision his reasons for
    refusing the request.  However, I am not persuaded that the  error  has
    resulted in material unfairness.

13. The first alleged  unfairness  is  that  the  Judge's  silence  on  the
    question of the adjournment means that the appellant is deprived of the
    ability to appeal the decision on the grounds that the Judge  erred  in
    law in not granting the adjournment.  However, by serving  Mr  Murphy's
    typed note of the  proceedings,  the  appellant  was  able  to  produce
    evidence of the adjournment request and the Judge's reasons for  ruling
    orally at the hearing why he had decided to refuse it.   Therefore  the
    Judge's failure to make reference to the  adjournment  request  in  his
    decision has not deprived the appellant of the ability  to  argue  that
    the Judge erred in law in not acceding to the adjournment request.

14. The second alleged unfairness is that the refusal  of  the  adjournment
    request was wrong in substance.  In her oral  submissions,  Ms  Gherman
    highlighted the fact that the appeal had been listed for a  substantive
    hearing within a very short time after the  refusal  decision  and  the
    subsequent lodging of the notice of appeal.  However, I  consider  that
    the reason given orally by  the  Judge  for  refusing  the  adjournment
    request was adequate.

15. With regard to the documents emanating from Sri  Lanka,  the  appellant
    had claimed asylum as far back as the end of August 2016.  Moreover, on
    his account, the court and police documents had been in existence since
    2009.

16. According to paragraph 5 of the grounds, Counsel submitted to the Judge
    that the Secretary of State should state what she made of the documents
    produced by the appellant; and in particular, in relation to the letter
    from the appellant's  Sri  Lankan  solicitor,  he  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State should  confirm  or  deny  whether  VG  was  on  the
    Solicitors' Register in Sri Lanka; and she should contact the solicitor
    to see if he was prepared to stand by his statement.

17. In oral argument, Ms Gherman accepted that the Secretary of State could
    not be compelled to agree to an adjournment  in  order  to  attempt  to
    verify the credentials of a person putting himself forward  as  a  bona
    fide Sri Lankan solicitor; and nor could she  be  compelled  to  verify
    whether documents put forward as being on a court  file  in  Sri  Lanka
    were actually on the court file in question.

18. Mr Murphy pleaded that the other reason he gave for seeking adjournment
    was that it was the appellant's case that he had  been  physically  and
    sexually abused whilst in detention, and he took  the  view  that  this
    case had the potential to be greatly  assisted  by  a  psychiatric  and
    medical report. To be precise, it was the appellant's case that he  had
    been sexually abused when reporting at a  police  station  on  10  June
    2009.  Although he had been physically abused while in  detention,  his
    case was that it was the sexual abuse on 10 June 2009 that  had  caused
    him to cease reporting,  and  thereafter  to  flee  the  country.   The
    appellant did not claim that there had been any permanent scarring from
    his physical abuse, and so there was no occasion for a scarring report.
     It is also not suggested that in the run-up to the appeal hearing  (or
    indeed at any time in the past) the appellant had displayed  the  signs
    and symptoms of PTSD.  The appellant had at  all  material  times  been
    represented by competent solicitors in the UK, and they  had  not  been
    prompted to seek a psychiatric report on the appellant.

19. Accordingly, I am not persuaded that the refusal of an  adjournment  on
    any of the grounds put forward by Counsel for the appellant resulted in
    material unfairness, or deprived the appellant of a fair hearing of his
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal.

Ground 2

20. Although not cited to me, I have had regard  to  Muse  and  Others  -v-
    Entry Clearance Officer  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  10  on  challenges  to  the
    adequacy of a judge's reasons. In South Bucks District Council v Porter
    (2) [2004] UKHL 33, cited with approval  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  at
    paragraph [33], Lord Brown said:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration (my emphasis)

21. The main issue in dispute in this  appeal  was  what  happened  to  the
    appellant in the spring and early  summer  of  2009;  and  whether  his
    claimed  problems  with   the   Sri   Lankan   authorities   had   been
    satisfactorily resolved by his older brother, so as to enable him to go
    back safely to Sri Lanka in 2014; or whether they had not been resolved
    by 2014 with the consequence that the charges allegedly brought against
    him in 2009 remained outstanding, as  did  a  warrant  for  his  arrest
    allegedly issued in 2009.

22. In order to evaluate whether the judge erred in law  in  not  making  a
    specific finding on the letter from VG, it is necessary to consider the
    contents of the letter and the wider context.

23. VG does not claim in the letter to have inspected documents on a  court
    file.  He does not claim to have been instructed to inspect  the  court
    file held at the Magistrates' Court in Kandy to ascertain what is  held
    on the file in respect of the appellant, and to produce copies  of  the
    said documents. Instead, VG refers to a file "maintained by me and  the
    information I have gained". However, VG does not list the documents  on
    his file, or purport to produce them, and he does not  state  when  the
    documents came into his possession.

24. As noted earlier, the evidence of the appellant at the hearing was that
    his older brother had been responsible for obtaining the documents from
    Sri Lanka, including documents from the court file.

25. VG only confirms appearing for  the  appellant  at  a  hearing  in  the
    Magistrates'  Court  in  Kandy  on  15  April  2009  and  securing  the
    appellant's release on bail in the sum of 500,000 rupees.  He does  not
    mention any further court appearances, whereas the appellant gave  oral
    evidence of further court appearances, as noted by the Judge.

26. Thirdly, while he confirms that an arrest warrant  was  issued  by  the
    Magistrates' Court in Kandy after his client failed to  report  to  the
    police station after 10 June 2009, he does not produce a  copy  of  the
    arrest warrant or an order of the court directing  that  the  appellant
    should be arrested. He also does not  confirm  that  any  charges  were
    brought against the appellant at the time, still less that any  charges
    against the appellant remain outstanding.  He says that he believes the
    charge against his client has become "more severe" because of  him  not
    following the bail conditions, but he does not identify what the charge
    is or was.

27. Although the Judge does not make a specific finding  on  the  probative
    value of VG's letter, it is implicit from his other  findings  that  he
    finds it to have little probative value.

28. Moreover, it is not true that  the  Judge  fails  to  engage  with  the
    contents of VG's letter. As  the  contents  of  VG's  letter  partially
    mirror the appellant's account of how the case against him  progressed,
    the judge engages with the account given by VG  by  engaging  with  the
    account given by the appellant, pointing up  its  inner  contradictions
    and the respects in which it lacks credibility (such as  the  appellant
    obtaining the medical diagnostic ticket directly  from  the  police  in
    2009) and the respects in which it is  not  consistent  with  documents
    allegedly on the court file - documents which were  not  said  to  have
    obtained from the court by  VG,  but  which  were  instead  purportedly
    obtained from the court by F, who is  neither  a  professional  nor  an
    independent witness.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 5 September 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
