
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02055/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st November 2016                        |On 28th November 2016         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M C
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Fisher, instructed by Gulsen & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is a  national
    of Turkey  born  on  25th  May  1973.   His  appeal  against  automatic
    deportation under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 was  allowed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow on asylum and Article 3 grounds.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed the decision on the  grounds  that  the
    judge had failed to apply relevant case law and had misdirected himself
    in law. Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page  on
    20th October 2016 on the grounds that it was arguable  that  the  judge
    had made a material error of law by failing to apply relevant case  law
    in relation to draft evasion or desertion in Turkey and  therefore  had
    erred in law in concluding that the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  on
    return. Further, the judge  had  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant faced a suicide risk in Turkey and  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 3 grounds.

Relevant case law

3.   IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKAIT 00312:

    "14. On this basis the Tribunal in A (Turkey) identified the  potential
         risk factors to be taken into account. It concluded as follows:


         46.  The following are the factors which  inexhaustively  (sic)  we
             consider to be material in giving rise to potential  suspicion
             in the  minds  of  the  authorities  concerning  a  particular
             claimant.


             a)   The level if any of the Appellant's  known  or  suspected
                  involvement with a separatist organisation. Together  with
                  this must be assessed the basis upon which it is contended
                  that  the  authorities  knew  of  or  might  suspect  such
                  involvement.


             b)   Whether the Appellant has ever been arrested or  detained
                  and if so in what circumstances. In this context it may be
                  relevant to note how long ago such arrests  or  detentions
                  took place, if it is the case that there appears to be  no
                  causal  connection  between  them   and   the   claimant's
                  departure from Turkey, but otherwise it may be a factor of
                  no particular significance.


             c)    Whether  the  circumstances  of  the  Appellant's   past
                  arrest(s) and detention(s)  (if  any)  indicate  that  the
                  authorities did in fact view him or  her  as  a  suspected
                  separatist.


             d)   Whether the Appellant was charged or placed on  reporting
                  conditions or now faces charges.


             e)   The degree of ill treatment to which  the  Appellant  was
                  subjected in the past.


             f)   Whether the  Appellant  has  family  connections  with  a
                  separatist organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.


             g)   How long a period elapsed between  the  Appellant's  last
                  arrest and detention and his or her departure from Turkey.
                  In this regard it may of course be  relevant  to  consider
                  the evidence if any concerning what the Appellant  was  in
                  fact doing  between  the  time  of  the  last  arrest  and
                  detention and departure from Turkey. It is a  factor  that
                  is only likely to be of any particular relevance if  there
                  is a reasonably lengthy  period  between  the  two  events
                  without any ongoing problems being experienced on the part
                  of the Appellant from the authorities.


             h)   Whether in the period after the Appellant's  last  arrest
                  there is any evidence  that  he  or  she  was  kept  under
                  surveillance or monitored by the authorities.


             i)   Kurdish ethnicity.


             j)   Alevi faith.


             k)   Lack of a current up-to-date Turkish passport.


             l)   Whether there is any evidence that the  authorities  have
                  been pursuing or otherwise expressing an interest  in  the
                  Appellant since he or she left Turkey.


             m)   Whether the Appellant became an informer or was asked  to
                  become one.


             n)    Actual  perceived   political   activities   abroad   in
                  connection with a separatist organisation.


             o)   If the returnee is a military draft evader there will  be
                  some logical impact on his profile to those assessing  him
                  on his immediate return. Following Sepet  of  course  this
                  alone is not a basis for a refugee or human rights claim.


         47.  We cannot emphasise too strongly the  importance  of  avoiding
             treating these factors as some kind of  checklist.  Assessment
             of the claim must be in the round bearing in mind the  matters
             set out above as a  consequence  of  a  careful  scrutiny  and
             assessment of the evidence. The central issue as always is the
             question of the real risk on return of ill treatment amounting
             to persecution or breach of a person's Article 3  rights.  The
             existing political and human rights context overall is also  a
             matter of significance as will be seen from our assessment  of
             the particular appeals in our determinations of  those  below.
             The particular circumstances that prevail today may not be  in
             existence in 6 months' time for all we know."


    "111.    In saying this we emphasise that many of the  individual  risk
         factors described in  A  (Turkey)  comprising  themselves  a  broad
         spectrum  of  variable  potential  risk   that   requires   careful
         evaluation on the specific facts of each appeal  as  a  whole.  The
         factors described in A (Turkey) were not intended as  a  simplistic
         checklist  and  should  not  be  used  as  such.     Thus  not  all
         detentions will be of comparable significance  in  assessing  risk.
         For example, in the light of the positive developments in Turkey in
         recent  years  described  above,  there  could  be  a   considerate
         difference  between  the  potential  significance  when  evaluating
         present risk to a person who, say, was rounded up by many others in
         the course of Kurdish Newroz celebrations and held overnight before
         being released without charge, and a  person  who  was  ill-treated
         along with others in his village in implementation of the clearance
         programme in the Southeast on the one hand, and a  person  who  was
         specifically and individually targeted  and  detained  for  reasons
         inherent in his personal history, and seriously ill treated over  a
         more  protracted  period  on  the  other  hand.   This   comparison
         illustrates why we caution against a  too  simplistic  approach  to
         headline factors."


     "118. In general terms however we consider that one should proceed when
         assessing the viability of internal relocation on the basis that an
         individual's material history will be in broad terms  become  known
         to the authorities at the airport and  in  his  new  area  when  he
         settles either through registration with the local Mukhtar or if he
         comes to the attention for any reason  of  the  police  there.  The
         issue is whether that record would be reasonably likely to lead  to
         persecution outside his home area."


     "119.    We have already identified some examples of the  circumstances
         in which a person may have experienced serious ill treatment in the
         past in areas of Turkey where the PPK was or  now  is  active,  but
         would not necessarily be at risk of  such  treatment  elsewhere  in
         Turkey where it is not, and where a different view of  his  history
         could be taken. They include examples of  general  intimidation  by
         the authorities of the Kurdish population to discourage support for
         the PPK, or to clear whole villages. The evidence is that  anything
         between some hundreds of thousands to some millions  (depending  on
         whose figures one uses) may have been displaced within Turkey as  a
         consequence of this. However, outside the  areas  of  PKK  activity
         there will not  be  the  same  perceived  need  to  undertake  such
         intimidation or clearances and the authorities within the receiving
         areas will be aware of the tactics that led to this mass  migration
         and will be able to assess an individual's record in the  light  of
         it. Similarly, a person who was included on Mr Dil's list of  local
         'ne'er-do-wells,'  against  whom  there  was  no  evidence  of  PPK
         involvement, but who ran the risk of being detained for questioning
         whenever a PKK incident occurred in his vicinity would  not  be  at
         similar risk in another area where the  PKK  were  not  active  and
         where such incidents were much less likely to occur. These are just
         some examples of why different risk can arise in different areas of
         Turkey."


    "133.    The following is a summary of our  main  conclusions  in  this
         determination


             1.   The  evidence  of  Mr  Aydin  (paragraph  32)  accurately
                  describes  the  defined   and   limited   ambit   of   the
                  computerised GBT system.  It  comprises  only  outstanding
                  arrest warrants, previous arrests, restrictions on  travel
                  abroad,  possible  draft  evasion,  refusal   to   perform
                  military service and tax arrears. 'Arrests'  as  comprised
                  in the GBTS require some court intervention, and  must  be
                  distinguished from 'detentions'  by  the  security  forces
                  followed by release without charge.  The  GBTS  is  fairly
                  widely accessible and is in particular  available  to  the
                  border police at booths in Istanbul airport, and elsewhere
                  in Turkey to the security forces.


             2.   In addition, there is border control information collated
                  by the national police (Department for Foreigners, Borders
                  and Asylum) recording past legal arrivals  and  departures
                  of  Turkish  citizens,  and   information   about   people
                  prohibited from entering  Turkey  as  a  result  of  their
                  activities abroad, collated by MIT.


             3.   The Judicial Record Directorate keeps judicial records on
             sentences...


             4.   The Nufus registration system comprises details  of  age,
                  residence,  marriage,  death,  parents'   and   children's
                  details, and religious status. It may also include  arrest
                  warrants and  if  any  of  the  people  listed  have  been
                  stripped of nationality. There is no evidence that  it  is
                  directly available at border control.


             5.   If a person is held for questioning either in the airport
                  police station after arrival or subsequently elsewhere  in
                  Turkey  and  the  situation  justifies   it,   then   some
                  additional inquiry could be made of the authorities in his
                  local area about him, where more extensive records may  be
                  kept  either  manually  or  on  computer.  Also,  if   the
                  circumstances so justify, an enquiry could be made of  the
                  anti-terror police or MIT to see if an  individual  is  of
                  material interest to them.


             6.   If there is a material entry in the GBTS or in the border
                  control information, or if a returnee is travelling  on  a
                  one-way  emergency  travel  document,  then  there  is   a
                  reasonable likelihood that he will be  identifiable  as  a
                  failed asylum seeker and could  be  sent  to  the  airport
                  police station for further investigation.


             7.   It will be for an Adjudicator in each case to assess what
                  questions are likely to be asked during such investigation
                  and how a returnee would respond without being required to
                  lie. The ambit of the likely questioning depends upon  the
                  circumstances of each case.


             8.   The escalation of the violence following  the  ending  of
                  the PKK ceasefire reinforces our view that the risk  to  a
                  Kurdish returnee of ill treatment by the  authorities  may
                  be greater if his home area is in an area of  conflict  in
                  Turkey  than  it  would  be  elsewhere,  for  the  reasons
                  described in paragraphs 90 and 116.


             9.   The Turkish Government is taking  action  in  legislative
                  and structural terms to address the human rights  problems
                  that present a serious obstacle to its membership  of  the
                  EU. It has made its zero tolerance policy towards  torture
                  clear. However, the use of torture is long and deep-seated
                  in the security forces and it will take time and continued
                  and  determined  effort  to  bring  it  under  control  in
                  practice. It  is  premature  to  conclude  that  the  long
                  established view of the Tribunal concerning the  potential
                  risk of torture in detention as per  A  (Turkey)  requires
                  material revision on the present  evidence.  However,  the
                  situation will require review as further evidence  becomes
                  available. For the time being as in the  past,  each  case
                  must be assessed on its own merits from  the  individual's
                  own history and the relevant risk factors as described  in
                  paragraph 46 of A (Turkey).


             10.  Many of  the  individual  risk  factors  described  in  A
                  (Turkey)  comprise  in  themselves  a  broad  spectrum  of
                  variable potential risk that requires  careful  evaluation
                  on the specific facts of  each  appeal  as  a  whole.  The
                  factors described in A (Turkey) were  not  intended  as  a
                  simplistic checklist and should not be used as such.


             11.  A young, fit, unmarried person, leaving his home area and
                  seeking unofficial employment in a big city, may not  feel
                  the need to register with the local Mukhtar, at  least  at
                  the outset.  Many do not.  However,  given  the  range  of
                  basic activities for which a certificate of  residence  is
                  needed,  and  which  depend  upon  such  registration,  we
                  conclude that it would in  most  normal  circumstances  be
                  unduly  harsh  to  expect  a  person   to   live   without
                  appropriate registration  for  any  material  time,  as  a
                  requirement  for  avoiding  persecution.  This  does   not
                  necessarily preclude the viability of internal  relocation
                  for the reasons described in paragraph 133.13 below.


             12.  The proper course in assessing the risk for a returnee is
                  normally to decide first whether he  has  a  well  founded
                  fear of persecution in his home area  based  upon  a  case
                  sensitive assessment of the facts in  the  context  of  an
                  analysis of the risk factors described in A  (Turkey).  If
                  he does not then he is unlikely to be  at  any  real  risk
                  anywhere in Turkey.


             13.  The risk to a specific individual in  most  circumstances
                  will be at its highest in his home area for a  variety  of
                  reasons, and particularly if it is located in the areas of
                  conflict in the south and east of Turkey.  Conversely  the
                  differential nature of the risk outside that area  may  be
                  sufficient to mean that the individual  would  not  be  at
                  real risk of persecution by  the  state  or  its  agencies
                  elsewhere in Turkey, even if they were made aware  of  the
                  thrust of the information maintained in his home  area  by
                  telephone or fax enquiry from the airport  police  station
                  or elsewhere, or by a transfer of at  least  some  of  the
                  information to a new home area on  registration  with  the
                  local  Mukhtar  there.  Internal   relocation   may   well
                  therefore  be  viable,  notwithstanding   the   need   for
                  registration in the new area. The  issue  is  whether  any
                  individual's material history would be  reasonably  likely
                  to lead to persecution outside his home area.


             14.  This determination updates and replaces the  7  decisions
                  listed  below,  in  the  light  of  further  evidence  and
                  argument, and now comprises the Tribunal's current country
                  guidance on the issues described."


4.   J v Home Secretary [2005] EWCA Civ 629

    "25. It should be stated at the outset  that  the  phrase  'real  risk'
         imposes a more stringent test than merely that  the  risk  must  be
         more than 'not fanciful'. The cases show that  it  is  possible  to
         amplify the test at least to the following extent.


    26.  First, the test requires an assessment to be made of the  severity
         of the treatment which it is said that the applicant  would  suffer
         if removed. This must attain a minimum level of severity. The court
         has said on a number  of  occasions  that  the  assessment  of  its
         severity depends on all the circumstances of the case. But the  ill
         treatment must 'necessarily be serious' such that it is 'an affront
         to fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to a
         country where he is at risk of serious  ill-treatment':  see  Ullah
         paras [38-39].


    27.  Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act  or
         threatened act of removal or expulsion and  the  inhuman  treatment
         relied on as violating the applicant's article 3  rights.  Thus  in
         Soering at para [91], the court said:


             "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may  be
             incurred,  it  is  liability  incurred  by   the   extraditing
             Contracting State by reason of its having taken  action  which
             has as a direct consequence the exposure of an  individual  to
             proscribed ill-treatment."


         See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that  the
         examination of the article 3 issue "must focus on  the  foreseeable
         consequences of the removal of the applicants to Sri Lanka..."


    28.  Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the Article 3 threshold
         is particularly high simply because it is a foreign case. And it is
         even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment is not  the  direct
         or  indirect  responsibility  of  the  public  authorities  of  the
         receiving state, but results from some naturally occurring illness,
         whether physical or mental. This is made clear in para  [49]  of  D
         and para [40] of Bensaid.


    29.  Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a suicide
         case (para [37] of Bensaid).


    30.  Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach  of
         article 3 in a suicide case, a question of  importance  is  whether
         the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving  state  upon
         which the risk of suicide is said to be based is objectively  well-
         founded. If the fear is not well-founded, that will tend  to  weigh
         against there being a real risk that the removal will be in  breach
         of article 3.


    31.  Sixthly, a further question of considerable relevance  is  whether
         the removing and/or the receiving state has effective mechanisms to
         reduce the risk of suicide. If there are effective mechanisms, that
         too will weigh heavily against an applicant's  claim  that  removal
         will violate his or her article 3 rights."


5.   Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362

    "14. If a fear of ill-treatment on return is  well-founded,  this  will
         ordinarily mean that refoulement (if it  is  a  refugee  convention
         case) or return (if it is a human rights case) cannot take place in
         any  event.  In  such  cases  the  question  whether  return   will
         precipitate suicide  is  academic.  But  the  principle  leaves  an
         unfilled space for cases like the present one where  fear  of  ill-
         treatment  on  return,  albeit  held  to  be  objectively   without
         foundation, is subjectively not only real but overwhelming.


    15.  There  is  no  necessary  tension  between  the  two  things.  The
         corollary of the final sentence of paragraph 30 of J is that in the
         absence of an objective foundation for the  fear  some  independent
         basis for it must be established if weight is to be  given  to  it.
         Such an independent basis may lie in trauma inflicted in  the  past
         on the Appellant in (or, as here, by) the receiving state:  someone
         who has been tortured and raped  by  his  or  her  captors  may  be
         terrified of returning to the place where it  happened,  especially
         if the same authorities are in  charge,  notwithstanding  that  the
         objective risk of recurrence has gone.


    16.  One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in J that what  may
         nevertheless be of equal importance is  whether  any  genuine  fear
         which the Appellant may  establish,  albeit  without  an  objective
         foundation, is such as to create a real risk of suicide if there is
         an enforced return."


First-tier Tribunal decision

6.   The judge made the following findings:

         "44. Country information reports lend  weight  to  the  Appellant's
             complaint of unlawful attacks on Kurds. In its  December  2014
             briefing  paper  for  the  Universal  Periodic   Review,   War
             Resisters International (cited in the Respondent's recent  OGN
             for Turkey) concluded that 'the dangers  of  apprehension  for
             evasion or desertion have significantly  increased  in  recent
             years  as  a  result  of  the  general  information  gathering
             system'. They further explained that 'During  the  last  three
             months of 2013, 4,920 evaders were detained  as  a  result  of
             regular ID checks under  the  General  Database  System.  This
             system also enables evaders including conscientious  objectors
             to be immediately identified while carrying  out  transactions
             at banks, airports, health institutions etc.'.


         45.  In making  his  claim  and  persisting  with  his  appeal  the
             appellant has presented as a vulnerable person.  He  has  told
             the truth about some matters, but not  all;  particularly  the
             situation concerning members of his family who  have  been  in
             the UK. However, at the lower standard it is accepted that the
             core of the appellant's claim as to being a draft deserter for
             the reasons given by him have been established. It is in these
             circumstances, drawing on IK and country  information  reports
             that the Appellant will be at risk on return. If he were to be
             returned it would be as a failed asylum seeker  travelling  on
             an emergency travel  document.  He  would  be  encountered  by
             border control and likely to be referred to higher  authority.
             He could not be expected to lie about his past. Turkey  is  in
             state of high alert following the recent terrorist  attack  at
             Ankara airport, the attempted coup and the sensitive  security
             situation with Syria  to  the  south  and  east.  All  persons
             arriving at immigration  control  amidst  heightened  security
             will be carefully screened, not least of all  a  Turkish  Kurd
             who left over 20 years ago. The risk of ill treatment  despite
             avowed improvement remains. Accordingly the Appellant's  claim
             for asylum succeeds."


         "50. This is a foreign case and the Article 3 threshold in relation
             to the claimed suicide risk on return is therefore high. As to
             the first proposition outlined in J, the claimed  severity  of
             treatment has been established. There is causal  link  between
             the threatened act of removal and the inhuman treatment relied
             on as violating the  applicant's  Article  3  rights.  As  the
             Appellant's  case  is  foreign  case  the  particularly   high
             threshold has been established. As he cannot  safely  relocate
             it has been shown that he has a genuine fear creating  a  risk
             of suicide.  Both Turkey and the UK, in answer  to  the  sixth
             proposition, have effective mechanisms to reduce the  risk  of
             suicide.


         51.  As it has not been shown that Turkey does not  have  mechanism
             to reduce the risk of suicide, the Tribunal should assume that
             the Respondent would provide appropriately  qualified  escorts
             on return. The Appellant's fear is  extreme,  relying  on  the
             evidence of Dr Moore,  as  to  lead  to  sufficiently  adverse
             consequences for his mental  health  on  removal.  The  likely
             effect of the psychological trauma in this case if  return  is
             enforced, will be  suicide.  The  Appellant's  only  perceived
             means of escapee from the isolation and fear in  which  return
             would place him, would be to take his  own  life;  that  there
             exists a local health service capable of  affording  treatment
             does not materially attenuate the risk  which  is  subjective,
             immediate and acute. In the fact  sensitive  circumstances  of
             this case the Appellant's return would in my  judgement  reach
             the  high  threshold  of  inhuman  treatment   unconditionally
             prohibited by Article 3."


Submissions

7.   Mr Jarvis submitted that, although the Appellant was  a  draft  evader,
    he would not be at risk on return  to  Turkey  because  there  were  no
    factors present in his case which were sufficient to put him at adverse
    interest to the authorities. There were credibility issues in  relation
    to Section 8 and the judge concluded that the Appellant's claim to have
    been involved in political activity was not credible.

8.   Mr Jarvis submitted that whilst it was accepted that Kurds were  abused
    and mistreated in the southeast, there may not be a risk on  relocation
    to another part of Turkey. There would only be a risk if an appellant's
    profile was such that they would still be of adverse interest once they
    were transferred. If the nature of the information about the person was
    sufficient to show that they had been involved in  terrorist  activity,
    then they would be conveyed to the terrorist police and therefore there
    would be a risk of harm.

9.   Mr Jarvis relied on paragraphs 111, 118 and 119  of  IK  and  submitted
    that there were certain risks in the home  areas  for  'ne'er-do-wells'
    that did not arise elsewhere in Turkey.  However,  the  failure  to  do
    military service would give rise to prosecution not  persecution.  What
    was missing from the judge's analysis  at  paragraph  45  was  why  the
    Appellant's profile was sufficient to mean that he would be of  adverse
    interest to the  authorities.  Being  a  Kurd  was  insufficient.  What
    evidence was there that the Appellant would be persecuted  rather  than
    prosecuted? What was missing was why the Appellant would be ill treated
    as a draft evader.

10.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the OGN [CIG] was referred to in  the  judge's
    decision at paragraph 44, but that this paragraph  in  itself  did  not
    refer to ill treatment.  If  the  judge  was  saying,  because  of  the
    heightened security situation, the Appellant would  be  at  risk  as  a
    Kurd, there was no evidential basis for a finding of ill treatment. The
    judge  deviated  from  IK  because  he  said  that  being  a  Kurd  was
    sufficient.  The  evidence  in  the  country  information  reports  was
    insufficient to show that the judge should deviate from IK.  The  judge
    needed to  identify  compelling  and  cogent  evidence.  This  was  not
    available because it was possible from the CIG evidence that  a  person
    could buy themselves out of military service. There was  no  evidential
    basis for the  deviation  from  IK  and  no  analysis  of  whether  the
    Appellant could or could not get out of military service.

11.  Mr Jarvis submitted that there were effective mechanisms in Turkey  and
    the UK to prevent suicide. The judge found that there was an  immediate
    and highlighted risk of suicide but he failed to analyse the  situation
    in terms of J. The judge's finding on suicide risk was predicated on  a
    finding of ill treatment. There was nothing before the  judge  to  show
    that the Appellant  could  not  receive  medication  or  could  not  be
    treated. The adverse risk was not made out. The Appellant would not  be
    at risk of suicide because he was not at risk  of  ill  treatment.  The
    circumstances of this case did not meet the threshold in Y and Z.

12.  The Appellant had evaded the draft twenty years ago and  there  was  no
    evidence of adverse treatment.  The  judge  failed  to  consider  other
    evidence such as the fact that the  Appellant  has  family  in  Turkey,
    which was relevant to how he would cope if there was no risk of adverse
    treatment.

13.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the finding of risk of suicide  was  not  made
    out. The medical evidence in this case amounted  to  letters  from  the
    Appellant's GP (see A45 of the Appellant's bundle). It was not accepted
    that the Appellant's PTSD was caused by events in Turkey. The judge had
    not properly applied J and had not looked at the  consequences  of  his
    finding when assessing the GP's letter. The GP had given some  credence
    to the Appellant's past, but the judge had specifically rejected  that.
    The adverse credibility findings reduced the effect of the GP's letter.
    The PTSD stemmed from what happened in the UK and was not the  same  as
    in Y and Z. This was an unusual case. The judge had  deviated  from  IK
    and had not followed relevant case law.

14.  For the Appellant, Ms  Fisher  submitted  that  the  Tribunal,  in  IK,
    accepted that there was torture in detention and the judge in this case
    specifically referred to that finding at paragraph 42. The  judge  also
    quoted paragraph 14 of IK. Ms Fisher submitted that following IK  there
    was evidence that torture and ill treatment took  place  in  detention.
    The judge had gone through IK and the OGN  [CIG]  and  found  that  the
    Appellant was a deserter.  At paragraph 45 the judge assessed  all  the
    evidence. From the summary in IK, torture does  occur  in  Turkey.  The
    courts have accepted that it does happen and the Appellant only has  to
    show a real risk. The CIG at paragraph 7.3.1  gives  a  full  range  of
    penalties which could impact on  the  Appellant's  mental  health.  The
    Appellant was a deserter so he may not be able  to  buy  his  way  out.
    There was an increase  in  the  apprehension  and  detection  of  draft
    evaders and it did not matter that the  Appellant  had  been  away  for
    twenty years.

15.  Ms Fisher relied on paragraph 8.3.1 and 8.4.1 of the CIG which states:

         "The UN Human Rights Committee highlighted its concern in  November
         2012 that conscientious  objectors  are  still  at  risk  of  being
         sentenced to imprisonment and that they are practically deprived of
         some of their  civil  and  political  rights  such  as  freedom  of
         movement and the right to vote."


         "In its 2014 Progress Report  on  Turkey  the  European  Commission
         reported that 'In June the European Court  of  Human  Rights  found
         Turkey in violation of Article 3 (prohibition of  torture)  and  of
         Article 9 (freedom of thought, conscience and religion) of the ECHR
         for prosecuting and sentencing four Jehovah's Witnesses who refused
         compulsory military service."


16.  Ms Fisher submitted that the  judge  took  into  account  all  relevant
    factors and had not departed from the conclusions in IK. The  Appellant
    was a deserter who had been away from Turkey for  twenty  years.  There
    was evidence before the judge which supported his conclusions. Any lack
    of reasoning was not material.

17.  In relation to J and Y and Z,  whilst  there  was  a  letter  from  the
    Appellant's GP, it was evident from the material before the judge  that
    the Appellant had been referred  to  acute  psychiatric  services.  The
    judge had evidence that he was currently under assessment by a team  of
    psychiatric services and that he had made an attempt on his  life  (A43
    of the Appellant's bundle). According to J there had  to  be  a  causal
    link between the removal and inhumane  and  degrading  treatment.   The
    judge set out the relevant parts of the judgment  in  J  and  Y  and  Z
    before coming to his conclusions at paragraphs 50  and  51.  Ms  Fisher
    submitted that the act of removal itself was sufficient  to  cause  the
    Appellant to feel such that the only way to escape would be to take his
    own life. Reading the judgment as a whole, it was well reasoned and the
    decision should stand.

18.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the Appellant's submission that the judge  has
    not deviated from IK was misunderstood.  IK did not find that there was
    a risk of ill treatment on being questioned. The risk of ill  treatment
    arose from the risk  of  being  transferred  to  MIT,  the  anti-terror
    police. If that was the case, then the court could  not  rule  out  ill
    treatment. The judge needed to identify  why  the  Appellant  would  be
    transferred to MIT.

19.  The appellant in IK had been detained. The Tribunal found that  IK  was
    a marginal case. It was not about being a Kurd or about coming from the
    Southeast. It was about whether, on the information on the GBTS,  there
    would be enough to identify whether a person was from the PKK  or  part
    of a separatist organisation. It was reasonably likely  that  a  person
    with this profile would be of adverse interest and the  issue  for  the
    judge was whether it was reasonably likely that the Appellant would  be
    regarded as a person with this profile. That was not the case here. The
    judge had identified generalised issues. The  CIG  at  paragraph  5.3.4
    gave several alternatives to military service. The  judge's  conclusion
    was not in accordance with  IK.  The  judge  had  not  dealt  with  the
    background evidence available.

20.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the action taken and the cause of suicide  had
    to be proved. At paragraph 50 the  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
    genuine fear created a suicide risk, not that the  Appellant's  removal
    caused it. The Appellant was not a conscientious objector, but a  draft
    evader and the suicide risk related to the risk of ill  treatment.  The
    judge had rejected the Appellant's political history in Turkey, so  his
    PTSD could only be as a result of what had happened  to  him  since  he
    came to the UK.

Discussion and Conclusions

21.  I am not  persuaded  by  Mr  Jarvis's  submission  that  there  was  no
    evidential basis,  in  the  judge's  decision,  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant would suffer ill treatment  in  detention.  The  Tribunal  at
    paragraph 133.9 of IK concluded that the use of torture  was  long  and
    deep seated in the security forces and it would take time and effort to
    bring it under control in practice. The OGN [CIG] referred to a  recent
    violation  of  Article  3  in  relation   to   those   prosecuted   for
    conscientious objection. Mr Jarvis accepts that the Appellant would  be
    at risk of prosecution for draft evasion.

22.  Mr Jarvis submits that risk of ill treatment would only  arise  if  the
    Appellant was transferred to the anti-terror police, MIT and there  was
    no evidence before the judge to support such a finding. I disagree. The
    judge applied the country guidance in IK and found that  the  Appellant
    would come to the attention of the authorities on return at the airport
    because he would  be  identified  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker  having
    travelled on an  emergency  travel  document.  He  would  therefore  be
    encountered by border control and likely to be  referred  to  a  higher
    authority. This finding was open to the judge given the  evidence  that
    the GBTS enabled draft evaders to be easily identified and the increase
    in detention of draft evaders as a result  of  regular  ID  check.  The
    judge also took into account the heightened security  following  recent
    terrorist attacks.

23.  The Appellant would be questioned on return to Turkey and he could  not
    be expected to lie about his past. It was the Appellant's case that  he
    deserted military service  because  he  was  ordered  to  burn  Kurdish
    villages, kill and target the civilian population, and that refusal  to
    comply with such orders resulted in ill treatment. The judge found that
    because the Appellant had deserted military service then it was  likely
    there would be some record of him  which  would  result  in  him  being
    referred to a higher authority. The risk was enhanced  because  of  the
    state of high alert due to recent terrorist attacks so that all persons
    arriving at immigration control would be carefully screened.

24.  The judge applied the relevant factors set out in IK and  A(Turkey)  to
    the Appellant's case. The Appellant was a Turkish Kurd who left  Turkey
    over twenty years ago. He would be easily identified at the airport  on
    return as a failed asylum seeker. He would be likely to be referred  to
    higher authorities because of this and because he  would  be  carefully
    screened. The authorities would discover his past history and there was
    a real risk that the Appellant would be detained whilst questioned.  He
    would be prosecuted and sentenced for draft evasion/desertion.  Torture
    is long and deep seated in the security forces. Therefore, there was  a
    real risk that he would be  tortured  whilst  in  detention  given  the
    evidence in the OGN [CIG] and the findings in IK.

25.  Given the judge's findings of fact, and applying the lower standard  of
    proof, the judge's conclusion that there was  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood  that  the  Appellant  would  suffer  persecution  and   ill
    treatment on return was open to him on the evidence before him. I  find
    that the judge has not departed from IK, but has  applied  the  country
    guidance to the facts as he found them.

26.  I am not persuaded by Mr Jarvis's argument that  the  risk  of  suicide
    was dependent on being ill treated or that the judge  failed  to  apply
    the case of J to the circumstances  and  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    mental health. The judge set out J in full and  also  referred  to  any
    amendment that should be made to it following Y and Z. The judge  found
    that there was a causal link between the threatened act of removal  and
    the inhumane treatment relied upon.  Because the Appellant's  fear  was
    extreme his only perceived means of escape from the isolation and  fear
    in which return would place him would be to take his own life. I am not
    persuaded that the suicide risk was based  only  on  ill  treatment  on
    return, but was based on the Appellant's actual removal.

27.  The judge  took  into  account  the  fact  that  there  were  effective
    mechanisms in both the UK and Turkey to prevent the  risk  of  suicide,
    but he found that did not reduce the risk because, in  this  particular
    case, the risk of suicide was  subjective,  immediate  and  acute.  The
    judge applied the case of J to the facts of the Appellant's case. There
    was ample evidence from the GP's letters, the fact that  the  Appellant
    had been referred to psychiatric  services  and  his  previous  suicide
    attempt to enable the judge to conclude that he would  be  at  risk  of
    suicide on return.

28.  Accordingly, I find that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision. He has properly  applied  the  country  guidance  of  IK  and
    properly applied relevant case law in deciding the Appellant's  Article
    3 claim. The evidence which was before  the  judge  was  sufficient  to
    enable him to come to the  conclusions  that  he  did  having  properly
    applied the lower standard of proof.  There is no error of law  in  the
    judge's decision dated 31st August 2016 and the Respondent's appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances
Signed                              Date: 25th November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
