
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02526/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 25 October 2018                            |On 4 April 2019              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                MRS Bibi [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K. McCarthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who  was  born  on  12  August
    1988.  She is now 30 years old.

 2. She appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mays
    promulgated on 20 April 2018 in which  she  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  made  on  6
    February 2018.  The decision was a decision to refuse her asylum  claim
    and her associated human rights claims advanced both  under  Article  3
    and under Article 8.

 3. The circumstances of  the  case  are  set  out  by  the  judge  in  the
    determination.  The appellant is from a town in Chittagong.  Her  claim
    was that she had met her husband in 2005.  She was then about 17  years
    old.  They initially kept that relationship a secret and  it  was  done
    because the couple's families were not happy about that relationship.

 4. It made matters worse in 2009 when the appellant became pregnant  prior
    to marrying Mr [A], her present  husband.   So  they  fled  to  another
    village but they were traced by Mr [A]'s family.  Mr  [A]  arranged  to
    marry the appellant in a marriage,  an  informal  small-scale  wedding,
    after which the appellant moved, as is the custom, into Mr [A]'s family
    home with her parents-in-law.   During  that  time  the  appellant  was
    severely abused,  particularly  by  her  mother-in-law.   She  was  not
    supported in anything that she attempted to  do  in  the  home.   Worse
    still, the  appellant's  mother  applied  so  much  pressure  upon  the
    appellant that she felt herself forced to undergo  an  abortion.   That
    was done in a way that was both dangerous and unlawful.

 5. The judge also accepted the  appellant's  account  was  that  they  had
    received  ill-treatment  from  the  Panchayat  and  had  been  punished
    accordingly.  As a result of all this the appellant  returned  to  live
    with her parents.  Mr [A] was sent  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  be  a
    student  but  he  returned  to  Bangladesh  in  2012  and  married  the
    appellant, this time formally, in accordance with Bangladeshi  law  and
    the appellant herself left Bangladesh in 2014, some  five  years  after
    the initial difficulties that she experienced with her parents-in-law.

 6. The judge described the appellant's case, which included the concession
    that after leaving the home of her parents-in-law  in  2009  until  she
    left Bangladesh some five years  later,  she  did  not  experience  any
    difficulties from Mr [A]'s family.  This period of five years  featured
    very heavily in the judge's consideration.  It was submitted on  behalf
    of the respondent that the appellant had lived  with  her  parents  for
    five years prior to leaving Bangladesh and had experienced no problems,
    either at the hands of religious extremists or  at  the  hands  of  her
    parents-in-law, and that there was no evidence that, at any  rate,  the
    religious extremists had been able to relocate her when  she  moved  to
    her parents' home.

 7. Mr [A] himself gave evidence that he had only spoken to his  family  on
    two occasions and that no threats had been made by his family.

 8. The judge said in paragraph 33, in encapsulating the  submissions  made
    by the respondent, that they had simply disowned Mr [A].  They made  it
    clear that they would not accept him and his wife and child.  There was
    no continuing interest  or  intention  on  behalf  of  the  appellant's
    parents-in-law to cause harm.

 9. That was the submission that was made on behalf of the  respondent  and
    it was a submission  that  was  supported  by  the  evidence  that  was
    provided.  That is found most significantly  in  paragraph  43  of  the
    determination.  The judge broadly accepted as credible the  appellant's
    account of events  that  had  happened  in  Bangladesh,  including  the
    actions of the religious extremists and of Mr [A]'s parents during  the
    time that they were living together.  However in paragraph 43 the judge
    concluded that the appellant had significantly overstated the level  of
    interest in, and the threat posed, to her and her child from  Mr  [A]'s
    family.  That finding  was  supported  by  evidence  given  by  Mr  [A]
    himself, recorded by the judge in  paragraph  43,  in  which  she  says



         "I find that Mr [A]'s family have disowned Mr [A].   They  are  not
         willing to accept Mr [A]'s marriage to the appellant  or  Mr  [A]'s
         child.  Mr [A] was expressly asked however whether his  family  had
         said anything else and at no time  in  his  oral  evidence  did  he
         suggest that his family had sought to threaten the appellant or his
         child".

10. That was the evidence.

11. The judge then went  on  to  consider  the  current  risk.   The  judge
    accepted in paragraph 46 that the appellant's parents-in-law  had  been
    able to track her and Mr [A] down  in  Chittagong  and  that  this  had
    resulted in the appellant going back to their home to live  with  them.
    The judge also accepted the level of violence that had been  meted  out
    to her, both by the religious extremists and by her parents-in-law, but
    returned to the central issue in this case, namely, what  had  occurred
    in the five years since the appellant had returned  to  live  with  her
    family between the years of 2009 and 2014.  The  judge  found  that  in
    those five years she was living with her parents in a house  which  was
    in the town.  She was not approached by  Mr  [A]'s  family  or  by  any
    religious extremists.

12. The appellant's evidence was that she was living in the property  which
    her parents owned in the house.  Despite the appellant suggesting  that
    Mr [A]'s family and the religious extremists have the reach  and  power
    to find the appellant throughout Bangladesh, they appear to  have  been
    unable or unwilling to find her in the  five  years  during  which  she
    remained in Bangladesh living in her parents' home.

13. This undermines the credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
    religious extremists and Mr [A]'s family have any ongoing  interest  in
    her.

14. It was on the basis of this evidence, evidence that  resulted  in  what
    the appellant and her husband told the judge, that the judge found that
    the appellant would not be at risk  of  harm  from  her  parents-in-law
    should she return to her home area with Mr [A] and their child.  I find
    that the appellant's parents-in-law have  disowned  Mr  [A]  and  would
    simply have nothing more to do with the family.  They are not  prepared
    to accept Mr [A] is married to the  appellant  or  the  child  of  that
    marriage.  That is notwithstanding the fact that the appellant  and  Mr
    [A] were married on 25 August 2012 in Bangladesh and that they now have
    a son, U, who was born on 30 April 2017 in the United Kingdom and is of
    course the legitimate son of the couple.

15. The judge went on to find that the appellant would be returning  almost
    nine years after the religious extremists had wished her harm and  that
    it was not reasonably likely that those religious extremists would seek
    to target her.  That finding of fact is not challenged in  the  grounds
    of appeal.  The judge therefore made twin findings.  First of all  that
    the husband's family had  disowned  the  appellant's  husband  and  the
    appellant and now their child.  Secondly that there was  no  harm  from
    religious extremists.  Those findings were properly open to  the  judge
    on the evidence that she heard and on the material that was before her.

16. In submissions made to me by Ms McCarthy it  is  said  that  the  judge
    materially misunderstood the evidence and that was  that  the  lack  of
    interest shown by Mr [A]'s parents was a lack of interest because  they
    believed the relationship had ended in 2009 when they  had  sent  their
    son off to the United Kingdom to act as a  student.   Consequently,  on
    return to Bangladesh, the couple would face the renewed animosity of Mr
    [A]'s parents.  That was a matter which the judge did not properly take
    into account.

17. I reject that submission for the reason that  the  appellant's  husband
    himself gave evidence, as I have summarised above, and that at no  time
    in his oral evidence did he suggest  that  his  family  had  sought  to
    threaten the appellant or their child.  It would  have  therefore  have
    been irrational for the judge to have found that the risk  was  somehow
    resurrected and that there was to be a renewed  animosity.   There  was
    simply no evidence to that effect.  It would have to have been a matter
    upon which there was some direct evidence if that renewed  threat  were
    to materialise.

18. Consequently in my judgment it is a central finding, and a  sustainable
    finding, of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the appellant's parents-
    in-law had disowned Mr [A] and would simply have nothing to do with the
    family.  That is not a finding which is specifically challenged in  the
    grounds of appeal.  It seems to me that, were this to be  advanced,  it
    would have to be established that the judge was Wednesbury unreasonable
    in reaching the conclusion that Mr [A]'s parents had disowned him.

19. In my judgment the evidence did not suggest that there  was  a  renewed
    interest on the part of his family.  That would simply  be  speculation
    but indeed was something which was undermined by Mr [A]'s own  evidence
    about the continuing interest shown by his parents.

20. That is the substantial finding which  in  my  judgment  has  not  been
    undermined  by  anything  that  has  been  said  or  submitted  on  the
    appellant's behalf this morning.  I can therefore turn to the issue  of
    internal relocation.  Internal relocation does not, of course, arise on
    the principal finding made by the judge that the couple would not be at
    risk in their home area.  The sustainable finding of fact that Mr [A]'s
    parents have disowned the couple has the effect that there is no  risk.
    Were there to be a risk, then the judge went on to deal with  that  and
    concluded  that  there  was  the  reasonable  possibility  of  internal
    relocation.  Inevitably, that was predicated upon the judge's  findings
    that the husband's parents were no longer interested  in  pursuing  the
    appellant.  It therefore does not matter whether he was a policeman  or
    a former policeman.  It does not matter whether he  had  the  reach  to
    approach whatever officers in the police force he may have contact with
    in whatever area he may be able to identify so that the  appellant  and
    her husband would be at risk.  Even if his reach was  as  submitted  on
    behalf of the appellant since there was no risk that her parents-in-law
    had a continuing interest then that would not be a matter  which  would
    exacerbate or render it unduly harsh for her to relocate.

21. Finally it is suggested that even  if  there  was  no  risk,  it  would
    nevertheless be a violation  of  their  human  rights  to  relocate  in
    Bangladesh.   That  is  an  unsustainable  submission  to  make.    The
    appellant is finding work in the United Kingdom as a chef.  There is no
    question of his being incapable of  work.   The  fact  that  employment
    prospects may not be as good in Bangladesh as they are  in  the  United
    Kingdom is nothing to the point.  The assessment that the Tribunal  had
    to make was whether a couple in good health with a child born  in  2017
    would be able to relocate to some part in Bangladesh.  It is inevitable
    that the conclusion on that assessment would be that there  is  nothing
    unreasonable in requiring them to relocate.  As long as  there  is  the
    prospect of the appellant or her husband  finding  work  then  that  is
    sufficient to establish that they are able  to  form  a  new  home  for
    themselves in Bangladesh without a violation  of  any  of  their  human
    rights.

22. In those circumstances I am satisfied that the judge  did  not  make  a
    material error of law and he was  entitled  to  conclude  that  on  the
    material before him the appellant, her husband or her child  would  not
    be at risk of a violation of any  of  their  rights  either  under  the
    Asylum Convention or under the ECHR.

23. Accordingly I dismiss the appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                               2 April 2019l
