

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02642/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 06th  April 2016                   |On 14th April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


                            MUHAMMAD FAHID ASHRAF
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Wilford, Counsel instructed by Hartley Bain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    his asylum and human rights claim. It is not necessary to set  out  the
    appellant's full immigration history for the purpose of  this  decision
    save to say that he made a number of failed applications for  leave  to
    remain before  claiming  asylum  on  the  ground  that  he  would  face
    persecution for reasons  of  his  sexual  orientation  if  returned  to
    Pakistan.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Watt ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 29 January 2016. The judge noted the evidence
    that was relied upon in support of the appeal [19]. He  heard  evidence
    from the appellant and Mr Siddique, who he says is his partner  in  the
    UK [21-27]. He noted that there were a number of witness statements  in
    the appellant's bundle but none of the other witnesses attended to give
    evidence [28]. The judge went on to make adverse  credibility  findings
    as to the genuine  nature  of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  Mr
    Siddique with reference to his immigration history and late  disclosure
    of his claimed sexual orientation [34-38].  In  assessing  whether  the
    witnesses gave credible and reliable evidence he also noted:

           "39. I did not regard either of the  witnesses  as  credible  or
           reliable. In particular, Mr Siddique presented his evidence in a
           very odd manner. He was extremely aggressive at the commencement
           of his evidence and spoke exceedingly quickly.  He  then  became
           emotional at the end of the evidence for no apparent reason.


           40. Looking at all the evidence in the round in this case  I  am
           not satisfied that there  is  a  gay  relationship  between  the
           appellant and Mr Siddique. I consider it more  likely  that  the
           relationship is a sham invented by the appellant and Mr Siddique
           to try to obtain asylum for Mr Ashraf in this country."

3.    The appellant seeks to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the
    following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal failed to take  into  account  and  make
           findings in relation to evidence that was material to  a  proper
           determination of the appeal. In particular, the judge failed  to
           make any findings regarding the witness statements testifying to
           the genuine nature of the relationship.

       (ii)   The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  placing  weight  on  the
           demeanour of the  appellant's  partner  and/or  failed  to  give
           adequate  reasons  for  concluding   that   his   evidence   was
           unreliable.

      (iii) The First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  to
           explain negative credibility findings. For  example,  the  judge
           failed  to  consider  the  appellant's  explanation   for   late
           disclosure of his sexual orientation or the  explanation  as  to
           why at least one of the witnesses was unable to attend.

4.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

5.    While it was open to the judge to take  into  account  matters  giving
    rise to concerns about the credibility of the appellant's  claim,  such
    as his immigration history, it is apparent from an overall  reading  of
    the decision that the judge focussed on those  matters  without  making
    any clear findings in relation to the evidence that might  support  the
    appellant's claim. Although evidence  provided  in  witness  statements
    where a person does not attend to give evidence is  not  usually  given
    significant weight the judge noted that the appellant  had  provided  a
    number of supporting statements but failed to make any findings  as  to
    what weight he placed on them. The appellant provided an explanation as
    to  why  Mr  Siddique's  mother  was  unable  to  attend  although   no
    explanation appears to have been offered for the absence of  the  other
    witnesses. The appellant's bundle also contains photographs  and  other
    evidence to suggest that the appellant and Mr Siddique may live at  the
    same address but no findings were made as to what weight was placed  on
    that evidence.

6.    It seems clear that the judge had  some  concerns  about  the  way  in
    which Mr Siddique presented his evidence  at  the  hearing  because  he
    mentioned it in two places in the decision. However,  taken  alone  the
    demeanour of a witness is a poor measure of  reliability.  Even  if  Mr
    Siddique presented his evidence in "an odd manner" it was incumbent  on
    the judge to give adequate reasons  to  explain  why  his  presentation
    rendered his evidence unreliable. Nothing in the decision suggests that
    the judge asked Mr Siddique why he behaved in the manner he did or that
    he considered any alternative  reasons  for  his  presentation  at  the
    hearing. The judge failed to make any clear findings to explain why  he
    rejected Mr Siddique's evidence.

7.    While the judge was entitled to  take  into  account  certain  matters
    that undermined the appellant's credibility  he  failed  to  take  into
    account other material matters that might support his  claim.  As  such
    the First-tier Tribunal erred by omission.

8.    It was agreed at the  hearing  that  if  I  found  that  the  decision
    contained an error of law then the appropriate course of  action  would
    be to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
    before another First-tier Tribunal Judge.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 11 April 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








