
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02572/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at the  Civil  Justice  Centre,  Manchester       Decision  &  Reasons
Promulgated
On the 26th November 2018    On the 02nd January 2019

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                     JRA
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mahmood (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Smith promulgated on the 26th April 2018, in which  he
       dismisses the Appellant's protection and  Human  Rights  appeal,  the
       protection claim being dismissed on the basis that he did not  accept
       that the Appellant was gay.

    2. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued, inter alia, that the Judge
       had not taken into consideration the Appellant's  evidence  that  she
       was gay and account of  the  Appellant's  witness  (her  sister)  who
       confirmed it is argued both in oral evidence and  in  her  statement,
       that she believed that the Appellant was homosexual.

    3. Permission to appeal has been granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Scott Baker on the 4th June 2018 on the basis it was clear  from  the
       determination that the Judge  had  overlooked  the  evidence  of  the
       sister with nothing being set regarding what her sister said  on  the
       issue within her witness statement and at the hearing.  He noted that
       the Appellant's sister had confirmed that she was aware the Appellant
       was a lesbian and that she had been beaten by her family as a  result
       which was said to go to the core of the Appellant's claim.

    4. Before me in the Upper Tribunal, Mr Tan agreed that in  the  decision
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith, the  Judge  had  failed  to  take
       account of the evidence of  the  Appellant's  sister  in  determining
       whether or not the Appellant was gay.  Mr Tan made reference  to  the
       fact that there was only limited mention of the  Appellant's  sister,
       and in that regard, I note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  stated
       at paragraph 27 that her sister's evidence was that she  intended  to
       return to Iraq, and the Judge noted further that the Appellant  lived
       with her sister for the consideration of the  Article  8  claim,  but
       nowhere within the decision is there any reference  to  the  sister's
       evidence regarding her belief  that  the  Appellant  is  gay  or  the
       evidence that was given that the Appellant had  been  beaten  by  her
       family as  a  result.   Mr  Tan  conceded  that  the  Judge  had  not
       considered the sister's evidence in sufficient detail  and  that  the
       consideration of the question as to whether or not the Appellant  was
       gay did need to be conducted having  taken  account  of  all  of  the
       relevant evidence, such that he conceded that the decision  contained
       a material error  of  law,  such  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Smith should be set aside in its entirety and the case
       remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  before  a
       differently constituted Tribunal before any First-tier Tribunal Judge
       other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith.

    5. In light of that concession, I do find that the  decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Smith does contain a material error in  terms  of
       his failure to consider all the relevant evidence in respect  of  the
       sister's evidence regarding the Appellant's sexuality,  and  in  such
       circumstances, I do set aside the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Smith in its entirety and remit the case back to the First-tier
       Tribunal for re-hearing before any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other
       than First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Smith  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside.

The case is to be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Smith.

I do make an Order for anonymity in  this  case  given  the  nature  of  the
protection claim.  No record or transcript  or  note  of  these  proceedings
shall refer to or identify the  Appellant  by  name  or  otherwise,  or  any
members of her family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and  to
the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction can lead to  contempt
of Court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 26th November 2018


