
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02844/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 12 November 2019              |On the 20 November 2019              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     Mr O
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Akram, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.



 1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan. He appeals with  permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  ("FtTJ"),  promulgated  on
    the 26 June 2019 dismissing his appeal against the decision  to  refuse
    his protection and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant's history is set out in the decision  letter  of  the  13
    March 2019 and  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  at  paragraphs  1-5.  The
    appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in   2015   having   been
    fingerprinted in Hungary on the 4th August 2015 and made  a  claim  for
    asylum on 4th October 2018.

 3. He provided a screening interview and was interviewed about the factual
    basis of his claim on the 18th February 2019. In addition, there  is  a
    witness  statement  dated  21  January  2019  which  was  sent  with  a
    Preliminary Information Questionnaire completed  by  appellant  on  the
    same date.

 4. The basis of his claim can be  summarised  as  follows.  The  appellant
    feared returned to Afghanistan because the Taleban would kill  him.  He
    was a farmer, but he and his father were transporting weapons  for  the
    Taleban by swimming across the river and taking  weapons  to  some  men
    identified as A and AS. He claimed  that  if  he  and  his  father  had
    refused to carry out the tasks for the Taleban they would be killed.

 5. After about three months of transporting the weapons,  the  appellant's
    father told the Taleban that they no longer  wished  to  transport  the
    weapons for them. They felt that it was a matter  of  time  before  the
    authorities discovered what they were doing, and the  Taleban  made  it
    clear that they would blow the appellant's house up if the  authorities
    discovered that they were transporting such arms.

 6. One evening, following the request  to  leave  the  Taleban  they  were
    beaten up by them  and  told  that  they  would  be  killed.  On  other
    occasions when the Taleban could be seen to approach the house  from  a
    distance the appellant escaped and went to live with his maternal uncle
    for two weeks. On another occasion the appellant hid in  a  bread  oven
    when he returned to the family home.

 7.  The  appellant's  father  decided  to  sell  some  land  to  fund  the
    appellant's journey out of the country. He travelled to Kabul  to  meet
    an agent who helped him leave. He  travelled  across  Iran  and  Turkey
    before arriving in France. He stayed in Calais before boarding a  lorry
    to the UK. He lived in the UK as a homeless  person  for  a  period  of
    three years before claiming asylum.

 8. In a decision letter dated the 13 March 2019,  the  respondent  refused
    his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection. It was  accepted  the
    appellant was an Afghan national but did not accept his claim  that  he
    had been of interest to the Taleban (see paragraphs 35-41).

 9. As can be seen within those paragraphs, the Secretary of State set  out
    a number of credibility issues relating to  the  core  aspects  of  his
    claim to be of interest to the Taliban.

10. The appellant sought to appeal that decision.   When  the  appeal  came
    before the FtTJ, she recorded that the appellant was unrepresented  but
    had provided a witness statement (page 28 RB) which he confirmed as his
    evidence and he also adopted the interview (see ROP). She also recorded
    his oral evidence that given in cross examination within  her  decision
    at paragraphs 19-27.

11. In a decision promulgated on the 26 June 2019, the FtTJ  dismissed  the
    appeal having concluded that the appellant had not given a credible  or
    plausible account as to his activities in Afghanistan and that he would
    not be at risk of persecution or serious harm contrary to Article 3.

12. Following the dismissal of his appeal, grounds of  appeal  were  issued
    for permission to appeal and that  application  was  refused  by  Judge
    O'Brien on the 7 August 2019. On reconsideration was granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on the 24th September 2019.

13. As a result of the grant of permission  the  appeal  comes  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, Mr Akram of Counsel relied upon the grounds as drafted.
    He submitted that the judge failed to take into  account  the  evidence
    given by the appellant in his asylum interview at question 73 - 94.  In
    this context he made reference to the decision in SB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 160 and the general  principles  referred  to  in  that
    decision concerning the assessment of credibility.

14. As to the particular findings made by the judge, he submitted that  the
    appellant had given an explanation in his interview  that  the  Taleban
    could not swim but he and his father could and was also able to explain
    that the river had deep parts in it and there were shallow parts.  That
    evidence was not taken into account by the judge in the finding made at
    paragraph 30. He submitted there was no  evidence  as  to  whether  the
    Taleban could swim or not.  Therefore  the  finding  was  not  properly
    reasoned.

15. He submitted  that  as  the  grounds  set  out  at  paragraph  3.3  the
    appellants local knowledge was key and that the Taleban chose  him  and
    his father because of their local knowledge of the river  as  explained
    by him at question 73.

16. As to the finding reached at paragraph 31 he submitted that  there  was
    no explanation as to how that conclusion was reached and  there  was  a
    lack of reasoning.

17. As to paragraph 32 he submitted that  there  was  no  evidence  of  the
    terrain or what the best method was to transport such  goods  and  that
    swimming may have been the best method. There was no  explanation  made
    by the judge as to why this was not a "sensible plan". As to the  boxes
    not getting wet, the appellant's evidence was that they were carried on
    his back and one at a time (see paragraph 3.3 of the grounds).

18. He submitted that the discussion of mules in the  FtTJ's  findings  did
    not refer to any evidence before the Tribunal and even if  it  did,  to
    reach that finding it required some evidence about the area.

19. He submitted that paragraph 33 and the reference made to  a  "realistic
    plan" was not reasoned by reference to any evidence and  the  FtTJ  did
    not refer to  any  information  about  the  area.  In  any  event,  the
    appellant's claim was that he was carrying out covert actions  so  that
    they were not seen by the army base. The alternative methods  suggested
    by the judge were not reasoned by reference to any evidence  about  the
    river.

20. Mr Akram submitted that the errors were material because they  went  to
    the core of the appellant's account and that the other findings set out
    at paragraphs 34 onwards were ancillary to the appellant's claim  given
    that the central plank was the transportation of weapons.

21.  Mr  McVeety  on  behalf  of  the  respondent   submitted  that  whilst
    consistency of an account was one of the elements used in the assessing
    overall credibility of an  account,  if  the  account  itself  was  not
    plausible, the fact that it had been given consistently did not assist.

22. Hr submitted that the  factual  backdrop  to  the  appellant's  account
    concerned  the  Taleban  who  are  a  military  organisation  of   some
    efficiency. The FtTJ was entitled to consider the appellant's  evidence
    in that light. Hr submitted that  there  was  no  illogicality  in  the
    judge's reasoning and that on  the  evidence  now  advanced  there  was
    illogicality, for example. it was being suggested  that  the  appellant
    was able to get across the river without the weapons  getting  wet  but
    that did not explain why the Taleban would need the appellant  if  that
    was the case as they could have done it themselves or by other  methods
    which was the FtTJ has set out in her findings. He submitted  that  the
    FtTJ was entitled to  use  common  sense  and  assess  the  appellant's
    evidence in the light of his evidence as to the events.

23. Mr McVeety took issue with the submission made by  Mr  Akram  that  the
    other findings made (which were not the subject of any  real  challenge
    in the grounds) were peripheral. He submitted that  they  went  to  the
    core of the appellant's account and were additional  reasons  given  by
    the judge as to why he had not given a plausible or credible account.

24. In his reply,  Mr  Akram  reminded  the  Tribunal  that  assessment  of
    credibility involves looking at consistency  of  evidence  and  whether
    there are any omissions in details given  by  an  appellant.  Here  the
    appellant had not been inconsistent. He invited the  Tribunal  to  find
    that the judge had erred in law in her assessment of the evidence.

25. I am grateful for the submissions made by each of the advocates  and  I
    have taken into account the matters raised both in the written  grounds
    and in the oral submissions. Having done so, I am not   satisfied  that
    the decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point  of
    law. I shall set out my reasons for reaching that decision below.

26. The grounds assert that the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
    appellant's evidence when reaching her conclusions on  the  credibility
    of the appellant's factual  account.   I  have  been  referred  to  the
    decision in SB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  by  Mr  Akram  which
    stated as follows:

         "41. The decision of the FtTJ turns upon  the  credibility  of  the
             Appellant's evidence. The credibility of  an  appellant  often
             lies at the centre of these cases. Evidence is often indirect.
             So, in this case there was no  direct  evidence  of  the  risk
             posed to the Appellant if returned, for example, from the  Sri
             Lankan authorities confirming or denying  that  the  Appellant
             was of interest to them and, if so, for what reason. The Judge
             did not have the  "stop"  list  referred  to  in  the  Country
             Guidance. He did  not  have  evidence  from  those  supposedly
             detaining Major Alwis confirming that he was in fact detained,
             and for what, and  whether  he  had  named  the  Appellant  as
             potentially complicit in anti-Government activities.  Evidence
             before a tribunal will therefore frequently be  circumstantial
             and based upon the credibility of an Appellant's account.

         42.  Some of  the  indirect  evidence  is  recognised  (in  Country
             Guidance) as a fair proxy measurement of risk, such as whether
             a person has been able to pass unhindered through  an  airport
             at a point in time when he or she should have been at risk, or
             whether the person has engaged in activities  known  to  place
             that person in present jeopardy of arrest. But other pieces of
             evidence are remote from any indicia of, or  proxy  for,  risk
             and concern only whether the individual is telling  the  truth
             which itself is then used in deciding whether the individual's
             account of the risk posed by return, is credible and truthful.



         43.  In this case  certain  pieces  of  evidence  fell  within  the
             Country Guidance (especially paragraph 7(a) and (d)) as  being
             pertinent to the assessment of risk. But much of the  evidence
             was remote from the issue of risk and  went  only  to  general
             credibility. Such background material can be relevant  to  the
             analysis, but it needs to be borne in  mind  that  per  se  it
             indicates  little  about  risk  and,  as  the  Judge  properly
             recognised, even genuine asylum seekers  might  exaggerate  or
             fabricate evidence in order to reduce the risk that their case
             is wrongly rejected.

         44.  All of this explains why first instance judges need  carefully
             to assess credibility and why appellate courts will accord due
             deference to the fact finder who  is  experienced  in  sifting
             evidence of this sort. But it also explains why  an  appellate
             court needs to be able to satisfy itself that the fact  finder
             has at least identified the most relevant pieces  of  evidence
             and given sufficient reasons (which might  be  quite  concise)
             for accepting or rejecting it.

         45.  Tribunal judges are experienced  at  resolving  the  sorts  of
             evidential disputes which arise in cases such as the  present.
             Different countries tend to throw up issues of a similar  type
             and cases involving Sri Lanka are no exception. Judges hearing
             these cases become versed in dealing with such disputes.  They
             have a good grasp of  what  is  credible,  and  what  is  not.
             Equally on an appeal to the Upper Tribunal the  appeal  judge,
             as a specialist in the area, is also familiar with these sorts
             of evidential disputes. By contrast the Court of  Appeal  does
             not have that institutional, every-day, experience and  it  is
             two steps removed from  the  initial  fact  finding.  To  this
             extent, where the issue on appeal is as to the  evaluation  of
             the facts  by  the  trial  judge,  an  appropriate  degree  of
             deference will apply (see authorities  referred  to  paragraph
             [63] below).

         46.  In cases (such as the present) where the  credibility  of  the
             appellant is in issue courts  adopt  a  variety  of  different
             evaluative techniques to assess the evidence. The  court  will
             for instance consider: (i) the consistency (or  otherwise)  of
             accounts given to investigators at different points  in  time;
             (ii)  the  consistency  (or  otherwise)  of   an   appellant's
             narrative case for asylum with his actual conduct  at  earlier
             stages and periods in time; (iii) whether, on facts  found  or
             agreed or which  are  incontrovertible,  the  appellant  is  a
             person who can be categorised as at risk if returned, and,  if
             so, as to the nature and extent of that risk  (taking  account
             of applicable Country Guidance);  (iv)  the  adequacy  (or  by
             contrast  paucity)  of  evidence  on  relevant  issues   that,
             logically, the appellant should be able to adduce in order  to
             support his or her case; and (v), the overall plausibility  of
             an appellant's account.

         47.  This list is not intended to be exhaustive. In this  case  the
             Judge adopted all these techniques. The criticisms now made of
             the Judge are  not  however  as  to  his  reliance  upon  such
             techniques but instead focus upon (a) the intrinsic  logic  of
             the inferences that he drew from the facts and (b) the failure
             to identify and  address  what  is  said  to  be  prima  facie
             relevant evidence which contradicts his findings.

         48.  If  a  judge  makes  material  errors  in  the  evaluation  of
             evidence, for instance because the inference drawn from a fact
             found is logically not one that properly can be drawn, then an
             appellate court will interfere. A material error in  logic  is
             an error of law. In ME (ibid) the appellant was  a  Tamil  who
             was well known to the Sri Lankan authorities and  had  already
             been beaten and tortured by them. The Court of Appeal  allowed
             an appeal and concluded, in relation to  inferences  drawn  by
             the judge about the risk to the Appellant  if  returned,  that
             there was a "serious gap in the FTTs chain of reasoning  which
             is sufficient to amount to an error of law".

         49.  Equally, the evaluation of the evidence must bear in mind that
             the relevant question that the court is dealing with is  risk,
             not actuality. In ME (ibid) the Court was critical of the  way
             the  judge  expressed  his  understanding  of  risk:  "I  also
             consider that it is unsatisfactory in a case of this kind  for
             the fact-finder to express findings of fact in  the  negative.
             For example, at [35] the FTT said (more than once) "I  do  not
             find that he is now perceived as a threat." If the  test  were
             that of the balance of probability,  a  finding  expressed  in
             that way is equivalent to a finding that he is  not  perceived
             as a threat. That is because whether a fact has been proved is
             a binary question, which can only be answered "yes"  or  "no".
             But where the question is whether there is a real risk that ME
             is perceived as a threat; a finding expressed in  those  terms
             does not squarely confront the relevant  question"  (ibid  per
             Lewison LJ at paragraph [18])."

27. In the context of this appeal, the appellant's factual account was  not
    supported by any other evidence, either by way of country materials  or
    any other type of evidence. There was also no direct  evidence  of  any
    interest in the appellant by the Taleban, such as  in  the  Sri  Lankan
    cases by way of arrest warrants or other court documentation or  as  in
    other cases involving the Taleban such as "warning letters."

28. The core of the appellant's account related to his fear of the  Taleban
    and in particular the account given that he and  his  father  had  been
    forced to carry weapons across the river and their refusal to carry  on
    with this caused them to be in fear of the Taleban.

29. The grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  challenge  those
    findings which are set out  at  paragraphs  30  -  33  of  the  judge's
    decision. It is plain from reading those paragraphs that the judge  did
    not believe the appellant's claim to have been carrying weapons  across
    a river to be credible or plausible.

30. The grounds seek  to  challenge  each  paragraph  of  the  decision  by
    reference to the appellant's evidence in his interview. In summary, the
    argument advanced by Mr Akram is that the judge made  her  findings  of
    fact without properly considering all of the evidence contained in  the
    interview and that in reaching her findings they  were  also  illogical
    and without any evidential foundation.

31. Dealing with the points that have been raised, it is submitted that  at
    paragraph 30 the judge failed to consider  the  appellant's  answer  at
    question 73 in his interview that he knew about the river and also that
    at question 94 it was because of their local knowledge about the  river
    which was relevant. It is submitted at paragraph  3.2  of  the  grounds
    that the reason the appellant and his father were chosen to  cross  the
    river was because of their local knowledge and  not  just  because  the
    Taleban did not know how to swim.

32. The findings of fact made by the judge should not be read in  isolation
    but should be read in conjunction with the  determination  as  a  whole
    including the evidence given by the appellant orally  and  recorded  in
    the judge's decision at paragraphs 19 - 27.

33. In his oral evidence the appellant gave a reason as to why the  Taleban
    did not transport the weapons themselves which  was  because  "none  of
    them could swim." In his interview the answers that were elicited  from
    him demonstrated that the members of the Taleban  concerned  had  never
    had any issues with the appellant's father nor had either of them  ever
    been known to the Taleban. At question 65 the interviewer suggested  to
    the appellant that it was "highly implausible"  that  "members  of  the
    Taleban would turn up your farm and  demand  and  force  you  and  your
    father to transport goods for them, given the family had not any issues
    or direct contact before this. Is there anything you can tell me  about
    how this actually  started?"  The  appellant's  responses  set  out  at
    questions 66 to 67 did not  provide  any  explanation  as  to  why  the
    Taleban would suddenly approach him and his father when  they  had  not
    done so before (see question 66).

34. At question 68, the interviewer clarified the appellant's  claim  which
    was that on one evening he was working on his family's father  and  two
    Taleban members appeared and demanded  he  transport  goods  for  them.
    During the course of the interview when the appellant was  being  asked
    about why the Taleban would have  chosen  him  and  his  father  to  be
    involved in this work, the appellant gave no explanation as to how that
    had happened. There was no reference made by the appellant that he  had
    any special or local knowledge as the grounds assert. Question  73  and
    94 do make reference to the appellant's evidence which he  states  that
    he had his father knew the river and that parts of it was shallow,  but
    those questions were referring to the appellant's  description  of  the
    river itself. It is not said that they were chosen because of any local
    knowledge. Had that been the case the appellant would have said so when
    being asked about this at questions 65 to 68.

35. At paragraph 30, the judge was making  the  point  that  the  appellant
    provided  no  information  (which  I  take  to  mean   any   additional
    explanation or evidence) as to why he and his father were able to  swim
    but no one else in the local area was able to. The FtTJ here was taking
    issue with the reasons given as to why they were the ones identified to
    carry out the task. Given the appellant's evidence that the men came to
    their  house  suddenly  one  night  having  previously  had  no  direct
    knowledge of the appellant or his father, this required an answer which
    the appellant had not given beyond the answer that they could swim.

36. Paragraphs 32 and 33 relate to the transportation of the weapons across
    the river. The evidence in his interview was that the boxes he  carried
    across the river were 2 to 3 feet long (question 74) and  that  he  and
    his father tied them on their backs (question  75)  and  he  knew  what
    parts of the river was shallow and if the water was deep they would  be
    swimming (Q75). He stated that the boxes were very heavy and had to  be
    transported to the area on the backs of a donkey or a horse because the
    Taleban could not use motorcycles as they would be seen from  the  post
    and base (question 83). The boxes were transported by the appellant  to
    people waiting on motorcycles (question 78).  Each  box  took  5  to  9
    minutes to transport across the river. He described it would depend  if
    the water was higher and it  would  take  longer  (question  85).  When
    transporting the boxes it might take 25 to 30 minutes (question 86).

37. He was asked in interview at question 88 "how did you go  about  trying
    to avoid any suspicion in  transporting  these  goods?"  The  appellant
    replied, "if anyone doubted or suspected they would have  informed  the
    police, we knew it was not a good thing to do but we had no  choice  we
    were forced."

38. In summary, the appellant's account in interview and  in  his  evidence
    was that he carried up to 12 boxes across the river each box being 2 to
    3 feet long and each containing heavy  weapons.  Against  that  factual
    background, it was open to the judge to reach the conclusion  that  the
    appellant had not  given  a  credible  account  has  to  how  that  was
    practical. The inference drawn from the judge's findings at  paragraphs
    32 and 33 was that the method described  was  both  impractical  and  a
    risky method for the transfer of valuable weapons by  the  Taleban.  He
    was asked in interview at question 88 "how did you go about  trying  to
    avoid  any  suspicion  in  transporting  these  goods?"  The  appellant
    replied, "if anyone doubted or suspected they would have  informed  the
    police, we knew it was not a good thing to do but we had no  choice  we
    were  forced."  The  appellant  did  not  offer  any  explanation  that
    adequately answered that important question.

39. At paragraph 31, the judge reached the  conclusion  from  the  evidence
    that it was not a credible account that  the  Taleban  would  transport
    weapons near water, and this would not be a reasonable or  a  "sensible
    plan" given the risk that the weapons would get  wet  after  the  river
    crossing . That was a finding that was open to the judge  to  make  and
    was one of based on the evidence in the interview. At questions 90 - 92
    the appellant was asked questions concerning damage to the  weapons  in
    the water for any sustained period and he was asked to explain  how  he
    transported them safely across the river without  them  being  damaged.
    The reply was at question 91 "I was transporting, we were not concerned
    whether it was damaging or not we just transport and give it to  them."
    It was followed up with a question it question 92 that that was thought
    to be highly implausible and lacking any credibility that he  was  able
    to swim with a two - 3-foot-wide box tied to his back given the  weight
    of the boxes as well as the weapons. He was asked to  explain  how  was
    able to do this and the response given at question 92 was that he  knew
    what part of the river was shallow and which part was not. However,  as
    the interviewer pointed out to the appellant, he had previously  stated
    that he transported  the  goods  by  swimming  (see  question  85)  and
    question 94 he was asked for a second time if he wanted to add anything
    else to his account in support of his claim to have  transported  goods
    by swimming one side of the river to the other in the light of the size
    and weight of the boxes. His response is recorded  at  question  94  as
    follows "so why I said before part of the river is deep some shallow so
    those parts which are not deep we will be kind of walking, in the  deep
    we will be swimming we knew the area and  we  were  using  the  passage
    because these boxes were wooden and it does not make you  sink  in  the
    water easily." It was against that factual background  that  the  judge
    made her findings at paragraphs 31 and 32. Paragraph 3.3 of the grounds
    can be properly characterised as a disagreement with those findings and
    do not demonstrate any error of law.

40. In her findings at paragraph 32 the judge made reference to the use  of
    mules as an alternative way of transporting the weapons. This  was  not
    something unconnected to the appellant's account because he had  stated
    that the Taleban had brought the weapons on  donkey  or  horseback  and
    therefore it was open to the FT TJ to reach the conclusion that as that
    method been used before, no reasons been given as to  why  that  method
    had not been used again. Given his claim that there were parts  of  the
    river that was shallow, it must follow that if that were true it  would
    not prevent the same mode of transport going across the river. Thus  in
    reaching that finding the FtTJ did take into account evidence given  by
    the appellant in his interview.

41. I would agree that the reference to the  use  of  a  pulley  system  at
    paragraph 33 does not appear to have any evidential foundation. Nor was
    there any evidence provided by the appellant himself  about  the  river
    other than it being called the Laghman River and his own description of
    it.

42. However, in my judgement the findings made concerning the transport  of
    weapons should not be seen in isolation but also seen in the context of
    his account as a whole and the other findings that  were  made  by  the
    judge. I do not accept the submission made by Mr Akram that the core of
    his account was the moving of  weapons  and  the  other  findings  were
    peripheral. It is the appellant's account that he was at risk from  the
    Taleban. While part of this account was that he had  been  transporting
    weapons, his account was that because his father told the Taleban  that
    they would not do this anymore they were assaulted and threatened,  and
    it was due to this at the appellant was in fear of the Taliban and left
    the country. The judge made a number of other findings which  went  the
    core of his account which was whether  he  demonstrated  to  the  lower
    standard of proof that he was at risk of harm from the Taleban.

43. The other findings made by the judge set out paragraphs 34  -  39.  The
    judge considered the action taken by the appellant and  his  father  in
    the light of the claim made the Taliban had  threatened  and  assaulted
    them both. The judge found that it  was  not  credible  nor  reasonably
    likely that the appellant's father having been threatened in  that  way
    and visited at their home, that the appellant's father would remain and
    only the appellant would relocate to his  maternal  uncles  house  (see
    paragraph 34).

44. Furthermore, the judge found that  the  appellant's  account  of  other
    family members (his two younger sisters, brother and mother)  who  were
    left in the family home, was not consistent with his account  that  the
    Taleban was seeking revenge on the appellant and his  father  and  thus
    his family (paragraph 34). As the FtTJ stated at  paragraph  35,  other
    family members such as the younger brother would also be  a  target  if
    the appellant's claim were true.

45. The appellant's claim was that his father  told  the  Taleban  that  he
    would no longer transport the weapons. As the  judge  said,  given  the
    nature  of  the  Taleban  and  against  the  factual  backdrop  of  the
    appellant's own evidence and the power of the Taleban,  that  it  would
    not be credible to have informed  them  rather  than  leaving  and  all
    relocating to safety.

46. The judge also found at paragraph 36 that when staying with  his  uncle
    for two weeks (when in fear of the Taleban) he left  the  house  to  go
    shopping. The judge recorded that she asked the appellant why he  would
    do this if he was fearful of Taleban reprisals.?  The  explanation  was
    that the women could not leave the house. It was therefore open to  the
    judge to find as she did that this was not  a  reasonable  or  credible
    explanation in the light of his evidence as to risk of harm (  and  see
    the additional  finding at paragraph 37) .The grounds at paragraph  3.6
    relied upon by Mr Akram where it is said "he had  to  go  shopping"  is
    simply a disagreement with the finding and  does  not  demonstrate  any
    arguable error of law.

47. At paragraph 38, the judge also found that if the appellant was genuine
    in fear of his life he would not  have  returned  to  the  family  home
    exposing him to further risk of harm.

48. Even if the judge had accepted that he  had  transported  the  weapons,
    given the other findings made, it demonstrated that his account  to  be
    of interest to the Taleban was not well-founded.

49. In my judgment, when the findings are  viewed  cumulatively,  the  FtTJ
    gave adequate and sustainable reasons for rejecting  the  core  of  his
    claim to be interest to the Taleban on return to Afghanistan.

50. The grounds also assert at paragraph 3.10 that the  appellant  was  not
    represented and was not conversant in English and that  the  solicitors
    have been instructed that "terms were not clear to him" and  that  this
    had an "adverse impact on his evidence and the decision". This  is  not
    been the subject of any witness statement or any explanation as to what
    terms were misunderstood or in what context. It is for the applicant to
    make out his grounds and there is no  reference  in  the  face  of  the
    determination that there were any problems with the translation of  the
    evidence.

51. Consequently it is not been demonstrated that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal judge involved the making of an error on a point of  law.
    The assessment of appellant's account was one that was reasonably  open
    to the judge to make  on  the  factual  evidence  provided  before  the
    Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

52. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    shall stand



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Date 14/11/2019

     Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

