
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02930/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2020                            |On 30 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     YT
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Fisher Stone, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Algeria who was born in 1994.  By  a
    decision which was promulgated on 7 November 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge
    Plimmer found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  such  that
    its decision in respect of Article 3 ECHR fell to  be  set  aside.  The
    Tribunal's decision on asylum grounds (dismissing the appeal)  was  not
    set aside. The Upper Tribunal  Judge  directed  that  the  question  of
    whether there is a valid appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds be determined
    at the resumed hearing. A Transfer order was made on 7 November 2019.

 2. At the resumed hearing on 21 January 2020, the appellant  attended  but
    he did not give evidence. The hearing proceeded by way  of  submissions
    only. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard of proof
    is whether there are substantial grounds for believing there  to  be  a
    real risk that the appellant will suffer treatment contrary to  Article
    3 ECHR if returned to Algeria. The determination of other issues within
    the appeal, including any appeal on Article 8 grounds,  is  subject  to
    the standard of proof of the balance of probabilities.

    Article 3 ECHR

 3. The appellant's main submission is that, if he were to be  returned  to
    Algeria, he would be a real risk of destitution and would  suffer  harm
    contrary to Article 3 ECHR. It had been accepted by the respondent that
    the appellant was a victim of trafficking. Miss Khan, who appeared  for
    the appellant at the resumed hearing, acknowledged that  the  test  for
    Article 3 ECHR harm on the basis  of  destitution  is  high  (see  Said
    [2016] EWCA Civ 44). However, she sought  to  distinguish  the  factual
    scenario addressed in Said from the instant case on the basis that  the
    poverty and deprivation which the appellant  is  likely  to  suffer  if
    returned to Algeria is, at least in part, due to the  failures  of  the
    Algerian government. The appellant claims that his birth has never been
    registered and that he does not have  any  identity  document.  He  was
    mistreated in the past  by  the  Algerian  police  when  he  asked  for
    assistance. The appellant claims that, without  an  identity  card,  he
    would be unable to rent accommodation.

 4. Without seeking to go behind the agreement  of  the  parties  that  the
    appellant has been subject to trafficking  from  Algeria  that  he  has
    suffered harm in that country in the past, I am not  satisfied  on  the
    evidence that the appellant has shown that,  as  an  Algerian  citizen,
    would be denied all assistance by the Algerian state. His past  chaotic
    life in Algeria may well have led to his being  unable  to  obtain  any
    identity document but there was no evidence to show that  the  Algerian
    authorities have sought to deny his nationality nor has any  submission
    been made to the effect that he is stateless. Whilst I fully accept the
    appellant's  vulnerability  as  a  consequence  of  his  mental  health
    difficulties, there is no evidence to show that he has  approached  the
    Algerian Embassy in London with a view to obtaining an  identity  card.
    The medical  evidence  does  not  indicate  that  he  is  incapable  of
    undertaking such a course of action or that it might harm  him  in  any
    way. Moreover, even if the appellant were to  be  returned  to  Algeria
    with a laissez passer, it has not been shown that he would be  admitted
    to the country and then effectively treated by the authorities as a non-
    citizen. These findings and observations lead me  also  to  reject  the
    submission that any problems which the appellant might face in  Algeria
    would emanate from failings on the part of the Algerian authorities. In
    my opinion, the appellant's claim that he would be destitute does  fall
    to be considered by reference to the test in N (2005) UKHL 31. There is
    no submission that he meets such a test. The appellant's Article 3 ECHR
    appeal is accordingly dismissed.

    Article 8 ECHR

 5. At the resumed hearing, both representatives accepted that Article 8 is
    not a new matter appeal, having been clearly pleaded in the grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. Miss Khan submitted that the appellant fell within  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi):

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

    The appellant is 25 years old. He entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  19
    February 2015. Miss Khan submitted that the appellant would  face  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in Algeria.  Appellant  relies
    upon two expert reports. Dr Miller has produced a report of  June  2018
    which was updated on  4  December  2019.  Dr  Miller  states  that  the
    appellant is suffering from complex PTSD with the consequence of he has
    suffered a substantial impact on his functioning in  important  domains
    including   educational, social interpersonal and occupational  skills.
    Dr Miller was unable to comment on  the  appellant's  ability  to  work
    since he has not been employed whilst living in the United Kingdom.  Dr
    Millard did comment that, if the appellant were permitted  to  stay  in
    United Kingdom, it was likely that he would have 'difficulties engaging
    in work.' The appellant also relies upon the report of Ms  Pargeter  to
    dated 27  June  2019.  Ms  Pargeter  has  provided  expert  opinion  on
    conditions in Algeria. She considered that  the  appellant  would  have
    difficulty accessing proper long-term support from either the state  or
    civil society such as to  get  him  into  the  workforce  and  adequate
    accommodation. There are state-run homeless shelters but the conditions
    are poor and individuals are  only  accepted  for  short  periods.  She
    concluded that there was a real risk that  the  appellant  would  'find
    himself back on the streets.'

 7. The Tribunal is required consider any private life which the  appellant
    may enjoy by the standards pertaining in Algeria  rather  than  in  the
    United Kingdom. Having said that, the appellant does not appear to have
    integrated to any great extent  in  United  Kingdom  society  since  he
    arrived here, primarily as a result of his illness. Moreover, whilst it
    might be argued that, if he were to find himself homeless  and  without
    job, the appellant would be  returning  to  conditions  in  Algeria  no
    different from those which he previously experienced, I  consider  that
    integration into any society should require, at  the  very  least,  the
    potential for finding work and accommodation.  I  accept  the  expert's
    comments regarding the inadequacy of homeless shelters, although I have
    not found that the appellant  would  be  denied  an  identity  document
    should he seek to obtain one.  Mrs  Pettersen,  who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State, submitted that account  had  to  be  taken  of  the
    availability of the UK government's AVR  (Assisted  Voluntary  Returns)
    scheme. This scheme would provide the  appellant  with  some  funds  to
    assist his return to Algeria. Miss Khan submitted that  no  particulars
    of the scheme have been provided by the respondent;  the  operation  of
    the scheme is different in different countries and, without details for
    Algeria, the Tribunal should discount the scheme as a factor. I  agree.
    Without relevant details, I cannot assess to what extent, if  any,  AVR
    would assist the appellant in reintegrating into Algerian society.

 8. I find that the appellant does, as  at  the  present  time,  face  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in Algerian society. It is his
    mental health problems, rather than difficulties caused by the Algerian
    authorities, which are likely to mean that he would return to living on
    the streets, a form of living which does not constitute integration  in
    any meaningful sense. The obstacles which the appellant  faces  at  the
    resent time are the result  not  of  any  inability  to  establish  his
    citizenship or identity in Algeria but on account of his mental  health
    problems. These problems have caused him to become  isolated  and,  for
    the time being, effectively unemployable. I do find that the  appellant
    is in good physical health and that, when he has been able to  overcome
    his mental health problems, there is no reason why he should not return
    to Algeria where I find that he should then be  able  to  access  state
    benefits /identity documentation. I stress that it is  the  appellant's
    mental health problems, as described by Dr Miller,  which  lead  me  to
    conclude that  the  appellant  is,  at  the  present  time,  unable  to
    integrate effectively. I find that the appellant meets the requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE (vi) and that  his  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
    succeeds.

    Notice of Decision

    The Upper Tribunal has remade the decision. The appeal  is  allowed  on
    human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds.


          Signed                             Date 21 January 2020

         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
