
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/02197/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 December 2017                        |On 01 February 2018            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     EA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna, instructed by Montague Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Turkey.  He  was  born  on  15  November
    1999.  He came to the United Kingdom on 11 May 2016 on  a  study  visa,
    and claimed asylum on 1 August 2016.

2.   In his witness statement he said he became involved  with  the  HDP  in
    2014 and supported them in distributing leaflets.  In  August  2015  he
    was grazing his animals when PKK guerrillas  approached  him  and  they
    shared food.  The next day his home was raided  and  he  was  detained,
    fingerprinted  and  photographed.   He  said  he  was   assaulted   and
    questioned and he was released the next day having denied  meeting  PKK
    members.

3.   In March 2016 he was approached by PKK fighters who gave him  money  to
    buy goods and he and some friends did so and one friend  was  arrested.
    He left his village at that point and went to Istanbul  where  he  made
    the visa application which led to him coming to the United Kingdom.  He
    learnt via a telephone call from his father on 14 July  2016  that  his
    friend had been arrested on 10 July and the appellant's home  had  been
    raided on the same day.  He said that there had subsequently been phone
    calls from his father to say that the gendarmes had been asking for him
    on 16 July and 22 August.

4.   Due to the appellant's age the  Home  Office  contacted  the  telephone
    number given on his Visa Application  Form  for  his  father.   It  was
    recorded that he said that he could not meet his son at the airport due
    to political reasons and Turkey was not safe for his son.  Although the
    visa address suggested he lived in  Istanbul  and  had  done  for  five
    years, he said he had never lived there but the address might have been
    his son's address when he was in Istanbul.  He said at one  point  that
    his son had worked in Istanbul but when asked about the  business  said
    he did not know and was not sure.

5.   In his asylum interview the appellant said his father was a farmer  and
    when he left school he helped his father.   He  said  he  joined  as  a
    member of the BDP which was the same as the HDP after 2014 and attended
    youth branch meetings.

6.   He referred to an arrest warrant which he said he had not seen  but  he
    had heard it over the phone.  As regards  the  reference  in  the  visa
    application to him living with his parents in Istanbul for  five  years
    he said the agent took care of everything and he just  gave  the  agent
    documents and had only ever been to Istanbul for a week prior to  that.
    As to why his father would say  he  had  been  living  and  working  in
    Istanbul prior to leaving he said perhaps his father was afraid.

7.   In oral evidence the appellant again said that the agent had filled  in
    the forms and he had simply given him money.  He said  his  father  had
    not written a statement because he spoke to him on the phone  and  told
    him everything and it had never come to his  mind  to  get  a  separate
    letter with the documents.  He accepted that the visa  information  was
    wrong.  There had not been enough evidence to detain him following  the
    incident in August 2015.  His  father  had  told  him  that  an  arrest
    warrant had been issued for him.  He said he was still in contact  with
    his father from time to time and last spoke to him on 2  January  2017.
    He said his father had  posted  documents  to  him  but  he  could  not
    remember when he received them.  The judge asked him where the  warrant
    was and he said there was no official document but they had been asking
    for him verbally.  When it was put to him that he had  said  there  had
    been an arrest warrant he said it was a misunderstanding and  he  meant
    they were looking for him.  He was required to go to the nearest police
    station.

8.   He referred to his uncle Mr MA, and he had known that he had  left  the
    United Kingdom having had political problems like  the  appellant.   He
    was asked whether his father was political and said he was and that  he
    attended party meetings for the HDP.  He did not know if his father was
    a member but his father was in the adult group and he was in the  youth
    group.  He said that the second encounter with the PKK members occurred
    in the village when somebody came to his home and asked him to go to  a
    quiet place and then they asked him things.  He  was  referred  to  his
    answers at interview at questions 42 and 52 and said he was at home  in
    the evening and someone from the village came and  asked  him  and  two
    other friends and they were taken to a quiet part of the village  where
    they were given money and asked to buy items for the PKK.

9.   The judge also heard evidence from Mr A  who  said  he  was  a  refugee
    because he had been a student working for the HDP and a close  relative
    had joined the PKK.  As this relative had a similar name to his he  was
    detained on a number of occasions.  He said  he  spoke  to  his  sister
    every week.  He had been a member of the HDP.  He did not know  if  his
    sister was a member as he had never asked, but he knew the  appellant's
    father was a member because they attended the same demonstrations.  His
    sister had told him of the appellant's problems and she had been hiding
    him.  She had told Mr A what they needed to do and had concluded  there
    was no safe way the appellant could remain  in  Turkey.   He  knew  the
    appellant had had problems and his sister was scared.  He was not aware
    of anything specifically happening to the appellant.  He then  said  he
    was told the appellant had been detained once on 16 August 2015 and  he
    said his sister had  told  him  about  this.   He  had  found  out  the
    appellant was coming to the UK the week after he arrived and then  said
    he knew he was coming and he  was  on  his  journey.   His  sister  had
    mentioned the arrest warrant.  He was asked whether  his  sister  could
    have sent the warrant to him and he said he did not understand and when
    asked again, he said people in Turkey were having a lot of problems and
    if they stopped talking he would never finish.  He had not asked if the
    appellant's mother had any problems after the appellant left.

10.  In his conclusions the judge noted in the Asylum Interview  Record  the
    appellant had not said his father was a member of the  HDP  though  the
    witness done so, and nor that his father was involved in  HDP  politics
    though he had said this subsequently in his witness statement.  He  had
    said he had introduced himself to the party.  The judge  did  not  find
    his oral evidence credible that he had not asked his father if he was a
    member.  In his second witness statement he had  said  all  his  family
    members were supporters which  the  judge  considered  to  some  extent
    contradicted his oral evidence that he did not know if his father was a
    member.  He noted the overall context of the claim that members of  the
    family had been granted status in the UK and the appellant's sister had
    recently  joined  the  PKK.   The  judge  also  considered   that   the
    appellant's general  knowledge  of  the  HDP  was  unsatisfactory.   He
    attached no weight to the documents produced to support the appellant's
    membership of the HDP and the adverse interest in him.  A  letter  from
    the Mukhtar was handwritten and had no  official  header  to  show  its
    provenance.  A membership letter was not a membership card and did  not
    say when the appellant joined or the level of his activity.  There  was
    no evidence from the appellant's  father  to  confirm  the  appellant's
    membership.  No original documents had been provided.   The  judge  did
    not therefore consider it to be reasonably likely  that  the  appellant
    was an HDP member as he claimed.

11.  The judge considered that the visa application for the  United  Kingdom
    must have been in contemplation for many months  bearing  in  mind  the
    fact that there were two visa applications, the appellant had said  his
    father and mother had to consent and financial information  was  needed
    from his father and the Entry Clearance Officer had noted sums of money
    being transferred to the appellant's father's business bank account  as
    far back as August 2015 which was before the appellant  applied  for  a
    passport  in  October  2015.   The  judge  considered  that  the   visa
    application's inaccuracies were a consequence of him being deliberately
    misleading.  Nor did the judge accept it to be reasonably likely that a
    villager would see the appellant assisting the PKK, given that it was a
    PKK supporting area.  There was no evidence for the appellant's claimed
    hospital  treatment  and  medication.   Nor  did  the  judge  find   it
    reasonably likely he would be given a warning and released  given  that
    at the time tensions were at a very high level.

12.  The judge also noted an inconsistency in the  appellant's  evidence  as
    between the PKK either coming to his house and  asking  him  to  go  to
    another  house  or  alternatively  meeting  him  in  the  street.   The
    inconsistency had not been explained.  It was also not  clear  why  the
    PKK could not do their own shopping or ask other members or  their  own
    family members to do it for them and why they would ask a 15  year  old
    boy to do it.  The  account  of  there  being  an  arrest  warrant  was
    inconsistent and contradictory in the judge's view.  It was relevant to
    note the lack of any evidence from the appellant's parents.

13.  The judge also found the evidence of Mr A  to  be  unsatisfactory.   It
    was not credible that he would not remember the  appellant's  detention
    until having given two negative responses and he had also  contradicted
    himself about whether he knew the appellant was coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  He had referred to the appellant as being  a  "fake"  student
    and that was regarded also as being telling.

14.  The judge drew matters together at paragraph 52 and was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant's account of his activities in Turkey for  the  HDP,
    his arrest and his being asked to help the PKK  which  led  to  adverse
    interest from the authorities was reasonably likely  to  be  true.   He
    considered the claim to be fabricated.  No Article  8  claim  had  been
    made.  The appeal was dismissed.

15.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to  appeal  on  renewal
    on the basis that the judge had not  made  a  specific  finding  as  to
    whether the appellant's family members, in particular his sister,  were
    supporters of the HDP/PKK.  Reference was made to the country  guidance
    in IK [2004] UKIAT 000312 including a relevant factor being whether the
    appellant has family connections with  a  separatist  organisation  and
    risk as a failed asylum seeker.  There was  a  risk  of  detention  and
    therefore of ill-treatment.

16.  At the hearing Ms Patyna adopted and developed the points made  in  her
    skeleton argument.  As a preliminary issue  she  sought  to  amend  the
    grounds to challenge paragraph 42 of the  judge's  decision  which  she
    argued was deficient in the way  in  which  the  written  evidence  was
    considered and the judge had not properly  applied  the  Tanveer  Ahmed
    guidance.  She argued that the findings were based on plausibility  and
    had been seen from a UK context.

17.  This application was resisted by Mr Tarlow who argued that it was  made
    very late and there was no material error in paragraph 42.

18.  Ms Patyna argued that the finding  was  critical  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's risk  profile.   Three  items  of  documentation  had  been
    provided.

19.  I ruled that it was too late for the grounds to be  amended.   Although
    I accept that Ms Patyna has come into the case late, it is  clear  that
    those instructing her have been  involved  since  at  the  earliest  12
    September 2017 when the permission to appeal application was put in and
    there has therefore been ample time prior to the date of hearing for an
    application to amend the grounds to be made.

20.  In her submissions Ms Patyna referred to paragraph 46 of  the  decision
    of the AIT in A (Turkey) [2003] UKIAT 00034,  adopted  subsequently  by
    the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in IK.  There were set out at paragraph
    46 a number of factors which were considered to be material  in  giving
    rise to potential suspicion in the minds  of  the  Turkish  authorities
    concerning a particular claimant.  For the purposes of  this  case  the
    particularly relevant factor is (f): "whether the appellant has  family
    connections with a separatist organisation such as KADEK  or  HADEP  or
    DEHAP".  The Tribunal had gone on to say at paragraph 47 that this  was
    not a checklist but assessment that the claim  must  be  in  the  round
    bearing in mind matters set out at paragraph  46,  the  central  issues
    always being the question of  real  risk  on  return  of  ill-treatment
    amounting to persecution or breach of a person's Article 3 rights.   It
    was also emphasised  that  the  existing  political  and  human  rights
    context overall was a matter of significance.

21.  Ms Patyna made the point that the appellant is young and Kurdish and  a
    failed asylum seeker and that it was  also  accepted  he  came  from  a
    family with a history of political involvement and it could not be said
    for sure that he would not be at risk on return.  Reference was made to
    paragraph 86 in IK where it was said that it would be for the judge  in
    each case to assess what questions were likely to be asked  and  how  a
    returnee would respond without being required to lie.  If  the  answers
    the appellant might give could give rise to suspicion then there was  a
    real risk of torture or ill treatment in detention.

22.  The  main  point  was  that  there  was  no  clear  finding  about  the
    appellant's family's political involvement, that  being  in  particular
    his parents and sister which had led to the authorities  attending  his
    home.  The judge had failed to take into account these matters and what
    questions and answers there would be for the  appellant  and  therefore
    the whole assessment of risk on return was flawed.  The judge  had  not
    said that he did not believe what Mr A had said had  happened  to  him.
    This had to be seen with the appellant's  statement  about  his  family
    including his sister joining the PKK.  In his  statement  he  had  said
    that his sister had joined the PKK seven months ago in  February  2016.
    He also said that this had become known in the village and  after  this
    the gendarmes had come to their home and asked  about  her  whereabouts
    and asked his parents a lot of questions.  The judge had  not  made  an
    explicit finding as to whether the family were supporters.   There  was
    no mention  of  the  crucial  issue  of  the  degree  of  the  sister's
    involvement and the consequences.  It was necessary to go back  to  the
    IK guidance as a relevant risk factor.  The judge had made  no  finding
    about the family.  What he said at paragraph 53 did not relate to  what
    the appellant's evidence was.  Reference was made to paragraphs 2 and 3
    of the appellant's statement.  No explicit finding had been made  about
    the sister and risk on return as a member of a family with a history of
    political involvement.  Not enough had been said by the judge about the
    appellant's ethnicity.  He had not referred  to  IK  or  A  or  to  the
    current political context in Turkey in assessing risk.  It  seemed  the
    judge had not engaged with this matter nor was he aware as to how  risk
    was to be assessed in circumstances such as the appellant's.  There was
    a material error of law with regard to the family involvement.

23.  In his  submissions  Mr  Tarlow  argued  that  this  was  a  matter  of
    disagreement only.  The judge at paragraphs 40 and 41 had  encapsulated
    the basis of the claim and his findings too.  These  were  findings  he
    was entitled to make and it was for him to assess the evidence for each
    conclusion.   There  was  nothing  perverse  or  unreasonable  in   the
    findings.  He had addressed the evidence with regard to the  uncle  and
    had assessed matters as he had said he would do.  With  regard  to  the
    conclusion at paragraph 53 the judge had done exactly what was expected
    of him and certainly  had  taken  the  family  including  the  sister's
    activities into account.

24.  By way of reply Ms Patyna argued that  the  decision  was  based  on  a
    wrong premise that could only succeed if the appellant's detention  was
    believed but the country guidance demanded more.  It was therefore  not
    open to the judge to conclude as he did.  He  had  not  dealt  properly
    with the family issues.  He had not rejected the uncle's evidence  with
    regard to his experiences but only what he said about the appellant.

25.  It is common ground that if the determination was found to  contain  an
    error of law or errors of law it would need to be remitted for  a  full
    rehearing before a First-tier Judge.

26.  I reserved my determination.

27.  I think that Ms Patyna has identified a material error in  the  judge's
    decision in this  case.   He  did  not  deal  with  the  issue  of  the
    appellant's sister and the risk of  adverse  interest  in  him  on  her
    account.  It is clear that his evidence was that she joined the PKK  in
    2016, and a risk factor as identified in IK is  whether  the  appellant
    has family connections with a separatist organisation and  this  needed
    to be borne in mind together with the  appellant's  Kurdish  ethnicity.
    Accordingly I consider it has been shown that the decision is flawed by
    a material error of law and accordingly it will require to  be  reheard
    and a fresh decision made in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date: 29 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




