

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02241/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On July 14, 2017                   |On July 17, 2017              |
|                                   |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                             MR ASAD RASHAD ALI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Azmi, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
      Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
Interpreter Mr Kafur


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    2. The appellant, an Iraqi national,  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on
       November 2, 2015 concealed in a lorry and claimed  asylum  the  same
       day. The respondent refused his application  on  February  24,  2016
       under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.


    3. The appellant appealed against that decision on March 4, 2016  under
       section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


    4. The appellant's appeal came before former Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Robertson (hereinafter called the "Judge") on September 16,
       2016 and in a decision promulgated on November 3, 2016 he  dismissed
       the appellant's appeal on all grounds.


    5. The appellant appealed that decision on November 14, 2016 and  Judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal Gillespie granted permission to appeal on
       December 1, 2016 as the Judge had  arguably  erred  in  finding  the
       appellant  could  return  to  Jalawla  in  circumstances  when   the
       respondent's own guidance stated the area was still contested.


    6. The matter came before me on May 18, 2017 and  at  that  hearing  Mr
       Bates conceded there was an error in law  and  submitted  the  Judge
       should have considered the  issue  of  internal  relocation.  I  was
       invited by Mr Azimi to remit the matter but  having  considered  the
       representations of both representatives I kept  the  matter  in  the
       Upper Tribunal and adjourned the case for further oral  and  written
       evidence.


    7. I made it  clear  that  the  Judge's  findings  of  fact  about  the
       appellant's claim were retained and the sole issue for  the  resumed
       hearing would be whether it would be a  breach  of  article  15c  to
       return the appellant to Iraq.



Appellant's Evidence


    8. At the  resumed  hearing,  the  appellant  re-adopted  his  previous
       statement and gave oral evidence. He  maintained,  contrary  to  the
       findings of the Judge, that his parents were born in  Sharazoor  and
       then went to live in Jalawla and that whilst they had  Civil  Status
       Identity Documents (CSID) he had never been issued with one and  had
       simply relied on the documents that his parents had been issued with
       at birth. He stated he had no contact with his father  in  Iraq  and
       there was no one whom he could  turn  to  obtain  the  document.  He
       maintained his earlier fear of his father's family (rejected by  the
       Judge) and argued he would be unable to live anywhere in the IKR  or
       Baghdad.



Submissions


    9. Mr Bates submitted that  based  on  the  Judge's  earlier  preserved
       findings this Tribunal should look carefully at his evidence  today.
       Whilst he maintained his parents were born  in  Sharazoor  and  then
       went to live in Jalawla, this had specifically been rejected by  the
       Tribunal as had his fear of his family. The Tribunal were  therefore
       dealing with a male who was to be returned to Iraq.  The  issue  for
       the Tribunal today was whether he could safely now  be  returned  to
       Jalawla in light of the improved situation there or alternatively he
       could relocate to either the  IKR  or  live  in  Baghdad.  Mr  Bates
       submitted that his claim not have access to a CSID should be treated
       with caution because of the previous findings. He submitted that  he
       could now return to Jalawla because evidence showed it was no longer
       a  contested  area  and  he  could  safely  return  to  live  there.
       Alternatively, he was a Kurd and the evidence showed he was fit  and
       well and he would be able to fly to Erbil by  one  of  a  number  of
       routes. He would be given entry for at least  ten  days  and  as  he
       claimed to have family all over the IKR he would have access to them
       in light of the rejection of his  account.  He  submitted  that  the
       appellant would be able to obtain the  necessary  documents  and  he
       asked me to refuse the appellant's appeal.

   10. Mr Azimi submitted that  whilst  the  Judge  had  made  findings  in
       paragraphs [15] to [19] of his decision he had not totally  rejected
       the appellant's account. The appellant's claim today was he  had  no
       family to turn to in Iraq as he had either lost contact with them or
       he feared them. He invited me to accept he had no one to turn to  in
       Iraq and this would  hinder  the  process  for  him  to  obtain  the
       necessary paperwork. He also argued that the recent Court of  Appeal
       decision of AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 did not say Jalawla was no
       longer a disputed area and  in  those  circumstances  he  could  not
       return there. The appellant stated he did not have a CSID and he had
       no access to one because he had no family who  could  help  him.  He
       submitted that he fell within  the  risk  categories  identified  in
       paragraphs [9] to [11] in the Annex of  AA.  Similarly,  he  had  no
       family in Baghdad and would be unable to settle there. He invited me
       to find internal relocation was not reasonable or  feasible  and  to
       grant him humanitarian protection.

   11. Mr Bates invited me to find there had been no error in law an  error
       in law and to remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  because
       ultimately the Judge  was  the  person  tasked  with  assessing  the
       evidence and making credibility findings.  It  was  clear  from  the
       Judge's decision that the Judge was aware of the report but for  the
       reasons given in the decision  he  concluded  the  appellant  lacked
       credibility and the findings made were all  open  to  him.  Even  if
       those reasons about return to his  home  area  were  not  adequately
       reasoned he could return to Kabul.  It  was  not  suggested  in  the
       grounds of appeal that Kabul  was  not  available  to  him  and  all
       findings made were open to him.

FINDINGS


   12. Findings  of  fact  were  made  by  the  previous  Judge  about  the
       appellant's claim and those findings are preserved. The Judge found:

        a. The appellant gave inconsistent evidence about what  he  feared.
           On arrival in the United Kingdom he claimed he feared  ISIS  but
           in his evidence the appellant only claimed to  fear  his  family
           and the JAFF tribe.


        b. The appellant submitted a  copy  Iraqi  Citizenship  certificate
           which named his  parents  and  gave  their  place  of  birth  as
           Jalawla. The appellant claimed initially this was  an  incorrect
           translation but then claimed it had been  done  deliberately  so
           they would not be identified.


        c. The appellant received no direct threats either from ISIS or his
           extended family though he claimed  his  father  had  received  a
           threatening letter albeit many years after his father had eloped
           with his mother. It was unclear why if their location  had  been
           discovered the threat was not carried out and no direct had been
           taken against his parents in 26 years.


        d. The Iraqi Citizenship Certificate showed the appellant's parents
           were born in  Jalawla  and  they  were  married  and  living  in
           Jalwawla.

   13. The situation in Iraq is changing all  the  time  as  most  recently
       demonstrated by the recent events in  Mosul.  The  Court  of  Appeal
       recently considered the situation in Iraq albeit it  is  clear  from
       the  language  used  this  was  on  a  limited  and  discrete  basis
       concerning the Iraqi  Civil  Status  Identity  Document.  The  point
       considered by the Court of Appeal is of  relevance  to  this  appeal
       because the appellant claimed he did not have access to a CSID and I
       will return to that issue later in my decision. What is clear though
       from the Court of Appeal decision is that the court was  not  tasked
       with considering other aspects of the country guidance decision.  To
       that extent Mr Azimi's submission that the Court considered the  law
       and made no amendments (other than to the CSID issue) has no merit.

   14. The Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC)
       considered the position as it was in May 2015 and issued a judgement
       in October 2015. In AF (2004) UKIAT 00284  the  Tribunal  said  that
       failure by Adjudicators to follow  country  guidance  cases  was  an
       error of law but where there is evidence to enable me to depart from
       a Country Guidance then I am entitled to do so as  long  as  I  give
       reasons for doing so.


   15. Mr Bates invited me to depart  to  depart  from  AA  and  find  that
       Jalawla was no  longer  a  contested  area.  Paragraph  [1]  of  the
       headnote in the annex of AA states-


         "There is at present a state of internal armed conflict in  certain
         parts of Iraq, involving government security  forces,  militias  of
         various kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL. The  intensity
         of  this  armed  conflict  in  the  so-called  "contested   areas",
         comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min),
         Ninewah and Salah Al-din, is such that, as a general matter,  there
         are substantial grounds for believing that  any  civilian  returned
         there, solely on account of his or her presence there, faces a real
         risk of being subjected to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to
         serious harm within the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification
         Directive."


   16. Jalawla is part of the governate of Diyala and therefore formed part
       of a contested area. This of course  was  the  reason  the  original
       error of law arose because the Judge stated it was  not  part  of  a
       contested area.

   17. Mr Bate submitted in evidence a  bundle  of  country  evidence  that
       supports his argument that Jalawla was no longer part of a contested
       area  although  he  acknowledged  it  was  part  of  the   "disputed
       territories" being claimed by both central government in Baghdad and
       the IKR.


   18. The evidence adduced included the following:


        a. An article dated March 28, 2016 which  referred  to  almost  600
           families returning to their homes in the area  over  a  two  day
           period. Three of the six neighbourhoods had  been  reconstructed
           and it was expected that  many  more  displaced  families  would
           return to the other three neighbourhoods the following week.  At
           that date around 4000 families had returned to the area and they
           had done so because the  houses,  streets  and  roads  had  been
           declared safe by bomb disposal engineers. ISIS had been  removed
           from the area.


        b. Evidence of the rebuilding of the city.


        c. Home Office Country Policy and Information Note June 2017.


              i. Para 2.2.4 makes  clear  that  internal  relocation  is  in
                 general  possible  to  all   areas   except   those   areas
                 identified. One such area is  "the  parts  of  the  Baghdad
                 Belts (the residential, agricultural and  industrial  areas
                 that encircle the city of Baghdad) that border  Diyala  and
                 Salahal-Din. This area is still assessed as meeting article
                 15(c).
             ii. Para 2.2.6 states people who originate from the IKR will in
                 general be able to return there and to relocate to  another
                 area subject to the provisos listed in para 2.2.8.


        d. Evidence of flights to Erbil from Baghdad.


   19. Mr Azimi did not present any evidence to support his submission that
       Jalawla remained part of a contested area although he did argue that
       it remained part of a disputed area.

   20. There was no evidence adduced of  any  continuing  fighting  in  the
       appellant's home area and the respondent's position is  now  changed
       in that whereas she accepted the area was in a contested  area  last
       year this was  now  not  something  they  placed  any  reliance  on.
       Representatives regularly refer  to  Iraq  like  Libya  as  being  a
       country in flux. I find that as at today's date Jalawla is no longer
       in a contested and the fact there may be a dispute  between  Baghdad
       and the IKR does not mean it is no longer a safe place to return to.




   21. Looking at the findings already made in this matter I  am  satisfied
       that subject to any document issues that have been raised  there  is
       nothing to prevent the appellant returning to his home  area.  There
       is evidence that he would be able to fly to Baghdad  and  then  onto
       Erbil.


   22. The problem I have with the appellant's evidence today  is  that  he
       was merely repeating evidence that he had given  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. Those findings were  never  challenged  and  they  are  my
       starting point.


   23. I am satisfied his parents were born and lived in Jalawla. I  reject
       his claim that his extended family in  the  IKR  would  take  action
       against him and I do  not  find  there  is  any  outstanding  grudge
       against him or his family.


   24. If the appellant feels unable to return to Jalawla then there is the
       option to return to Erbil (from Baghdad on one  of  the  many  daily
       flights) and either stay there or in another part of the IKR subject
       of course to my being satisfied that he  would  be  able  to  secure
       documents or be allowed to remain without them.


   25. The Court of Appeal reviewed the importance of documentation  and  a
       CISD in AA and gave  the  updated  guidance  in  the  Annex  to  its
       decision-
      "B. DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)
      5. Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will
      be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad. The Iraqi
      authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to
      enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi
      passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.
      6. No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in
      possession of one of these documents.
      7. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and
      Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
      1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by
      reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of a
      current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer, if the Tribunal
      finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account of a lack
      of any of those documents.
      8. Where P is returned to Iraq on a laissez passer or expired
      passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of return
      by reason of not having a current passport.
      C. The CSID
      9. Regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it will be necessary
      to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain one,
      reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in
      order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance from the
      authorities; employment; education; housing; and medical treatment. If
      P shows there are no family or other members likely to be able to
      provide means of support, P is in general likely to face a real risk
      of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds
      provided to P by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's
      return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still
      have no CSID.
      10. Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P should as a
      general matter be able to obtain one from the Civil Status Affairs
      Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi passport (whether
      current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such a passport,
      P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether P knows the page
      and volume number of the book holding P's information (and that of P's
      family). P's ability to persuade the officials that P is the person
      named on the relevant page is likely to depend on whether P has family
      members or other individuals who are prepared to vouch for P.
      11. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered if
      P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's
      Governorate because it is in an area where Article 15(c) serious harm
      is occurring. As a result of the violence, alternative CSA Offices for
      Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have been established in Baghdad and
      Kerbala. The evidence does not demonstrate that the "Central Archive",
      which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those
      in need of them. There is, however, a National Status Court in
      Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal recognition of identity.
      The precise operation of this court is, however, unclear.
   26. Based on the findings made the  issue  is  whether  the  appellant's
       ability to obtain an CSID. Having found his  parents  were  born  in
       Jalawla and lived there and that the area no longer forms part of  a
       contested area and having rejected his claim fear of persecution  it
       seems to me that when the appellant was returned he would be granted
       entry to the IKR as a Kurd and I am satisfied that he would be  able
       to obtain the CSID without any real difficulty. I reject  his  claim
       that he himself did not have one. He gave evidence that his  parents
       did have one and as his account of events has been rejected I do not
       find it credible that as an adult living in Iraq for around 24 years
       he would not have obtained a CSID.

   27. Having considered all of the evidence I find were the  appellant  to
       be returned to Iraq he could either return to his home area to  live
       or alternatively he could return to the IKR region via  an  internal
       flight from Baghdad and obtain his CSID and re-establish  his  life,
       like many others, in Iraq.

DECISION

   28. The original Judge's decision  contained  an  error  in  respect  of
       humanitarian protection only. I set aside  that  decision  and  have
       remade it.

   29. I dismiss the appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds
       and uphold the decisions to dismiss his other claims.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
