
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/02197/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2019                  |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     B A
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Degirmenci of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born in 1999.  He appealed against
    a decision of the respondent made on 10 February  2017  to  refuse  him
    asylum.  On 4 April  2017  there  was  an  appeal  hearing  before  the
    Tribunal where the appellant's appeal was  dismissed.   On  1  February
    2018 the Upper Tribunal set aside the Tribunal's decision  and  ordered
    that it be heard afresh.

 2. The  basis  of  his  claim  is  that  he  fears  persecution  from  the
    authorities on account of his imputed opinion as a supporter of the PKK
    due to his membership of the Peace and Democracy Party  which  in  2014
    became the People's Democratic Party (HDP).

 3. In 2014 he became involved with the HDP because his family and  friends
    supported them.  He distributed leaflets and put up posters.  In August
    2015  PKK  guerrillas  approached  when  he  was   in   the   mountains
    shepherding.  The next day he was arrested and detained for  one  night
    and questioned about the PKK.  He was beaten.

 4. In  February  2016  his  sister  joined  the  PKK.   As  a  result  the
    authorities came to the appellant's home and questioned his parents.

 5. In March 2016 he and two friends were told by a villager to  meet  some
    PKK guerrillas outside the village.  They were told to run errands  for
    them.  One of his friends left to return to the village.  Soon after he
    learned that that friend had been detained.

 6. The appellant travelled to Istanbul.  He applied for a UK visa  in  mid
    April 2016 and left Turkey in May 2016.  Whilst in the  UK  his  father
    called him and told him that the police had raided his home on 10  July
    2016.  The authorities had also questioned the  village  mukhtar  about
    his whereabouts.

 7. His sister is missing.

 8. The basis of the refusal  is  that  while  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant is a Turkish national and of Kurdish  ethnicity  his  account
    was not credible.  His answers at interview  about  HDP  policies  were
    vague and inconsistent; given he was 17 years of age  at  interview  he
    could not have been high profile; visa applications  made  in  February
    2016 and in April 2016 indicated that he lived in Istanbul, had  worked
    there and had intended to travel to the UK in April, all matters  which
    contradicted his account.

 9. Further, his ability to get a passport in October 2015 indicated he was
    of no interest.  Also, it was not credible that the PKK would  approach
    three men who were not members to carry out their tasks.

10. He appealed.

First tier hearing

11. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 9  October  2018  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Loke dismissed the appeal.

12. Her findings are at paragraph [14] ff.  In summary, having  noted  that
    the appellant was vulnerable at the time of his interview  due  to  his
    age, she found that it was "reasonably likely  that  he  supported  the
    HDP.  He may have attended rallies and he  may  well  have  distributed
    leaflets."  [17]

13. However, the judge was "not satisfied that he was a member of the HDP."
     A claimed membership document had not materialised.  A membership card
    indicating him to be a member of the Kurdish Community Centre  did  not
    assist.  [18]

14. She went on to find that the appellant has family connections with  the
    HDP, namely his uncle and cousins.  There  are  newspaper  articles  in
    support.

15. She did not believe that the appellant's sister had joined the  PKK  or
    was suspected of such.  He had not  mentioned  such  at  interview.   A
    statement by his father, while it  said  he  had  not  seen  her  since
    February 2016, did not state she had joined the PKK.

16. As for the incidents  in  August  2015  there  were  discrepancies,  in
    particular, whether he signed or refused to sign a document before  his
    release.  Further, there was inconsistency about how much he was  asked
    whilst in detention about his sister.

17. The judge also did not believe the PKK would  instruct  an  unknown  to
    carry out errands or that he would have, as a  15  year  old  boy,  the
    resources to travel immediately to Istanbul.

18.  In  further  adverse  findings  the  judge  placed  little  weight  on
    gendarmerie documents and did not find  persuasive  evidence  from  the
    appellant's father in Turkey.

19. Finally, the judge took as an adverse factor  that  the  appellant  was
    able to leave Turkey on his own passport.

20. The judge concluded by considering risk  on  return  in  light  of  her
    findings,  namely,  that  although  a  supporter  of  HDP  with  family
    connections with the HDP, he had  not  been  detained  or  arrested  or
    tortured or suspected of being a separatist and the authorities had not
    expressed any interest in him since his departure.

21. She stated: "Whilst I have found that the appellant  has  attended  HDP
    rallies and meetings there is no evidence that  he  has  attracted  the
    attention of the authorities in doing so.  Although the  appellant  has
    family connections with the HDP through his uncle and cousins there  is
    no evidence that the appellant will be questioned  on  their  account."
    [41]  Accordingly, the judge was not satisfied that the appellant would
    face a real risk on  return  either  to  his  home  area  or  elsewhere
    including the airport on arrival.

22. He sought permission to appeal which was refused but was granted on  22
    January 2019 on reapplication to the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law Hearing

23. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Degirmenci made three  points.
    First, the judge failed to  consider  a  material  document  which  was
    before her which confirmed he was a member of  the  HDP.   Such  had  a
    bearing on the overall assessment of credibility.  Also,  many  members
    of the HDP have been detained and imprisoned.  Second, having  accepted
    that family members had connections with HDP the judge failed  to  make
    findings on the extent of the family's connections  to  the  PKK.   His
    case  was  that  his  cousins  had  been  arrested  on  accusations  of
    supporting  the  PKK.   Third,  whether  the   appellant   has   family
    connections with a separatist organisation  is  a  material  matter  to
    consider in assessing risk on return.  The judge's  statement  that  it
    was of no consequence was erroneous.

24. In response Ms Cunha accepted that the judge failed to have regard to a
    document which supported his claim to have been a member of  HDP.   She
    questioned whether it was material in light of what  he  admitted  were
    his low level activities.  As for family members the judge  gave  clear
    reasons in support of her finding that the sister had  not  joined  the
    PKK.  Overall, she made adequate findings  that  the  family  were  not
    involved with PKK.  Finally, her approach to risk on return was one  on
    the facts found which was open to her.

Consideration

25. In considering this matter I find merit in Ms Degirmenci's submissions.
    It is clear that the judge gave  careful  thought  to  the  case  in  a
    detailed analysis.  Unfortunately, however, I conclude  that  she  made
    errors which mean it is unsafe.  First, the judge correctly  recognised
    that the appellant's association with the HDP including whether or  not
    he was a member of the party, was a material issue in the  appeal.   At
    [17] she accepted that the appellant was a supporter  of  the  HDP  who
    distributed leaflets and attended rallies.  At [18] she noted that  the
    document  confirming  the  appellant's  party  membership  had   "never
    materialised."  That was incorrect.  The appellant's first bundle (pp 9-
    12) contained evidence supporting his claim of membership  including  a
    letter from the HDP and a receipt for contributions to the party.   The
    letter confirmed that the appellant was "a member of our party."

26. I consider that her failure to assess  this  evidence  was  a  material
    error which had a bearing on the overall assessment of credibility.  It
    cannot be said that had the judge properly considered the  evidence  of
    the appellant's membership, it  would  be  immaterial  to  her  overall
    conclusion on credibility.

27. In any event the respondent's  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note:
    Kurdish political parties, Turkey (August 2018) provides as follows:

         "2.4.1   The HDP  and  the  PKK  are  separate  organisations  with
         different goals.   The  HDP  denies  direct  links  with  the  PKK.
         However, some members of the HDP have been accused by  the  Turkish
         government of links with the PKK."

28. Further, (at 2.4.4) "thousands of members of the HDP have been arrested
    since the coup attempt of July 2016."

29. The second problem is the judge's failure to reach a finding in respect
    of a material matter.  She accepted the evidence that  the  appellant's
    family had connections with the HDP [20, 38] "as evidenced by newspaper
    articles" but other than in respect of  his  sister  did  not  reach  a
    finding as to the extent of the family connections with the PKK and the
    arrests and imprisonment of family members on account of such  (genuine
    and suspected) connections.

30. The evidence was that two cousins had been arrested on  accusations  of
    supporting the PKK.  A further cousin killed in 2012 had been a member.
     An uncle who was a mukhtar was removed from office amongst allegations
    of PKK involvement.  There was supporting evidence in  respect  of  the
    profile of the family members, and the criminal cases against  them  in
    the supplementary bundle of evidence.

31. Such has relevance to  risk  on  return.   The  judge  referred  to  IA
    (Turkey) [2003] UKAIT 34 (as confirmed in IK  (Returnees  -  Records  -
    IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 312.   Whether  the  appellant  has  family
    connections with a separatist organisation  is  a  material  matter  to
    consider in assessing risk on return.  The judge's comment  that  there
    is "no evidence" [41],  that  the  appellant  would  be  questioned  on
    account of his family connections is erroneous in the context  of  this
    guidance, which identifies the political associations of family members
    as a risk factor.

32. In light of the flaws in the decision I consider  that  the  case  will
    need to be reheard again and appropriate findings made.

Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material  error  of  law.
    It is set aside.  The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate
    under section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2 to remit to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing on all issues. No findings stand. The  member(s)  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to consider the  case  are  not  to  include
    Judge Loke.

34. An anonymity order is made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   Failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed      Date 5 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
