
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA024472015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3rd June 2016                          |On 14th June 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     K R
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Thomas, Counsel; instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker dismissing the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision refusing to grant him asylum, humanitarian protection  and  on
    the basis of his human rights claims.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and was granted permission
    to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andrew  on  all  grounds.   The
    grounds upon which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

      i) It is arguable that the judge failed to make findings regarding the
         dissemination of the Appellant's name via social  media,  namely  a
         Facebook post on the Facebook page of [AA].

     ii) It is arguable that the judge erred in not considering the  correct
         test to be applied regarding internal relocation pursuant to Januzi
         v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426.

    iii) It is arguable that the judge erred in failing to consider or  give
         reasons for rejecting the Appellant's objective  country  evidence,
         namely in the form of the Danish Immigration Service's report dated
         June 2014.

     iv) It is arguable that the judge erred in  his  consideration  of  the
         ambit of Article 1D of the Refugee Convention.



Error of Law

 3. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give.  I find that there was  an  error  of
    law in the decision such that it should be set aside.  My  reasons  for
    so finding are as follows.

 4. In respect of Ground 1  it  was  said  that  a  central  tenet  of  the
    Appellant's case, namely the fact that his name had  been  disseminated
    on Facebook on [AA]'s Facebook page, had not been considered  and  that
    this material was unchallenged in the refusal letter or at the  hearing
    which showed that the risk that the Appellant faced was not confined to
    the camp where he previously lived.

 5. In respect of this ground I take into account  Mr  Duffy's  submissions
    that it is difficult to see in what  terms  the  post  existed  or  the
    comments were made.  This is because the Facebook post itself  was  not
    sought  or  requested  by  the  Respondent  however  neither   was   it
    voluntarily put forward by the Appellant nor thought to be needed given
    that it was not challenged in the reasons for refusal letter.

 6. Ms Thomas was forced to accept that the Facebook post was not mentioned
    by her  in  her  skeleton  argument  nor  in  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement.  However, she highlighted that this was not a case in  which
    the Appellant's credibility had been placed in issue and  indeed  there
    are no adverse credibility findings made against the Appellant by Judge
    Walker.  Had this been the sole ground of complaint the error would not
    have been material.  However, in  concert  with  the  remaining  errors
    which I discuss below, it did contribute to a material error such  that
    the decision should be set aside.

 7. Turning to Ground 2 concerning the internal relocation to  Tripoli  and
    the assessment of whether that would be unduly harsh,  Mr  Duffy  quite
    rightly pointed out that the judge's assessment was on the  basis  that
    the risk to the Appellant existed only within the camp and that he  did
    not encounter any adverse interest when he was living in  Tripoli  with
    his aunt.

 8. Ms Thomas, however, rightly highlights that such a view  presumes  that
    the Appellant would have been at large whereas the  fact  remains  that
    the Appellant was in hiding for fear of  his  safety  and  consequently
    there was no assessment of whether returning to that status  quo  would
    be unduly harsh given that the fact of his remaining in hiding was  not
    challenged.  Therefore, whilst I note that the judge's  view  was  that
    the risk was confined to the camp,  that  finding  cannot  be  complete
    without an assessment of whether the risk is truly confined  given  the
    fact that the Appellant  was  in  hiding  in  Tripoli,  which  was  not
    challenged thus far. Without such  an  assessment,  the  conclusion  is
    incomplete.

 9. Turning to Ground 3 and the failure to deal with the objective evidence
    put forward by the Appellant, namely the Danish  Immigration  Service's
    report, Mr Duffy rationalises this omission by virtue of the fact  that
    the material would not have had a bearing on the result of the  appeal.
    However, I do note that the  material  was  extensively  referenced  at
    paragraph 12 of Ms Thomas' skeleton argument and consequently the  fact
    that it was not considered in and of itself is  a  concern.   Moreover,
    the fact that the material was more recent  than  the  material  relied
    upon by the Respondent meant that it should have been looked at as  the
    most up-to-date objective evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  and
    its relevance and any weight to be attributed should have been assessed
    before the judge could  prefer  or  focus  solely  upon  the  objective
    country evidence from the Respondent.

10. Turning to Ground 4 and the treatment  of  the  Appellant's  claim  and
    Article 1D of the Refugee Convention, Ms Thomas  highlighted  that  the
    first question, which was answered, was whether  the  Appellant  was  a
    documented Palestinian in receipt of assistance from  UNWRA.   However,
    the  second  question,  which  was  not  considered,  was  whether  the
    Appellant was in receipt of assistance any longer  given  that  he  was
    forced to leave the country, which was a matter beyond his control.

11. This was said to  be  important  given  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the Appellant had been  threatened  by  Ansar  Allah  and
    hence left the country, which is  confirmed  at  paragraph  33  of  the
    Reasons for Refusal letter and which omission sits  uneasily  with  the
    judgment of El Kott, the citation of which is as follows: Abed El Karem
    El Kott and others v Bevandorlasi es Allampolgarsagi Hivatal (Directive
    2004/83/EC) Case C-364/11 in which the European Court of  Justice  held
    that a person who had been "forced to  leave  for  reasons  unconnected
    with that person's will ... may lead to a finding that  the  assistance
    from which  that  person  benefitted  has  ceased"  (see  [59]  of  the
    judgment).  I accept Ms Thomas' submissions  on  this  point  and  this
    ground points to an error also.

12. There was a further matter which gave me cause  for  concern,  which  I
    also canvassed with the parties, which was the finding at paragraph  35
    of the judgment that the Appellant did not face any risks  or  problems
    at the airport on exit. This finding was made against the reference  to
    the UNHCR report by Ms Thomas in her skeleton argument which  mentioned
    that "Hezbollah dominates security at the airport, so the  group  would
    be able to track anyone directly from entry to Lebanon".

13. Whilst the objective material admits that Hezbollah dominates  security
    at the airport, the fact that  the  Appellant  was  able  to  exit  the
    country notwithstanding Hezbollah's presence at the airport in  and  of
    itself should not mean that he would not be at risk on return.  Indeed,
    were this to be so, the same would follow and apply to  all  Appellants
    who were able to pass through the airport  and  arrive  in  the  United
    Kingdom to claim asylum.

14. Consequently, taking these minor  errors  in  the  determination  as  a
    whole, I am just satisfied that there is overall a  material  error  in
    the determination such that it should be set aside and consequently the
    findings are not preserved.

15. In light of the above findings, the appeal shall  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.




Notice of Decision

16. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted bench.

18. I maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date 10 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
