
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02349/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2020                   |On 29 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     In person, not legally represented
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Handler promulgated 1.10.19, dismissing on  all  grounds
    her appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    4.3.19, to refuse her protection claim made on 19.10.17.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker granted permission to  appeal  on
    1.10.19.

 3. There was no appeal against the judge's  rejection  of  the  protection
    claim on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.

 4. However, the grounds assert that the judge erred in law in:

      a) Finding that it was reasonable to expect  the  appellant's  British
         citizen L child to leave the UK;

      b) Concluding that the appellant's British partner SM could travel  to
         Iraq;

      c) Finding that the appellant could apply  for  entry  clearance  from
         outside the UK.

 5. In granting permission, Judge Scott-Baker considered it  arguable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  in  the  assessment  of  the
    child's best interests as a British citizen pursuant to s117B(6) of the
    2002 Act and the finding at [45] that the child could travel to Iraq.

 6. The Upper Tribunal error of law hearing  was  heard  at  Manchester  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harris. He found  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's assessment of the child's best  interests  failed  to  consider
    whether it was in the long term best interests of the child  to  go  to
    live in Iraq or to remain in the UK. At  [16]  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision, Judge Harris stated, "The effect on a British citizen and the
    prospective impact on the child of going to live in Iraq is one of  the
    factors that needs to be taken into account. That  is  clear  from  the
    guidance of Lady Hale in ZH (Tanzania) at paragraph 41. The factors  to
    be considered are weighty and significant and the judge has  failed  to
    properly apply them thus creating a material error of law."

 7. Judge Harris preserved all the findings  of  fact.  In  the  directions
    issued  for  the  resumed  hearing,  he  stated  that  the  issue   for
    determination by the Upper Tribunal "is whether it  is  in  the  public
    interest to remove the Appellant from the UK having concluded  one  way
    or the other whether it is reasonable to expect the child of the family
    L to leave the UK and for a full and detailed analysis  of  the  issues
    pursuant to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act."

 8. Judge Harris has  now  retired  and  thus  on  16.12.19  the  Principle
    Resident Judge made a transfer order for the appeal to be determined by
    a differently constituted Tribunal. Thus the matter came before me as a
    resumed hearing on 24.1.20.

 9. There was no legal representation for the appellant, who attended  with
    her husband and two young children. The eldest daughter is now 2  years
    of age and the youngest, born after the First-tier  Tribunal  decision,
    is just 2 months old. A letter received from  Knightbridge  Solicitors,
    dated 17.1.20, explained that their instructions had been withdrawn and
    thus they no longer represented the appellant. The  appellant  told  me
    that they  could  not  afford  the  sum  required  for  representation.
    Fortunately,  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  arranged  a   Kurdish   Sorani
    interpreter for the appellant so that the appeal was able to proceed.

10. The relevant background is that the appellant is  an  Iraqi  Kurd  from
    Sulaymaniyah in the IKR. Her factual claim  to  be  at  risk  from  her
    family on return to Iraq because she  had  had  sex  with  her  husband
    without going through a  second  marriage  ceremony  and  because  they
    regarded her first child as having been conceived out of lawful wedlock
    was found not credible. The First-tier Tribunal rejected the claim that
    the  appellant  had  been  mistreated  by  her  family  in   Iraq   and
    specifically found that she had travelled to the UK with the  knowledge
    and support of her family and that she remains in contact with them, so
    that there was no need for her to relocate within Iraq. The judge found
    that, if necessary, they can assist her to re-document herself  with  a
    CSID from within the UK but found that the volume and  page  number  of
    the Family Book were in fact shown in the English  translation  of  her
    marriage certificate, so that she already had sufficient information to
    be able to obtain a CSID  from  the  Iraqi  Embassy  in  the  UK.  This
    findings have been preserved.

11. One of the arguments raised on the appellant's behalf at the First-tier
    Tribunal was that in the light of L's British citizenship and the Upper
    Tribunal's decision in JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK)  Turkey
    [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC),  the  appellant  was  "bound"  to  succeed  on
    article 8 ECHR family life grounds.

12. Whilst Mr McVeety did not agree that the appeal was necessarily "bound"
    to succeed, he conceded that there were very strong grounds in relation
    to the appellant's (now) two young British citizen children and he  was
    somewhat surprised that the appeal had not meet remade by  allowing  it
    at the same time Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harris set  it  aside.  In
    the circumstances of this case, he did not resist the appeal.

13. Ms Patel's point had been that JG held that, "section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  requires  a  court  or
    tribunal to hypothesise that the child  in  question  would  leave  the
    United Kingdom, even if this is not likely to  be  the  case,  and  ask
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to do so."  Even  if
    the children would have remained with their British citizen  father  in
    the UK whilst the appellant returned to Iraq to make an application for
    entry clearance as a spouse, the Tribunal has to proceed on  the  basis
    that the children would be leaving with her  and  thus  had  to  assess
    whether it was reasonable to expect them to do so.

14. In KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC  53   the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  was  given  by  Lord
    Carnwath, who stated that "reasonableness" is to be considered  in  the
    context of the real  world  in  which  the  children  find  themselves,
    including whether the parents have any right to remain. It would follow
    that the assessment on the facts of this case must  take  into  account
    the rejection of the appellant's protection claim so that  she  had  no
    right to remain in the UK. Further, in my view, the assessment must  be
    also made in the context of the assessment as to whether there would be
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  family  life  with  SM
    continuing outside the UK. This is what the judge addressed at [44]  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision, noting that whilst a British  citizen
    and he had been in the UK since the age  of  17,  SM's  background  was
    Iraqi. He spoke Sorani and had travelled to, lived in and visited  Iraq
    on a number of occasions. Judge Handler saw no reason why SM could  not
    accompany the appellant and L, if he chose to do so.

15. Returning to the best interests of the child L, and now a second child,
    it is clear from ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 that nationality is not  a
    trump card but it is of particular importance  in  assessing  the  best
    interests of any child. In  JG the Upper Tribunal cited ZH and  pointed
    to the importance of the fact that as a British child by descent from a
    British parent, such a child has an unqualified right of abode  in  the
    UK. Given L's young age, and the second child being even younger, there
    are no  existing  educational,  social  or  community  links  that  are
    relevant in this case, and the child's present focus will  be  entirely
    within the nuclear family unit. However, it is important to  point  out
    that L may be deprived of the opportunity to be raised and educated  in
    the UK, with all the obvious benefits that  will  entail.  "It  is  not
    enough to say that a young child may readily adapt to life  in  another
    country. That may well be so, particularly if she moves with  both  her
    parents to a country which they know well and where they can easily re-
    integrate in their own community. But it is very different in the  case
    of children who have lived here all their lives and are being  expected
    to move to a county which they do not know and will be separated from a
    parent whom they also know well." Clearly, given the young age  of  the
    two children, only the first part of that statement from ZH applies  to
    them. However, we have the following passage at [30] of ZH:

         "We now have a much greater  understanding  of  the  importance  of
         these issues in assessing the overall well-being of the  child.  In
         making the proportionality assessment under  article  8,  the  best
         interests of the child must be a primary consideration. This  means
         that they must  be  considered  first.  They  can,  of  course,  be
         outweighed by the cumulative effect  of  other  considerations.  In
         this case, the  countervailing  considerations  were  the  need  to
         maintain firm  and  fair  immigration  control,  coupled  with  the
         mother's appalling immigration history and  the  precariousness  of
         her position when family life was created.  But,  as  the  Tribunal
         rightly pointed out, the children were not to be blamed  for  that.
         And the inevitable result of removing their primary carer would  be
         that they had to leave with her. On the facts, it is  as  least  as
         strong a case as Edore v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2003] 1 WLR 2979, where Simon Brown LJ held that "there really  is
         only room for one view" (para  26).  In  those  circumstances,  the
         Secretary of State was clearly right to concede that there could be
         only one answer."

16. The Upper Tribunal in JG  did  not  accept  that  the  construction  of
    s117B(6) could be affected by the respondent's submission that  whether
    or not that provision had purchase, there would still  need  to  be  an
    article 8 ECHR proportionality assessment so that a  parent  who  could
    not meet s117B(6) might nevertheless succeed on article 8 grounds.  The
    Upper Tribunal pointed out that because immigration history would  need
    to be taken into account in  such  a  proportionality  assessment,  the
    outcome could be very different from one conducted under s117B(6):

         "But, the real point is that this  submission  does  not  begin  to
         affect the plain meaning of subsection (6). If, as we  have  found,
         Parliament has decreed a particular  outcome  by  enacting  section
         117B(6), then that is the end of the matter. We  accept  that  this
         interpretation may result in an underserving individual  or  family
         remaining in the United Kingdom.  However, the fact that Parliament
         has mandated such an outcome merely  means  that,  in  such  cases,
         Parliament has  decided  to  be  more  generous  than  is  strictly
         required by the Human Rights Act 1998."

17. Applying the 'real world' analysis required by KO,  the  assessment  of
    reasonableness in relation to L leaving the UK must  be  on  the  basis
    that there are significant reasons why the appellant should be  removed
    from the UK, given the failure of her protection claim, and that  there
    is no reason why SM would not be able to accompany her to Iraq. I  also
    bear  in  mind  that,  assuming  that  the  appellant  would  make   an
    application for entry clearance  from  Iraq,  it  is  likely  that  her
    absence and thus the absence of the children accompanying her would  be
    of short duration, during which time there would be  no  disruption  to
    education, community or social life as there might  be  with  an  older
    child.

18. However, another factor that is important on the facts of this case  is
    that because of L's very young age, still under  two,  and  the  second
    daughter being only two months of age,  the  appellant's  role  as  her
    mother and carer is all  the  more  significant.  Whilst  it  might  be
    possible for SM to care for the child on his own whilst  the  appellant
    makes entry clearance application from abroad, it is certainly  not  in
    the child's best interests to be deprived  of  her  mother's  nurturing
    care, even for a temporary period of months. It  is  obviously  in  the
    child's best interests to be raised by both parents and  even  more  so
    where the child has all the greater need for parental care  during  her
    early years of life. Further, if the children do leave  the  UK,  these
    two very  young  British  citizen  face  life  in  Iraqi  in  difficult
    circumstances far inferior to those available to them in  the  UK;  not
    only in  terms  of  future  educational  advantages,  but  society  and
    community life,  and  medical  or  social  care  and  support.  British
    nationality is  intrinsic  and  fundament  to  the  children's  rights;
    affecting the manner of exercise of a child's family and private  life,
    during childhood and well beyond.

19. If they do go to Iraq, these children would also face not insignificant
    risks to  health  and  life  arising  from  continuing  unrest  between
    factions, even if ISIS is no longer a significant player in events, and
    from the generally poor living conditions ordinary citizens face. It is
    no exaggeration to suggest that life in Iraq at the present time  would
    inevitably be challenging. In all the circumstances, it is difficult to
    conceive how it can ever be regarded as reasonable to expect these  two
    young children to leave the UK. As the Upper Tribunal  pointed  out  in
    JG, the implications and consequences of an appellant meeting  s117B(6)
    in respect of qualifying children are clear, the public  interest  does
    not require her removal and that satisfies the  other  public  interest
    elements of section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002, including the general public interest  in  enforcing  immigration
    control.

20. In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that Mr McVeety  was  entirely
    right to present no further resistance to the appeal on article 8  ECHR
    family life grounds. Even without that concession, I am fully satisfied
    that on the facts of this case it would be unreasonable to  expect  the
    two children to leave the UK and conclude,  for  the  reasons  set  out
    above, that the decision is therefore disproportionate  to  the  family
    life rights of the appellant and her family members.  It  follows  that
    the appeal must be allowed on human  rights  grounds  under  article  8
    ECHR.

Decision

21. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds only.

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal on asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds stands.







     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 24 January 2020



