
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02967/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th October 2016                 |On 3rd November 2016                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                  Ahmad [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, instructed by Lawrence & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a Palestinian refugee who  was  formerly  resident  in
    Lebanon.  He was born on 18th  April  1992.   His  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal of his protection claim was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Higgins in a  decision  dated  7th  June  2016  and
    promulgated on 21st June 2016.   The  Respondent  was  not  represented
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  on  four  grounds:  the
    judge erred in law in his assessment of credibility; there was a  delay
    of three months between the hearing and promulgation  of  the  decision
    which amounted to an error of law following the decision of  Sambasivan
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] Imm AR;  the  judge
    erred in law in relying  on  inconsistencies  between  the  Appellant's
    screening interview and his substantive interview; and the judge  erred
    in law in his assessment of Article 8 under the  Immigration  Rules  in
    failing to take into account relevant evidence in concluding that there
    were no significant obstacles to reintegration.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  on
    30th August 2016 on the grounds that, although there was  not  a  three
    month delay as far as the judge's work on the decision  was  concerned,
    the decision did not set out the Appellant's oral  evidence  coherently
    and it was at least arguable  that  in  the  judge's  analysis  of  the
    Appellant's evidence and his core account the  judge  placed  too  much
    weight on the Respondent's view of his evidence rather  than  analysing
    the Appellant's evidence.  The findings  of  fact  in  respect  of  the
    appeal of the Appellant's brother were not clear nor  was  it  apparent
    that the judge took into account the  decision  as  a  starting  point.
    There was no record of the submissions made by Mr Lee on behalf of  the
    Appellant.


Submissions

4.   Mr Jesurum relied  on  the  four  grounds  of  appeal  and  the  recent
    authority of Kamara v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813,  which  dealt  with
    integration and was relevant to ground 4. In relation to ground  1,  he
    submitted that  this  was  an  overarching  challenge  to  the  judge's
    credibility findings.  The  judge's  decision  fell  short  of  anxious
    scrutiny. This was a case where the judge  had  found  the  Appellant's
    claim to be  implausible  in  some  respects  which  was  an  incorrect
    approach to the assessment of the evidence.  The  judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 37 that it was implausible that the Appellant  did  not  make
    further enquiries as to the nature of the activity at the ten day scout
    camp, failed to take into  account  the  Appellant's  explanation  even
    though it was recorded at paragraph  6  of  the  decision  and  it  was
    clearly apparent from the Appellant's witness statement. Although  this
    finding at paragraph 37 was not enough in itself, a similar approach to
    the evidence could be detected throughout.

5.   Secondly, it was the Respondent's case that the ten day scout camp  was
    supported by the  government  so  there  was  no  reason  for  why  the
    Appellant would be targeted by the authorities. The Appellant made  two
    points which were not considered by the judge. Firstly, the  nature  of
    the camp might have been misunderstood and, secondly, there were  rival
    factions within Lebanon such that  the  intervention  by  the  security
    forces might have been dictated  by  those  supportive  of  the  Syrian
    regime such as Hezbollah.  What was lacking  in  the  decision  was  an
    analysis of the points being put forward by the  Appellant.  The  judge
    was dealing with a society ridden with flaws  and  Hezbollah  may  well
    control some security elements.  The Appellant may well be targeted  by
    elements supported by a different faction and this was supported by the
    objective evidence. The judge had failed to give the  Appellant's  case
    anxious scrutiny.

6.   In relation to ground 3, Mr Jesurum submitted that in  considering  the
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account  the  judge  had  failed  to
    apply the lower standard of proof.  The decision-maker should  not  put
    out of his mind an account given by the Appellant unless there  was  no
    doubt that the event did not occur. The Appellant stated that there had
    been a mistranslation and this should be approached as to whether there
    was a reasonable likelihood that it had in  fact  occurred.  The  judge
    stated that the mistranslation point was not made  in  the  Appellant's
    statement. However, it  was  made  in  the  Appellant's  interview  and
    therefore it  did  not  make  a  difference  to  whether  there  was  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that this event had occurred.

7.   In his witness statement the Appellant stated that he had provided  all
    relevant evidence in his initial interview, but  it  was  not  recorded
    that there was a  mistranslation.  The  Appellant  had  asked  for  his
    interview to be taped because otherwise he was deprived of a  means  of
    proof. The Appellant had provided  details  of  how  the  mistakes  had
    arisen. The Appellant stated that  the  interpreter  in  the  screening
    interview had  incorrectly  translated  'accused'  with  'charged'  and
    'arrest warrant'.  The Appellant had in fact been accused  of  a  crime
    and not actually charged with a crime. These matters were dealt with in
    the Appellant's witness statement and the judge had failed to apply the
    lower standard of proof to his assessment of these explanations.

8.   At paragraph 15 of the grounds the Appellant relied on the case  of  JA
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 540:


         "That is particularly important when considering  the  significance
         to be attached to answers given in the course of an  interview  and
         recorded only by the person  asking  questions  on  behalf  of  the
         Secretary of State.  Such evidence may be  entirely  reliable,  but
         there is obviously room for mistakes  and  misunderstandings,  even
         when the person  being  questioned  speaks  English  fluently.  The
         possibility  of  error  becomes  greater  when  the  person   being
         interviewed requires the services of an  interpreter,  particularly
         if the interpreter is not physically present.  It  becomes  greater
         still if the person being interviewed is vulnerable  by  reason  of
         age or infirmity.  The written word acquires a degree of  certainly
         which the spoken word may  not  command.   The  'anxious  scrutiny'
         which all claimants for asylum are entitled to expect begins with a
         careful  consideration  of  the  weight  that  should  properly  be
         attached to the answers given in their interviews.  In the  present
         case the decision-maker would need to bear  in  mind  the  age  and
         background of the applicant, his limited command of English and the
         circumstances under  which  the  initial  interview  and  screening
         interview took place."


9.   The judge had given inadequate consideration to  the  explanations  and
    the application of the appropriate standard.   Further,  the  decision-
    maker had failed  to  keep  an  open  mind.  The  case  of  Karanakaran
    suggested that, although the  assessment  of  evidence  was  approached
    serially, the decision could not be made in the same way. A  reasonable
    degree of likelihood applied to each  piece  of  evidence  and  to  the
    evidence as a whole. The test was whether there was a reasonable degree
    of likelihood that the Appellant's account was a true one.

10.  In respect of the Appellant there was evidence  for  and  against.  The
    judge should have assessed each piece of the Appellant's  evidence  and
    formed a provisional view, but not made specific  conclusions  on  each
    part of evidence because different pieces of  evidence  supported  each
    other.  It was possible that the explanations given  by  the  Appellant
    were reasonably likely to be correct. The lower standard demanded  that
    the decision should not exclude matters from  consideration  of  future
    matters unless there was  no  real  doubt  that  they  could  not  have
    occurred. The conclusion  set  out  at  paragraph  16  of  the  grounds
    demonstrated that  the  judge  had  failed  to  apply  the  appropriate
    standard of proof to the evidence as a whole.

11.  In relation to ground 2, Mr Jerusum submitted  that  the  decision  had
    been promulgated three months after the hearing.  Nexus was a  flexible
    term,  not  a  strict  causal  relationship.  There  had  to  be   some
    connection. In the case of RK (Algeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 868, the court found that in  order  to
    show that delay has led to an error of law it had to be shown that  the
    judgment was not safe and therefore unlawful.  In RK,  the  court  said
    that a nexus had to be shown between the delay and the  safety  of  the
    decision.  However, the present case could  be  distinguished  from  RK
    because in that case credibility was not in issue.  Accordingly,  there
    was no requirement for a direct causal connection. The  Appellant  need
    not point to evidence which had not been considered.

12.  If a direct causal connection was required, the rule in Sambasivan  was
    unnecessary.  Sambasivan protected the perception  of  the  process.  A
    substantial delay tended to undermine the  loser's  confidence  in  the
    correctness of the decision.  Promulgating  after  three  months  where
    credibility was the essential issue tended to undermine the  confidence
    in the administration of justice.

13.  In relation to ground 4, Mr Jesurum submitted that  the  Appellant  was
    permitted to rely on the black letter Immigration Rules. The Rules made
    the factors considered in Strasbourg jurisprudence a test and not  only
    one of the factors to be considered.   Very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration was a test in  the  Immigration  Rules  and  if  they  were
    present the Appellant was entitled to succeed. In the case  of  Kamara,
    Lord Justice Sales at paragraph 14 stated:

         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one. It is not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not  appropriate  to  treat  the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually  be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself  in  the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of  "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life."

14.  In the Appellant's case the background material showed that there  were
    very significant obstacles to participation in life in the Lebanon  for
    Palestinians. The judge had given inadequate consideration to the  test
    in this particular case. He stated there was no reason to suppose  that
    the Appellant would be unable  to  resume  his  former  life,  but  the
    Appellant's former life was  not  an  integrated  one  because  of  the
    widespread discrimination against Palestinians. The judge had failed to
    analyse what integration  was  in  the  Appellant's  case.  He  had  no
    capacity to live a full life  or  operate  within  society  with  equal
    opportunity. It was arguable that the judge had failed to  address  the
    test set out in Kamara.

15.  For the Respondent, Mr Clarke submitted that there  were  three  issues
    on credibility.  The Appellant submitted in grounds 1 and  3  that  the
    judge took matters in an artificial  and  separate  way  and  this  was
    incorrect. However, the approach of the First-tier Judge was to set out
    the standard of proof at paragraph 33; to set out the substance of  the
    Appellant's claim at paragraph 34; and then at paragraphs 35 to  43  to
    look at all the factors without being  determinative.  The  judge  then
    properly directed himself to consider the  evidence  in  the  round  at
    paragraph 44 in concluding that the Appellant's claim was not  genuine.



16.  The first point advanced by the Appellant is  that  the  judge  ignored
    key factors, namely that the Appellant's friends were  going  along  to
    the scout camp and had invited him to come  along  and  the  judge  had
    assessed this evidence on  plausibility  grounds.  It  was  clear  from
    paragraph  37  that  the  judge  took  into  account  the   Appellant's
    explanation that he went because his friends were going  and  it  would
    not cost him any money to go to the scout camp.  This was also apparent
    from his statement of the Appellant's case and from what he set out  at
    paragraph 18.  Accordingly, it could not be said  that  the  judge  had
    ignored the reasons put forward by the Appellant.

17.   The  judge  went  on  to  identify  countervailing  factors   in   the
    Appellant's evidence which went against  his  explanation.  The  judge,
    from his findings at paragraph 13, was clearly aware of the  background
    evidence and, at paragraph 19, of the political history of  the  Future
    Movement which was part of the legislature. There was clear integration
    of this movement within the government. In considering  the  background
    evidence  and  taking  into  account  the  Appellant's   own   personal
    situation, it was open to the judge to find that his explanation raised
    suspicion and that he would have asked for more information.  The judge
    was entitled to address that.

18.  At paragraph 41, the judge found that  the  Appellant  had  embellished
    his account.  He was saying that, although this may  be  an  incidental
    issue which was not credible, it detracted from  the  essential  issue.
    There was no evidence that other participants  in  the  camp  had  been
    pursued by the authorities in the Appellant's statement.  However,  the
    Appellant had developed his claim in interview and had put a  gloss  on
    his account. It was not incidental to the  main  claim  whether  others
    were pursued. It went to the core of the Appellant's claim.

19.  The Appellant's claim was that the authorities had considered the  camp
    of adverse interest. It was  specific  to  risk  at  the  core  of  the
    Appellant's claim. The judge stated what  the  Respondent  claimed  and
    what the Appellant said in response. The judge then  concluded  why  he
    accepted the Appellant's rebuttal.  He  identified  where  he  drew  no
    adverse interest and his assessment was a fair and  balanced  appraisal
    of the evidence. In his assessment the judge considered  everything  in
    the round and his findings were open to him.  The  Appellant's  grounds
    amount simply to disagreements.

20.  The judge dealt with the two reasons from the Appellant for  why  there
    was an adverse interest at paragraph  42.  The  judge  summarised  both
    points and after looking at both points concluded  that  the  Appellant
    leaned towards the latter possibility.  The judge looked  at  the  case
    advanced at the hearing, but concluded that  there  was  no  background
    evidence that the security forces operated against the government.  The
    judge accepted that the Appellant was not required to  corroborate  his
    claim, but the background evidence  did  not  support  the  Appellant's
    case. If it existed the Appellant's representative should have  put  it
    before the Tribunal. The judge  noted  that  there  was  no  background
    evidence to support the Appellant's claim  and  also  that  the  Future
    Movement was part of the government.

21.   The  Appellant  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence   that   the
    authorities  would  not  act  other  than  in  accordance  with   their
    employment and therefore it was not open to the judge to  make  such  a
    finding.  However, the Appellant had  to  identify  that  the  security
    forces were working against the government and that there  was  rivalry
    between Hezbollah and the Future  Movement.  In  the  absence  of  such
    evidence, the judge's findings at paragraph 42 could not be impugned.

22.  In relation to ground 2, it was clear  from  the  grant  of  permission
    that the decision was signed on 7th June 2016  which  was  under  three
    months from the date of hearing.  There was a nexus which must stand or
    fall  with  the  substance  of  the  grounds.  The  Appellant  had  not
    identified evidence to show that the findings were not open  to  judge.
    There was no nexus and the date of promulgation was irrelevant.

23.  In response to ground 3, Mr Clark submitted that, at paragraph 40,  the
    judge  was  critical  of  the  Appellant  developing  his   case.   The
    Appellant's witness statement made no mention of  the  explanation  for
    the inconsistencies between  the  screening  interview  and  subsequent
    evidence. The explanations were only raised later  in  the  substantive
    interview. It was not enough to  say  that  there  was  an  interpreter
    problem. It was open to the judge to take this  into  account  and  his
    approach was consistent with the reasoning in JA.

24.  In relation  to  ground  4,  at  paragraph  47,  the  judge  noted  the
    background evidence in general. He found that the  Appellant  had  been
    employed as a plumber for five or 6  six  years  after  completing  his
    education and his parents lived in an area whose  population  reflected
    the varied cultural and religious  makeup  of  Lebanon  generally.  The
    judge's approach was consistent with Kamara. The judge found  that  the
    Appellant could go back to his former life and this finding was open to
    the judge on the evidence.

25.  In response, Mr Jesurum submitted that the  judge  records  the  burden
    and standard  of  proof,  but  the  test  was  whether  he  applied  it
    correctly. The approach of the judge fell short of a correct  analysis.
    At paragraphs 31 and 32 the judge was recording what someone  said  not
    demonstrating that  he  was  bearing  this  in  mind  when  making  his
    findings. The repeated use of the term plausible suggested that  rather
    than looking at the account given by the Appellant and  the  background
    evidence the judge was applying his knowledge  of  events  in  his  own
    country. The issue is how the judge approached the pieces of  evidence.
    Simply because the judge rejected the Respondent's point did  not  mean
    that he had approached the rest of the evidence correctly. The  gradual
    emergence of an account  was  to  apply  the  approach  in  a  criminal
    prosecution.  There was no caution in an asylum interview. To criticise
    an emerging case is to ignore the reason for having a lower standard of
    proof.   The  "what  if  I  am  wrong"  approach  was  in  essence  the
    appropriate one.

26.  In relation to ground 4, the judge could  not  see  the  wood  for  the
    trees.  It was not sufficient to say that the Appellant could  go  back
    to his former life when, in his former  life,  he  did  not  have  true
    integration as he did not have the opportunities set out in  Kamara  at
    paragraph 14. He was not treated as an insider. The Appellant lived  as
    an outsider. The Appellant's original life was not  an  integrated  one
    and the judge's approach misses the larger picture.

27.  I asked Mr Jesurum to show me evidence that Hezbollah was part  of  the
    security services. He referred me  to  page  G10  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle and the paragraph which states:

         "Hezbollah has been asked several times by the UN chief Ban Ki-Moon
         and  the  Lebanese  Army  leader  to  disarm.   However,  Hezbollah
         rejected these  calls,  stating  that  the  weapons  are  the  only
         guarantee to protection of Lebanon."

28.  Mr Jesurum submitted that for the judge to suggest that Lebanon  was  a
    monolithic state and that  the  security  services  did  as  they  were
    required by the government was unrealistic. Hezbollah, contrary to  the
    wishes of the state, were fighting in  Syria.   Given  those  divisions
    there may be parts of the security  forces  who  act  contrary  to  the
    government.  The judge could not disregard that there was a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood. There was  a  clear  inference,  even  though  Mr
    Jesurum could not point to anything that was directly  put  before  the
    judge.

Discussion and Conclusions

29.  The judge set out the core of the Appellant's  claim  at  paragraph  34
    namely that he attended a scout camp organised by  a  body,  apparently
    connected with the Future Movement, and he was wrongly suspected by the
    Lebanese authorities of having been trained to fight against the Syrian
    Government and its backers.

30.  The Respondent in the refusal letter pointed  to  several  reasons  why
    she did not accept the Appellant's account.  The judge set out each  of
    the points made by the Respondent and the Appellant's response to those
    points.  At paragraphs 35 and 36 he found that the Appellant had made a
    fair point and the Respondent's arguments were rejected.  At  paragraph
    37 the judge concluded:

         "More concerning is the fact that the Appellant would have been  22
         when he signed up for the camp.  He says he did  so  on  the  basis
         that his friends would be going and the camp would  not  have  cost
         him anything. The Respondent thought it unlikely he would have done
         so without first enquiring  who  the  camp's  organisers  were  and
         satisfying himself what its organisers motivation was for providing
         him with a free holiday.  I agree. The extent  to  which  political
         and religious divisions dominate Lebanese society is apparent  from
         its recent history and  is  evident  from  the  background  country
         materials to which the Appellant and the Respondent  have  referred
         me. Like the Respondent, I consider it unlikely the Appellant would
         have participated in a 10  day  camp,  paid  for  by  someone  else
         without making any effort to establish who  his  benefactors  would
         be. The Appellant's curiosity about why he  was  being  invited  to
         attend a 10 day camp at no cost to himself is likely to  have  been
         increased given he was 22 and the scouts is an  organisation  whose
         focus is generally boys and adolescents. Why full  grown  men  with
         jobs, such as the Appellant, were being invited to attend  a  scout
         camp is highly likely in my view to have aroused some  interest  on
         his art if not suspicion.  The fact that his invitation  to  attend
         the camp did not, according to the Appellant, stimulate him to make
         further enquiries leads me to doubt whether  this  element  of  his
         account is true."


31.  The judge concluded at paragraph 38 that  the  Appellant's  account  of
    what was said by the lecturers was not in fact inconsistent and it  was
    unreasonable to draw any adverse inference from his inability to  state
    the full names of the persons who allegedly lectured him.

32.  At paragraph 39 the judge stated that he was not prepared to  draw  the
    inferences the Respondent  did.  Being  connected  with  a  discredited
    asylum seeker did not undermine the Appellant's credibility given  that
    he had specifically mentioned his brother  in  his  statements  to  his
    solicitors.

33.  I find that it is apparent from these parts of the  decision  that  the
    judge is assessing the points made by the Respondent,  looking  at  the
    Appellant's explanation and concluding whether  they  were  potentially
    damaging to the credibility of the Appellant's account.

34.  At paragraph 37, the judge concluded that the  Appellant's  explanation
    in respect of the points raised there led him to doubt the truth of his
    account, but that in respect of the other points made by the Respondent
    he found in the Appellant's  favour.  It  is  clear  from  the  judge's
    approach to the evidence that he is carrying out a balanced  assessment
    of the Appellant's claim  and  that  he  is  assessing  each  piece  of
    evidence and deciding whether  it  has  the  potential  to  damage  the
    Appellant's  credibility.   Accordingly,  I  am  not  persuaded  by  Mr
    Jesurum's point that the judge has failed to give anxious  scrutiny  to
    the account or indeed that he failed to approach the evidence and apply
    the lower standard of proof. The judge's assessment of the evidence was
    consistent with the approach in Karanakaran.

35.  The judge then goes on to deal with  the  inconsistencies  between  the
    Appellant's account in his interview and what he said subsequently. The
    judge found that, in the Appellant's initial interview,  the  responses
    recorded at questions 3.2, 3.3 and 4.2 asserted  that  the  offence  of
    which the Appellant had been accused  was  training  and  preparing  to
    fight in Syria and that he was subject to an  arrest  warrant.  By  the
    time the Appellant submitted a witness statement in July 2015, when  he
    had had an opportunity to consider the initial interview, he  took  the
    opportunity to correct a number  of  the  responses.   In  relation  to
    question 3.2 he claimed that he had been accused of being trained to go
    to Syria to fight against the  Syrian  Government  and  Hezbollah.  The
    Appellant explained that the word for 'being accused' and 'charged' was
    interchangeable in Arabic and that it was wrongly recorded that he  had
    been 'charged' with the offence. He had not said an arrest warrant  had
    been issued. Although he would  have  been  arrested  by  the  Lebanese
    authorities  were  they  to  discover  where  he  was.   The  statement
    attributed to him that an arrest warrant had been issued appeared to be
    the result of incorrect interpretation.

36.  At paragraph 40 the judge concluded:

         "Although I can accept that the  reference  to  an  arrest  warrant
         having been  issued  might  have  arisen  as  a  result  of  faulty
         interpretation  the  same  may  not  necessarily  be  said  of  the
         assertions he is recorded as  having  made  in  response  to  three
         different questions that his alleged  offence  was  having  trained
         others to go and fight in Syria. I  note  his  explanation  in  the
         course of his substantive interview that the interpreter must  have
         confused the words 'training' and 'trainer'  but  this  was  not  a
         point which he chose to make  in  his  intervening  statement.  The
         difference  between  training  others  and  being  trained   is   a
         fundamental one and I would have expected  the  Appellant  to  have
         directed attention to this  particular  inconsistency  specifically
         when he  made  his  witness  statement  had  he  had  a  reasonable
         explanation for it. The fact that (I am satisfied) he provided  the
         answers about the nature of the offence of which [he] had allegedly
         been accused in the course of his initial  interview  which  he  is
         recorded as having given casts doubt on  his  subsequent  claim  to
         have been accused merely of undergoing training."

37.  Mr Jesurum criticises the judge's finding  in  the  following  respect:
    the judge had failed to take into account the Court of Appeal  decision
    of JA (Afghanistan) and to appreciate the potential for  unfairness  in
    relying on apparent discrepancies. The judge had failed to  acknowledge
    in his decision the need to be cautious with regard  to  the  screening
    interview.

38.  I am of the view that the judge's findings at paragraph 40  demonstrate
    an analysis of the Appellant's account such that the judge was prepared
    to accept the misinterpretation in relation to 'accused' and 'charged',
    but was not prepared to  accept  a  misinterpretation  in  relation  to
    'training' and 'trainer' and the judge gave adequate reasons for why he
    found that was the case. The fact that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    mention in his statement that the  interpreter  had  confused  the  two
    words was something the judge was entitled to take  into  account.  The
    judge was also  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had given the same response to three questions in his initial
    interview and therefore it was unlikely that it was a misinterpretation
    on the part of the interpreter. Accordingly,  I  am  not  persuaded  by
    ground 3 that the judge had  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  apply  JA
    (Afghanistan).  The judge had given anxious scrutiny to the answers  in
    interview and had  given  adequate  reasons  for  why  he  found  those
    discrepancies to be significant.

39.  The judge also found that the Appellant had failed to mention,  in  his
    statement of July 2015, that others who had attended the camp had  been
    arrested. He found that the Appellant first mentioned this fact in  his
    substantive interview when he was asked  the  question  directly.   The
    judge stated: "Only when he was asked at question 73 if anyone else who
    had been at the camp with him had suffered problems similar to his  did
    the Appellant say he had a friend who was in prison and  had  not  been
    allowed to see his family.  When he was subsequently asked at  question
    80 the names of his friends who were allegedly in  prison  he  provided
    the names of three persons not one.  Had it  been  the  case  that  the
    Appellant was aware that three of his friends who had attended the camp
    were now in prison I would not have expected him to have  mentioned  it
    for the first time in response to a direct question in the course of  a
    substantive interview six months after he had left Lebanon.  His  claim
    that three friends who attended the camp were in October 2015 in prison
    has all the hallmarks of a gloss on his account calculated to highlight
    the risk to which he would be exposed were he removed to Lebanon, and I
    regard it as such. The fact that  he  was  prepared  to  embellish  his
    account in the way that he did also calls into question the  extent  to
    which I may rely on his evidence in relation to the  core  elements  of
    his account."  The judge makes a clear finding that the  Appellant  has
    embellished his account.

40.  Mr Jesurum submitted that  it  was  irrelevant  whether  the  Appellant
    first mentioned this in his statement  or  his  interview  and  that  a
    developing account was not a reason, applying the  lower  standard,  to
    find that the Appellant's account was not credible.  I  find  that  the
    judge approached the  Appellant's  account  by  deciding  whether  each
    element had the potential to damage his credibility and he  found  that
    this particular point was one which  was  adverse  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility. This finding was open to the judge on the evidence and  he
    gave adequate reasons for why he came to such a finding.

41.  At paragraph 42 the judge stated: "A more fundamental  difficulty  with
    his account is understanding why the  Lebanese  security  forces  might
    have been interested in arresting and interrogating him, or indeed  any
    of the others who allegedly attended the  scout  camp  in  April  2015.
    According to the Appellant the camp was organised and led  by  a  scout
    association aligned with,  or  at  least  sympathetic  to,  the  Future
    Movement.  The advice given to the participants that  they  should  not
    think of going to Syria to fight against the government there reflected
    what it is evident from  the  material  the  Respondent  found  on  the
    internet was the position adopted publicly by Saad  al-Hariri  and  the
    Future Movement.  For the Appellant to have been sought by the security
    forces on the basis that he had taken part in military training with  a
    view to fighting against the Syrian regime and its Shi'a backers, there
    must have been a fundamental misunderstanding about what  had  occurred
    at the camp or the intervention by the security forces might have  been
    dictated by political interests supportive of the Syrian regime such as
    Hezbollah.   The  Appellant  appeared  to  lean  towards  this   latter
    possibility when he gave his evidence, telling me that Hezbollah is the
    real power in Lebanon but there is  no  suggestion  in  the  background
    country materials relied on by either party that the Lebanese  security
    forces generally act contrary to the will of the  government,  and  the
    Minister of the  Interior  was,  I  accept,  a  member  of  the  Future
    Movement.  The Future Movement was opposed to Sunni  Muslims  going  to
    Syria to fight against the government there, if only out of  fear  that
    the influence of Islamic jihadists would be increased and Lebanon would
    disintegrate  still   further.    What   I   consider   a   fundamental
    implausibility in the Appellant's claim to  have  been  sought  by  the
    Lebanese authorities in such circumstances goes to  the  heart  of  his
    appeal."


42.  Mr Jesurum submitted that the judge had failed  to  take  into  account
    the two reasons given by the Appellant as to why he was of interest  to
    the authorities.  However, it is clear from what the  judge  stated  at
    paragraph 42 that he considered both  of  these  explanations:  firstly
    whether there was a misunderstanding and  secondly  that  the  security
    forces might have been dictated by political  interests  supportive  of
    the Syrian regime such as Hezbollah.

43.  The judge also  considered  that  the  Appellant  favoured  the  latter
    reason in his oral  evidence.  He  concluded  that  this  position  put
    forward by the Appellant  in  explanation  was  not  supported  by  the
    background material and the judge pointed out evidence  which  did  not
    support the position claimed by the Appellant,  which  he  specifically
    set out. Mr Jesurum could not point to evidence to  the  contrary.  His
    submission was that, given that Hezbollah had rejected calls to disarm,
    then the judge could not make the finding that there was no  reasonable
    likelihood, on the lower standard, that Hezbollah had not in  some  way
    infiltrated the security forces. I do not agree. The judge assessed the
    evidence of the Appellant in light of the background material  and  was
    entitled to conclude that his explanation or reasons for why  he  would
    be of interest in the authorities was not supported by such evidence.

44.  Accordingly, dealing with each of the grounds in turn, the  judge  took
    into account the explanations given by the Appellant  and  gave  cogent
    reasons for why he rejected those accounts. The judge properly assessed
    the Appellant's credibility in accordance with Karanakaran. He was  not
    merely assessing  the  plausibility  of  the  Appellant's  account  but
    looking at each piece of the Appellant's evidence and deciding  whether
    it had potential to damage  his  credibility.  After  considering  each
    individual piece of evidence, some in favour of the Appellant and  some
    against, the  judge  properly  concluded,  on  the  basis  of  all  the
    evidence, that his account was not a credible  one.  This  was  clearly
    demonstrated from the judge's finding at paragraph 44: For the  reasons
    given the Appellant has failed to show, even  to  the  lower  standard,
    that the core elements of his account are true.

45.  The judge found that the Appellant  had  embellished  his  account  and
    that his claim to be of adverse interest to  the  authorities  was  not
    supported by the background material. These findings were open  to  the
    judge on the evidence and he gave cogent reasons for  his  conclusions.
    The judge clearly took into account both of the reasons  given  by  the
    Appellant and assessed them against the background materials.

46.  The delay in promulgation did not amount to three  months  (Ground  2).
    The judge made his decision on 7th June 2016.  The fact that it was not
    promulgated for a further two weeks was outside  the  judge's  control.
    Further, I do not agree with Mr Jesurum's submission  that  there  does
    not need to be a nexus or some connection with the delay in cases where
    credibility is being assessed.  Mr Jesurum has not  satisfied  me  that
    the judge's credibility findings were not open to him on  the  evidence
    or that the judge's approach  to  the  assessment  of  credibility  was
    fundamentally flawed. Given that the threshold of three months set  out
    in Sambasivan was not in fact reached  and  that  there  was  no  nexus
    established  then,  whichever  way  one  looks  at  it,  the  delay  in
    promulgation does not  amount  to  a  material  error  of  law  on  the
    particular facts of this case.

47.  In relation to ground 3, the judge's findings were consistent  with  JA
    (Afghanistan).  He did apply anxious scrutiny and he gave  reasons  why
    he accepted one of the Appellant's explanations, but not the other. His
    findings were open to him given that the Appellant was asked  on  three
    separate occasions and the account he gave was the same.  It  was  only
    later  in  his  substantive  interview  that  he  sought  to  give   an
    explanation for the discrepancies and his explanation of mistranslation
    was not a credible one in the circumstances.  The judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for coming to this conclusion.

48.  Ground 4 - Article 8, very significant obstacles to  integration:   The
    judge concluded at paragraph 47 that the Appellant was integrated  into
    wider Lebanese society before he came to the UK and he would be able to
    resume his former life. In coming to this  conclusion  the  judge  took
    into account the US State Department  Report  2015  Country  Report  on
    Human Rights Practices  in  Lebanon;  Palestinian  refugees  experience
    significant discrimination both at the hands of the government  and  in
    wider society.

49.  The Appellant  worked  as  a  plumber  for  five  or  six  years  after
    completing secondary education and his evidence was  that  he  and  his
    parents lived in an area whose population reflected the varied cultural
    and religious makeup of Lebanon generally. The judge found there was no
    reason to suppose that the Appellant would  be  unable  to  resume  his
    former life. He was integrated into Lebanon when he left and there were
    no significant obstacles to him being integrated to the same extent  as
    before were he to return here.


50.   It  was  submitted  that,  relying  on  the  background  material,  no
    Palestinian  refugee  in  Lebanon  could  be  integrated  or  could  be
    considered to be an insider in accordance  with  what  is  set  out  in
    Kamara. However, it is clear from the Appellant's own evidence that  he
    had achieved a level of integration such that he  could  not  meet  the
    test set  out  in  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  judge's  finding  was
    consistent with Kamara and there was no error of law in relation to the
    judge's assessment of Article 8.

51.  In summary, I conclude that none  of  the  four  grounds  establish  an
    error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins.  The
    judge's approach to the evidence was a balanced and  fair  one  and  he
    applied the lower standard of proof.  He gave adequate reasons for  his
    findings and those findings were open to him  on  the  evidence  before
    him.  I therefore conclude that there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision dated 7th June 2016  and  I  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 31st October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 31st October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
