

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02610/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 12 October 2016                       |on 13 October 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     F G
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Reza of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Boylan-Kemp promulgated on the 13 July  2016  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appeal under the Refugee Convention but allowed it on
        humanitarian protection and human right grounds.
     2. The appellant's challenge asserts the Judge erred in law.
     3. The Judge found that the appellant, born on the 1 January 1994  had
        left Eritrea illegally. The respondent's case is that although  the
        appellant left illegally and is of draft age there was no real risk
        on return in light of the Danish FFM Report findings.
     4. At [28] of the decision the Judge finds:


        28.  Therefore, I must consider whether or not  there  would  be  a
             risk on return to the appellant as a  result  of  his  illegal
             exit.  As Mr Khalfey is not relying upon the Danish FFM Report
             then I turn to the available country guidance as  referred  to
             by Mr Reza both in his oral submissions and in detail  in  his
             skeleton argument.  The country guidance clearly sets out that
             an individual in the appellant's position  would  be  at  risk
             from the authorities; therefore , I find that if the appellant
             were required to return to Eritrea that his article  3  rights
             would be infringed and so he should  be  granted  humanitarian
             protection under paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules as  a
             result.


     5. The Judge rejected the asylum claim on the basis of a  finding  the
        core of the appellants case lacked  credibility.  It  is  found  at
        [24]:


        24.  As a result of these findings, I conclude that  the  appellant
             has failed to satisfy me, even to the lower standard, that  he
             is at a real risk of  persecution  due  to  his  religion  and
             therefore I find that he does not satisfy the criteria set out
             in the Refugee convention and so he cannot be  granted  asylum
             on this basis.


     6. The basis of the asylum claim was wider than that  of  religion  as
        the country guidance case law refers to those of draft age who left
        the country illegally facing a real risk of  persecution  for  this
        reason. Failure to adequately consider this  element  and  to  give
        reason for rejecting this claim amounts to arguable legal error.
     7. The decision is set aside to be remade.
     8. In the interim the Upper Tribunal has published the updated country
        guidance  case  of  MST  and  Others  (national  service   -   risk
        categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 in which it found  that  a
        person whose asylum claim has not been found credible, but  who  is
        able to satisfy a decision maker (i) that he or she left illegally,
        and (ii) that he or she is of or approaching draft age,  is  likely
        to be perceived on return  as  a  draft  evader  or  deserter  from
        national service and as a result face a real risk of persecution or
        serious harm.
     9. The Convention reason is  that  of  an  adverse  imputed  political
        opinion.
    10. Mr Bates accepted that on the draft evader issue, when  considering
        the country guidance, the appellant was entitled  to  succeed  with
        his appeal.
    11. The appeal is allowed on Refugee Convention grounds.


Decision

    12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    13. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12 October 2016












