
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02782/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25th April 2019                    |On 24th May 2019                      |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  M D L K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Tobin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 24th March  1982.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history having been issued  with
    a Tier 4 (General) Student visa on 11th January 2011.  Thereafter,  the
    Appellant made  further  applications  and  on  14th  August  2017  was
    encountered working illegally and arrested as a Section 10  overstayer.
    On 17th August 2017 he claimed asylum.  His claim for asylum was  based
    on a purported well-founded fear of persecution in  Sri  Lanka  on  the
    basis of his imputed political opinion.  His application was refused by
    Notice of Refusal dated 10th February 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Burns sitting at Birmingham on 25th October 2018.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 29th October 2018  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds and pursuant to Article 3 of the
    European Convention of Human Rights.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    granted the Appellant anonymity.  No application is made to  vary  that
    order and none is made.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal  on  24th  February
    2019.  Those grounds contended:-

      i) that there had been a failure by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to
         apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010;

     ii) that there  had  been  a  failure  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         rejecting the medical evidence; and

    iii) that there  had  been  a  failure  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         rejecting supporting evidence.

 4. On  19th  March  2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  granted
    permission to appeal.

 5. It is on that basis that this  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Ms Tobin.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Tarlow.

Submission/Discussion

 6. Ms Tobin takes me to the Grounds of Appeal pointed  out  that  although
    she is not the author of  them  they  are  fairly  comprehensive.   She
    starts by reminding me of the factual background and procedural history
    of this matter which is set out in some detail at paragraphs 4 to 7  of
    the Grounds of Appeal.  Thereafter, she submits that Counsel before the
    First-tier Tribunal addressed the judge that the  Appellant  should  be
    treated as  a  vulnerable  witness  and  that  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 applied in his case.  She points out that the  judge
    noted that "given that he has a diagnosis of a mental health problem  I
    proceeded in accordance with  the  guidance".   The  judge  notes  that
    thereafter there was a discussion about what  adjustments  were  sought
    which the judge recorded as being "entirely reasonable requests".

 7. Ms  Tobin  submits  that  the  issue  herein  relates  to  the  judge's
    assessment of the evidence when he  made  several  adverse  credibility
    findings when considering the Appellant's mental health.   She  submits
    that those findings constitute a material error of law.  She reminds me
    that the judge notes that he addressed credibility at paragraph  44  of
    his determination and noted that the Appellant's depression  "may  well
    have hindered his ability to fully participate in the appeal" but  that
    when the judge came to  make  findings  on  credibility  there  was  no
    consideration  as  to  whether  potential  issues  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence may have resulted due to this condition.

 8. Ms Tobin goes on to refer me to paragraph 10 of the Grounds  of  Appeal
    pointing out issues therein including the Appellant's delay in claiming
    asylum, the coherence of his account, the lack of  consistency  in  his
    account, his inability to recall the chronology of when  a  letter  was
    received or his "stumbling" in oral evidence and submits that all  were
    as a result of his mental health difficulties.  She contends that  none
    of these factors were properly considered by the judge and consequently
    the judge has  totally  failed  to  assess  the  vulnerability  of  the
    Appellant in accordance with the guidelines.

 9. Secondly, she turns to the failure that is contended by  the  judge  to
    give adequate reasons for rejecting the medical evidence.  She  submits
    that the judge's credibility had already been formed  and  that  it  is
    completely wrong as a matter of law  to  formulate  the  assessment  of
    credibility prior to reading and making findings on  the  report.   She
    submits that even when reading the determination in  the  round  it  is
    clear that the judge rejected  the  medical  report  to  a  significant
    extent  because  he  had  rejected  the  Appellant's  credibility   and
    therefore rejected the corroborative  potential  of  the  report.   She
    submits that this is clearly the wrong  approach  and  contravenes  the
    principles set out in Mibanga which  conclusively  establishes  that  a
    judge should not make findings  on  credibility  before  assessing  the
    medical evidence.

10. Finally, she turns to the contention that the judge has failed to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting  supportive  evidence,  particularly  in
    this instance the evidence from the Appellant's former  attorney-at-law
    and the provision by the attorney  of  a  letter  along  with  his  Bar
    Association of Sri Lanka identity card.  She points out that this issue
    was given very short consideration by the judge and  was  dismissed  at
    paragraph  64.   She  consequently  contends  that  overall  there  are
    substantial material errors of law which taint  the  decision  and  she
    asks me to set the decision aside and to remit the matter back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

11. In response Mr Tarlow states that at paragraph 72 of his  decision  the
    judge made a finding that even if the Appellant's case was true he  has
    not shown to the lower standard that the  abductors  were  in  any  way
    connected to the authorities in Sri  Lanka  and  consequently  that  he
    would not be at risk.  He therefore contends that even if there were to
    be errors of law they are not material.  He submits that  whatever  the
    Mibanga error is (and he concedes there may be one), the risk on return
    is covered by the guidance given  in  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  that  the  Appellant
    would not be of interest to the authorities  in  accordance  with  that
    authority.  He asks me to dismiss this appeal.

12. In brief response Ms Tobin points out that  the  Appellant  would  fall
    within the risk categories of GJ if he was credible.  For  example,  he
    has been noted to have passed evidence onto  Channel  4  News  and  she
    submits he would be at risk and fall into the risk categories  therein.
    She reiterates that there are material errors of law  and  asks  me  to
    remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. The starting point in this case relates to the  judge's  assessment  of
    credibility.   A  proper  approach  to  credibility  would  require  an
    assessment of the evidence and of the general claim.  In asylum  claims
    relevant factors would be the internal consistency of  the  claim,  the
    inherent plausibility of the claim, and thirdly the consistency of  the
    claim with external factors of the  sort  typically  found  in  country
    guidance.  I acknowledge that theoretically all a claimant need  do  is
    no more than state his claim but that claim still needs to be  examined
    for consistency and inherent plausibility  and  in  nearly  every  case
    external information against which the claim could be checked would  be
    available.  That would appear to be a valid general contention in  this
    matter.

16. Consequently, I accept the submission made by Ms Tobin that if there is
    an error of law it  is  material  insofar  as  the  evidence  does  not
    immediately show that the Appellant if found to be credible  would  not
    fall within the risk categories of GJ and consequently much will depend
    upon the assessment of the Appellant's credibility.  In  reaching  such
    assessments there are two specific factors where the judge has erred in
    law that need to be considered.  Firstly, it is clear from  the  manner
    in which the decision is set out that the judge has fallen  into  error
    in the order in which he has assessed the medical evidence, i.e. he has
    considered the credibility of the Appellant prior  to  considering  the
    medical evidence.

17. Secondly, the judge goes to great lengths to make reference to the fact
    that he acknowledges the Appellant is a  vulnerable  witness  and  then
    seemingly fails to take those factors  into  account  when  making  his
    credibility assessment.  For all these  reasons  I  am  satisfied  that
    there are material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge which taint the decision and make it unsafe.

18. The correct approach is consequently to set aside the decision  and  to
    send the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing with none
    of the findings of fact to stand.   However,  I  do  emphasise  to  the
    Appellant that this is not to say that on a proper and  fully  reasoned
    assessment of this appeal that another judge would come to a  different
    conclusion ultimately to that of the original judge.

Decision and Reasons

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter for  the  rehearing
    of this matter.

      1) That on finding that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal is set aside and the matter is remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham on the first available date  28
         days hence with an ELH of three hours.

      2) None of the findings of fact are to stand.

      3) That the rehearing of the appeal is to be before any Judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Burns.

      4) That there be leave to either party to file and serve a  bundle  of
         such further subjective and/or objective evidence upon  which  they
         seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

      5) That a Sinhalese interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  granted  the  Appellant  anonymity.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 23 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

