
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02716/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Microsoft     |Decision promulgated                 |
|Teams)                               |                                     |
|On 20 August 2021                    |On 14 September 2021                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                          SASITHARAN THARMALINGHAM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patyna instructed by Reeves & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated on 15 February 2021 in which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
     2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 13 March 1994, who
        appeals the respondent's decision dated 28 February 2020 to  refuse
        his asylum and humanitarian protection claim.

Background

     3.  The  appellant  relies  on  a  number  of  grounds  of  challenge.
        Permission was granted by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal,
        the operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

        "2.  The grounds argue that the Judge did not apply the guidance on
             vulnerable witnesses and had not considered relevant background
             material, it is argued that the Appellant's risk on return  had
             not been properly addressed.


        3.   The points made in regard to the report of the  Dr  the  Judge
             observed that the Appellant had given significant discrepancies
             in his accounts of  ill-treatment  which  the  report  had  not
             addressed. However, the guidance on vulnerable witnesses in the
             assessment of the evidence was not obviously factored into  the
             Judge's assessment. The grounds may be argued."

     4. The Secretary of State in her Rule 24 response dated 29 March  2021
        claims that the Judge was not satisfied that the appellant was ill,
        arguing that if an appellant wishes to be treated as  a  vulnerable
        witness, then it is for him to show he is actually  vulnerable  and
        what actually is being  argued  that  vulnerability  means  in  the
        context of the hearing. It is argued that it would be irrational to
        find a failure of the Judge to mention  the  Presidential  guidance
        when clear findings had been made that it does not apply.
     5. The specific terms of the Ground relating to the application of the
        Presidential Guidance is in the following terms:

        Ground 1: Failure to apply Presidential Guidance on vulnerability


             2. In assessing A's credibility. The Judge failed  to  address
             her mind to and apply the Joint Residential Guidance Note No.2
             of 2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant
             guidance ("the Guidance Note"). The FTTJ had been  invited  to
             apply the Guidance Note in Counsel's skeleton argument  ([7-8,
             14c] and at the hearing. There is no express reference to  the
             Guidance Note in the Determination.


             3. In JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145
             (IAC), the Upper Tribunal found [26] that it is incumbent upon
             judges to apply the Guidance Note. It referred to [15] of  the
             Guidance Note which states:


                  15. The decision should record whether  the  Tribunal  has
                  concluded  the  appellant  (or  a  witness)  is  a  child,
                  vulnerable  or  sensitive,   the   effect   the   Tribunal
                  considered  that  the  identified  vulnerability  had   in
                  assessing the evidence before it,  and  thus  whether  the
                  Tribunal  was  satisfied   whether   the   appellant   had
                  established his or her case to the  relevant  standard  of
                  proof. In  asylum  appeals,  weight  should  be  given  to
                  objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to a
                  state of mind".


             4. The approach in JL (China) was approved  by  the  Court  of
             Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  1123.  Sir
             Ernest Ryder referred to the Guidance (and also  the  Practice
             Direction, First-tier and  Upper  Tribunal  Child,  Vulnerable
             Adult and Sensitive Witnesses as follows [30]:


                  The directions and guidance contained in them  are  to  be
                  followed (...) Failure to follow them will most likely  be
                  a material error of law


             5. In line with JL (China)  and  the  Guidance  Note,  it  was
             incumbent upon the  FTTJ  to:  (a)  make  an  express  finding
             whether A was vulnerable in the context of the Guidance Note -
             and  in  what  sense;  and  (b)  consider  what   impact   his
             vulnerability had on the assessment of his evidence.


             6. The Determination has no express finding in respect of  A's
             vulnerability. While  the  Judge  raised  concerns  about  the
             report of Dr Balasubaramaniam  [45  -  46,  54,  first  bullet
             point], it is unclear whether she dismissed it  outright.  The
             FTTJ failed to reach a finding as to whether A had PTSD or was
             otherwise vulnerable, or how that  vulnerability  impacted  on
             the inconsistencies she identified.


             7. It follows that the FTTJ failed to apply the Guidance  Note
             on the principles set out in  JL  (China).  This  renders  her
             assessment of credibility materially flawed.


Error of law

     6. The first reference to the issue of vulnerability  appears  in  the
        Judges Record of Proceedings supporting the submission of Ms Patyna
        that this matter was raised  before  the  Judge.  The  Judges  note
        appears to read "Appellant a vulnerable witness".
     7. The Judge had before her medical evidence by way of a report from a
        psychiatrist and copies of the appellant's GP medical  records.  In
        relation to this evidence the Judge writes at [45 - 47]:


        45.  In my opinion these discrepancies in the appellant's  evidence
             are material and highly relevant  to  the  Psychiatric  report
             submitted. Dr Balasubramaniam who prepared the report confirms
             that he received copies of the screening and asylum interviews
             and the appellant's written statement before interviewing  the
             appellant. However, the  report  makes  no  reference  to  the
             discrepancies  disclosed  in  these  documents.  Between   the
             initial claim of being hit  by  sticks  on  the  feet  at  the
             screening  interview  and  the  claim  made  in  the   written
             statement of being hit by heavy rods. Indeed, the report makes
             no reference to heavy rods when setting out the description of
             ill-treatment at paragraph 3: "... he was beaten  with  sticks
             on his back, arms and foot. He was  also  kicked  with  booted
             foot and whilst he was being beaten water was poured  on  him.
             On some occasions, he fainted and when  he  woke  up,  he  was
             without clothes and felt burning sensations in his  genitals."
             Whilst the report does refer at one point to the  reasons  why
             there may be a late disclosure  of  sexual  assault.  In  such
             cases, it makes no reference to the fact  that  the  appellant
             was saying initially that he had no injuries and no  reference
             as to whether the appellant  was  even  asked  about  injuries
             sustained. This means the report does not say as part  of  the
             clinical  assessment  whether  and  why  or   why   not   such
             discrepancies affects the diagnostic opinion that is reached.


        46.       These omissions also need to be considered alongside  the
             fact  that  Dr  Balasubramaniam's  report  does  not  consider
             whether the appellant may  be  exaggerating  or  feigning  his
             symptoms. Paragraph 290 of the Istanbul Protocol  makes  clear
             in relation to psychological examinations that there is a duty
             to consider whether the presented symptoms may be falsified or
             exaggerated. In the circumstances that the appellant's account
             of ill-treatment had significant discrepancies I consider that
             this requirement becomes even more important in this case, and
             not to have done so is in my view, a significant area  of  the
             report.


        47.       It is also to be noted that the GP medical  records  show
             that the appellant was registered with the GP on 24  September
             2019 and first attended the surgery on 30 October 2019 with  a
             complaint of diarrhoea. He appears  not  to  have  raised  any
             other matter at this appointment - although I  accept  he  was
             not asked to explain at the hearing why this was so.  He  then
             attended on 22 November 2019  and  complained  of  nightmares.
             "Following torture in Sri Lanka in July 2019". Again, I accept
             the appellant was not asked at the hearing to explain  why  he
             did this four days before the asylum interview and not before.


     8. At [54, bullet point 1] the Judge writes:



           . The significant discrepancies  in  the  account  given  by  the
             appellant of the claimed ill-treatment and injury sustained  at
             the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities  whilst  in  detention.
             This  goes  to  the  core  of  the  appellant's  claim  and  no
             reasonable explanation has been given for the discrepancies. In
             this context I find a little weight can  reasonably  placed  on
             the findings made in the psychiatric report due to the report's
             failure to consider the discrepancies or  to  consider  whether
             the appellant may have faked or exaggerated  his  psychological
             symptoms before making the diagnosis of PTSD.



     9. The finding the Judge claims to place only little weight  upon  the
        Psychiatrist's report is a finding that creates uncertainty in  the
        mind of a reader. The thrust of the Judge's comments regarding  the
        report appear to challenge the claimed causation of the PTSD rather
        than the fact  the  appellant  had  been  clinically  diagnosed  as
        suffering from PTSD. It is not clear what the Judge placed  "little
        weight" upon: was it upon the explanation provided by the appellant
        for what had happened to him which the psychologist found explained
        his presenting with symptoms justifying the clinical  diagnosis  of
        PTSD or was it on the report as a whole, including the  claim  that
        the appellant was suffering PTSD?
    10. It must also be  remembered  that  the  GP  report  refers  to  the
        appellant being prescribed sertraline, a recognised antidepressant.
        The Judge highlights issues concerning the consultant with  the  GP
        at [47] and clearly recorded a number of those issues  arise  as  a
        result of the evidence not being explored with the appellant at the
        hearing.
    11. The credibility of the claim was  not  a  matter  for  the  medical
        profession but for the Judge.
    12. The Judge  may  have  been  entitled  to  have  found  that  whilst
        accepting the clinical diagnosis of PTSD the issue of causation was
        not accepted as a result of unexplained discrepancies, but there is
        no such finding in these terms. If one infers from a reading of the
        determination that that is what the Judge meant  to  say  it  would
        mean that the grounds asserting the Judge failed to  refer  to  the
        Joint  Presidential  Guidance  on  Child,  vulnerable   adult   and
        sensitive witnesses is made out. The  appellant  as  an  individual
        suffering PTSD, for whatever reason, falls within the definition of
        a vulnerable witness.
    13. The Judge failed to specifically record in clear unequivocal  terms
        whether it was found the appellant is a vulnerable witness and  how
        that vulnerability had been factored into  the  assessment  of  the
        evidence before her.  It  appears  that  just  because  there  were
        discrepancies in the evidence this justified  little  weight  being
        placed  upon  the  evidence  of  the  psychologist,   rather   than
        considering that the diagnosis by the psychologist  of  PTSD  might
        have provided an explanation for the discrepancies.
    14. I find in light of this the Judge has erred  in  law  in  a  manner
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal. I do  not  need  to
        consider the remaining two grounds on the basis that the failure to
        properly  assess  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim  is
        material to the assessment  of  risk  on  return  and  the  country
        background material.
    15. I set the decision aside.  The appeal  shall  be  remitted  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be heard  afresh  by
        judge  other  than  Judge  Colvin.  There  shall  be  no  preserved
        findings.

Decision

    16. The Judge materially erred in law. I set the decision  aside.  This
        appeal shall be remitted to Taylor House  to  be  heard  afresh  by
        judge other than Judge Colvin.

   Anonymity.

    17. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 23 August 2021












