
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02038/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2018                           |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     RB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Dzuiti, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  She was  born  on  5  February
    1992.

 2. The appellant  appealed  against  the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant
    asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights  grounds  dated  25
    January 2018, however, before Judge  Wilsher  (the  judge),  the  other
    claims having been withdrawn, the appeal proceeded only  on  Article  8
    grounds.

 3. The judge allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.   He  said  inter
    alia, the following:

         "7.  The justification put forward for the interference with family
             life is the need to maintain immigration control.  This is  an
             important consideration and I must consider it carefully.  The
             appellant arrived in the UK through Ireland where she  claimed
             asylum.  She withdrew that asylum claim before me and  I  find
             as a  fact  that  she  always  intended  to  come  to  the  UK
             principally to pursue family reunion with her mother  and  two
             siblings.  She had previously applied for entry  clearance  on
             that basis in 2010 but this had been refused.  I was told that
             it was easier to get a visa to  go  to  Ireland  and  then  to
             travel across.  Clearly this is an abuse  of  the  immigration
             system.  On the other hand however I  find  that  there  is  a
             clear and important welfare interest of the  two  children  at
             stake in this case.   I  also  find  that  the  appellant  did
             genuinely have strong connections  with  the  UK  through  her
             mother and siblings and therefore this was  not  an  appellant
             who sought to obtain a foothold here which just did not  exist
             otherwise.  The  relevant  case  law  confirms  that  powerful
             reasons are required to require a qualifying  child  to  leave
             the UK.  Similarly, the principle behind s.117B(6) is  that  a
             person with an existing  parental  relationship  with  such  a
             child should not be forced to leave the UK unless it would  be
             reasonable to expect the child  to  go  with  them.   In  this
             instance, Glen Jr  is  the  qualifying  child  who  will  lose
             contact with his father and stepmother  if  the  appellant  is
             removed with her child and the  family  leave  together  as  a
             unit.  I have already found that both the  appellant  and  her
             partner have a parental relationship with Glen Jr.  Glen  Jr's
             biological mother  cannot  be  expected  to  go  with  him  to
             Zimbabwe as she is settled in the UK.   For  these  reasons  I
             have  concluded  that   it   would   be   a   disproportionate
             interference with family  life  and  in  particular  the  best
             interests of the children for this appellant to be returned to
             Zimbabwe in these circumstances ..."

 4. The grounds claim that the judge materially misdirected himself in law.
     The grounds claim that the judge erred by finding that  the  appellant
    had a genuine parental relationship with her partner's  child,  thereby
    meeting the requirements of s.117B(6).   The  grounds  claim  that  the
    judge made a material misdirection in law by finding that the appellant
    had a parental relationship with Glenn  Jr,  her  partner's  biological
    son.  As Glenn Jr's  biological  mother  is  in  the  UK  and  has  not
    relinquished any care responsibilities for  him,  the  judge  erred  in
    finding that the appellant had a parental relationship with  the  child
    for the  purposes  of  s.117B(6).   Reliance  was  placed  upon  Ortega
    (Remittal; bias; parental relationship) [2018] UKUT 00298  (IAC).   See
    headnote 3:

         "As stated in paragraph 44 of  R  (On  the  application  of  RK)  v
         Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (Section  117B(6):
         "Parental relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT  00031  (IAC)  if  a  non-
         biological parent ("third party") caring for a child claims to be a
         step-parent, the existence of such a relationship will depend  upon
         all the circumstances including whether or  not  there  are  others
         (usually the biological parents) who have such a relationship  with
         the child also.  It is unlikely that  a  person  will  be  able  to
         establish they have  taken  on  the  role  of  a  parent  when  the
         biological parents continue to be involved in the child's  life  as
         the child's parents."

 5. Reliance was also placed upon R  (On  the  application  of  RK)  v  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Section 117B(6)): "Parental
    relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC) that supports  the  position
    that the appellant does not have  a  "parental  relationship"  for  the
    purposes of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  Paragraph 44 states;

         "If a non-biological parent ("third  party")  caring  for  a  child
         claims such a relationship, its existence will depend upon all  the
         circumstances including whether or not there  are  others  (usually
         the biological parents) who have such a relationship with the child
         also.  It is unlikely, in my judgment, that a person will  be  able
         to establish they have taken on the  role  of  a  parent  when  the
         biological parents continue to be involved in the child's  life  as
         the child's parents as in a case such  as  the  present  where  the
         children and parents continue to live and function  together  as  a
         family.  It will be difficult, if not impossible,  to  say  that  a
         third party has 'stepped into the shoes' of a parent."

 6. The grounds submit that the  judge  recognised  that  when  stating  at
    paragraph 6 that Glenn Jr's biological mother remained as  his  parent.
    The judge said in respect of Glenn Jr's mother, "I find as a fact  that
    she would not leave the UK with Glenn Jr if the appellant were returned
    to Zimbabwe".

 7. The grounds argue that the judge erred in concluding that the appellant
    had a genuine parental relationship with a qualifying child  whilst  he
    resided with and remained in the care of his biological mother.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Mr Jarvis relied upon the grounds.

 9. Ms Dzuiti did not address any of the grounds in terms, but asked me  to
    look at the decision as a whole,  and  find  that  the  judge  did  not
    materially err.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10. Ortega at head note 3 (see [4] above) is of significance in that it  is
    not impossible that a person will be able to establish they have  taken
    on the role of a parent when the  biological  parents  continue  to  be
    involved in  the  child's  life,  however,  that  would  have  required
    specific findings on the part of the judge, absent in his decision.

11. The judge set out the circumstances at [3].  He said that the appellant
    could not meet the requirement to be in a  parental  relationship  with
    the child.  After hearing evidence, the judge  said  he  was  satisfied
    "...... that there is extensive contact which is ongoing between  Glenn
    Jnr and his father as well as the appellant.  He is effectively part of
    her family and she treats him as her own son".  The judge did not  hear
    any evidence from the child's mother.  Nevertheless, the judge went  on
    to say at [7],  inter  alia,  "I  have  already  found  that  both  the
    appellant and her partner have a parental relationship with Glenn Jnr".
     That finding was arguably perverse as notwithstanding that he said  at
    [6] that the appellant treated the child as her own son,  there  needed
    to be more in terms of Ortega and R (on the application of RK).

12. I find that the judge materially erred in concluding that the appellant
    had a genuine parental relationship with a qualifying child whilst that
    child resided with and remained in the care of his biological mother.

Notice of Decision

13. The First-tier Tribunal materially erred.  The decision  is  set  aside
    and will be re-made in the First-tier following a de novo hearing.

    An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

