
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02906/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 March 2019                     |On 02 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                  LORD UIST
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     JS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge E B
    Grant, promulgated on 6 March 2018. Permission to appeal was granted by
    the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal on 18 February 2019.



Anonymity

 2.  An  anonymity  direction  was  sought  and  granted  in  view  of  the
    appellant's vulnerability as an asylum-seeker.

Background

 3. On 30 September 2006 the appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  with
    entry clearance as a student. He overstayed and came to light after  he
    was arrested for affray in October 2011. At that point he  applied  for
    asylum. There  followed  convictions  for  assault  occasioning  actual
    bodily harm, theft, criminal damage, being  drunk  and  disorderly  and
    affray between 2011 and 2014. The appellant absconded from  immigration
    control and in 2012 his asylum claim was treated as being withdrawn.

 4. On 13 July 2015 the appellant  was  convicted  of  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm and sentenced to 14 months'  imprisonment.  He  also
    received an additional 16 weeks' imprisonment for breaching a suspended
    sentence. The Secretary of State served the appellant with notice of  a
    decision to deport him on 28 July 2015, following which  the  appellant
    resurrected his asylum claim.

 5. The deportation order was signed on  9  March  2016.  In  refusing  the
    appellant's protection and human rights claim, the Secretary  of  State
    rejected, for want of credibility, the appellant's claim that he was  a
    member of the LTTE and that he was detained and ill-treated for  spying
    on a Sri Lankan Army officer for the LTTE. Nor was it accepted that his
    attendance at a single demonstration in the United Kingdom would create
    a real risk of persecution.  A decision was also made  to  exclude  the
    appellant from a  grant  of  Humanitarian  Protection  under  paragraph
    338D(iii) of the Immigration Rules owing to his most recent  conviction
    and imprisonment. Regarding the free-standing Article 3 claim owing  to
    the claim that the appellant suffered from PTSD, it was noted  that  he
    had not shown he was receiving medication in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    that treatment was available in Sri Lanka.  As for the Article 8 claim,
    the respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  could  meet  none  of  the
    exceptions to deportation set out in paragraphs 399a and  399A  of  the
    Rules and there were no very compelling circumstances.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Following the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  judge  found
    that the appellant had fabricated his entire account owing to his  poor
    immigration  history,  inconsistencies  and  that   his   account   was
    implausible or incredible in several respects. The judge did not accept
    that the medical evidence amounted to credible, corroborative  evidence
    of the appellant's claim.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal argued that there had been  two  instances  of  a
    failure by the First-tier Tribunal to assess the evidence in the round.
    The first arguable error was in respect of the  country  expert  report
    and the second was in respect of the medico-legal report. In  addition,
    it was said that the judge failed to take  into  consideration  various
    aspects of the medical evidence.

 8. The appellant was refused permission to appeal by both  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal. His application for judicial review of
    that decision was refused by the Administrative  Court  on  30  January
    2018.

 9. The appellant  was  granted  permission  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  to
    judicially review the refusal of permission by the Upper Tribunal on 14
    December 2018. The reasons provided by Henderson LJ were  that  it  was
    arguable that the  decisions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal were wrong in law. The First-tier Tribunal had arguably failed
    to take the medical  evidence  into  account  as  part  of  a  holistic
    assessment of all the evidence and the Upper  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    appreciate this fundamental error in the  approach  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. The matter was remitted to the Administrative Court and on  1  February
    2019 the decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to  appeal
    was quashed.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by the Vice  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in light of the comments of Henderson LJ.

12. Directions were issued by the Principal Resident Judge on 1 March  2019
    stating that the respondent must file and serve a Rule 24 response  or,
    if already filed, a skeleton argument and any Rule 15(2A)  notice.  The
    appellant was similarly directed to  file  a  skeleton  argument,  Rule
    15(2A) notice and trial bundle.

13. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 14  March  2019,  stated
    that the appeal was opposed. In summary, it was argued that  the  judge
    was entitled to consider the evidence  in  the  order  chosen  and  her
    findings did not amount to a concluded view  on  the  entirety  of  the
    claim, HH (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 306 applied.

The hearing

14. Mr Bandegani and Mr Walker both advised the panel that they agreed that
    the First-tier Tribunal made material  errors  of  law  in  failing  to
    adequately consider the expert reports. They further  agreed  that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing.

15. We advised the representatives that we consented to the proposed course
    of action.

Decision on error of law

16. Given the agreement of the legal representatives, we can be brief.

17. The First-tier Tribunal erred in considering the  medical  report  from
    Freedom from Torture separately and  only  after  arriving  at  a  firm
    conclusion on the credibility of the  appellant's  claim.  The  medical
    evidence was not considered in  the  round,  AM  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
    (EWCA) Civ 1123 considered. Furthermore, the  judge  erred  in  finding
    that the appellant's scarring was merely consistent with his account of
    torture whereas the medical evidence was that overall the scarring  was
    "highly consistent" with that account. The First-tier Tribunal took  no
    account of the impact of the appellant's diagnosis of PTSD, significant
    depression and alcohol use on  his  ability  to  provide  a  consistent
    account.

18. There was no reference to the content of the expert country evidence of
    Dr Chris Smith in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and  reasons.  Nor
    was there any assessment of the  expert's  conclusions.  If  the  judge
    rejected the expert evidence, no reasons were provided  for  doing  so.
    The expert evidence addressed issues pertaining to the plausibility  of
    the  appellant's  account,  which  the  judge   did   not   take   into
    consideration in reaching her findings.

19. In these circumstances we are satisfied that there are  errors  of  law
    such that the decision must be  set  aside  and  remade.  None  of  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge are to stand.

20. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  him  of   such
    consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 4 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 28th March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
