
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/02516/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated:     |
|on 25 July 2019                      |on 5 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    S A R
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as a citizen  of  Sudan,  born  on  29
    April 1990, and as a non-Arab Darfuri, being  a  member  of  the  Gimir
    tribe.  He sought asylum in the UK on 23 October 2016.

 2. The respondent refused the claim by letter dated 7 February 2019.   The
    appellant had used another identity, of being born in Saudi  Arabia  on
    29 April 1984.  It was not accepted that he  is  of  the  Gimir  tribe.
    Even if he was, conditions  had  changed  since  country  guidance  was
    issued in 2009 and 2015, and he had not shown that he was wanted by the
    authorities or was at risk.  There was no basis for any grant of leave.

 3. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  His grounds  were  perfunctory  and
    generic.

 4. FtT Judge Montgomery dismissed  the  appeal  by  a  decision  dated  11
    September 2018.

 5. The appellant applied to the FtT for permission to  appeal  on  grounds
    which, lightly edited, are as follows:

      (1) reaching unclear or contradictory findings and failing to  resolve
      those

      ... On the one hand the  FtT  accepts  the  core  of  the  appellant's
      account as both plausible and consistent with external findings [(20];
      the appellant has told a credible story [21].  However  on  the  other
      hand finds at [25] that it must still carefully consider  whether  the
      core of the appellant's account can be accepted as credible [25].  The
      latter finding appears to be contradictory to  the  previous  findings
      and the FtT has failed to resolve this matter ...

      (2) failing to assess the evidence in the round

      ... The FtT has arrived at adverse credibility findings at [16  -  19]
      ... prior to the assessment of the expert report  and  medical  report
      ... it is wrong in principle to form a concluded view on the  probable
      veracity of particular items of evidence and  then,  from  that  fixed
      point, to allow that to  govern  the  assessment  of  other  evidence.
      Although the FtT has said it must consider the evidence in  the  round
      ... the FtT has paid [only] lip  service...  The  FtT  has  erred  for
      reasons outlined in AM [2018] 4 WLR 78 at 19 (a)  and  in  TF  and  MA
      [2018] CSIH 58 at 38-39, 48 and 50-52.   Separatim  the  finding  that
      there is no credible evidence to indicate from the Gimir tribe is  not
      supported, or not adequately supported, by the  terms  of  the  expert
      report.

      (3) errors of law in light of KB  and  AH  (credibility  -  structured
      approach) [2017] UKUT 00491

      The FtT erred by failing to bear in mind the approach advocated in  KB
      ... in particular as set out at [26] ... The FtT accepts at [20]  that
      the appellant scored account as plausible and consistent with external
      factors. The FtT accepts  at  [21]  that  the  appellant  has  told  a
      credible story. Although the FtT has focused on other  inconsistencies
      these do not go to ...  determining  the  appellant's  ethnicity.  The
      appellant has given sufficient detail.  In light of the foregoing  and
      where the FtT has accepted the core account and  plausibility  of  the
      claim, the FtT ought to have allowed the appeal...

 6. Permission was refused by the FtT but granted by the UT,  on  the  same
    grounds, on 9 May 2019.

 7. Mr Winter's submissions were along the lines of the grounds.  The  main
    further points which I noted were these:

      i) Ground 1  showed  inconsistency  and  lack  of  clarity.  That  was
         significant, as the  adverse  factors  in  the  decision  were  all
         peripheral to the essential claim, based only on ethnicity.

     ii) As the core of the ethnic  claim  had  been  found  plausible,  the
         appeal should have been allowed.

    iii) In terms of ground 2, the judge  allowed  her  adverse  credibility
         findings  to  sway  her  view  of  the  expert   report.    Adverse
         credibility findings on other issues could not displace independent
         expert evidence.

     iv) In light of that evidence, the judge was wrong to say at [28]  that
         there was "no credible evidence to indicate that  he  is  from  the
         Gimir tribe".

      v) On ground 3, the judge's finding at [21] that  the  appellant  "has
         told a credible story" should have led to the appeal being allowed,
         not dismissed.

     vi) The decision should be set aside and the case remitted for a  fresh
         hearing.

 8. Mr Govan relied on the respondent's  rule  24  response  and  submitted
    further as follows:

      i) Grounds 1 and 3 run together. They take  certain  comments  of  the
         judge out of context.

     ii) A finding of plausibility and consistency was  one  thing,  but  it
         remained for the judge to make an assessment  overall  credibility,
         weighing all factors.

    iii) The appellant used two identities and told stories  full  of  self-
         contradictions.  He  had  shown  himself  to  be  fundamentally  an
         unreliable and untruthful witness, and had simply not  proven  that
         he was who he said he was. That clear conclusion was  open  to  the
         judge and supported by ample reasons. Grounds 1 and 3  amounted  to
         no more than disagreement

     iv) On ground 2, the judge had considered the expert report and medical
         evidence both on their own terms and in context of  all  the  other
         evidence. She had not made up her mind before considering  all  the
         evidence, but in the round.

      v) The appellant was, on any view, a serial liar.  His  appeal  should
         be dismissed.

 9. Mr Winter in reply said that his criticism  of  the  treatment  of  the
    expert report was not that the judge failed to consider the evidence in
    the round, but that she allowed her adverse findings on credibility  to
    impact on her assessment of the expert evidence, which was contrary  to
    the approach explained in TF and MA.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. The submission that the appellant is a serial  liar  is  one  which  he
    could hardly resist, either in the FtT or in the UT.

12. It was of course possible for the appellant to be both  a  serial  liar
    and a member of the Gimir tribe.  The FtT had to reach a decision which
    showed it was open to that possibility.  Reading the  judge's  decision
    fairly and as a whole, it is clear that she did take all  the  evidence
    in the round.

13. The case for the appellant was, or came very close to, the  proposition
    that because he had an expert report which supported  him,  he  had  to
    succeed, no matter how seriously damaged his credibility was by matters
    outside the report.  I was taken to no passages in AM or  in  TF  &  MA
    which support such a doctrine, and I do not think it has  any  support,
    either there or elsewhere in case law.  A judge  must  give  an  expert
    report the weight it deserves, but overall credibility  remains  for  a
    judge, weighing all the evidence, including  expert  evidence,  in  the
    round.   The  judge  gave  many  impeccable  reasons  for  finding  the
    appellant not to be a satisfactory witness.

14. I was not taken to any passage in  KB,  at  [26]  or  elsewhere,  which
    supports ground 3.  I see nothing in that case to show error of law  in
    the decision of the FtT in this case.

15. The grounds are largely based on  taking  two  sentences,  and  use  of
    language, out of context.  It is instructive to read  the  respondent's
    refusal letter and the record of submissions in the decision  at  [11],
    i.e. the case for the appellant to meet.  As put to the judge at  [11],
    it was "not the credibility of the story that  was  in  issue  but  the
    credibility of this appellant".  The point was also put to her that the
    expert "had not grasped that the Home Office refusal was based  not  on
    refuting that the claimed experiences were possible  in  Sudan  but  on
    whether this appellant actually had these experiences".

16. The  judge's  acceptance  at  [20]  that  the  appellant's  account  is
    "plausible and consistent with external factors" means no more than  it
    says, and it gives the expert report all the weight it  could  properly
    carry.  It does not take the case any further than that.

17. The phrase in the first sentence  of  [21],  "...  the  fact  that  the
    appellant has told a credible story", should perhaps have carried on in
    the language of "a plausible story"; but it is obviously not an overall
    positive credibility finding, either in context of the whole  decision,
    or even  of  the  same  sentence,  which  carries  on,  "...  does  not
    necessarily mean that he was subjected to the experiences he describes,
    or that he is who he claims to be".

18. The phrase at [28], "there is no credible evidence",  might  have  been
    better framed, but again the criticism is highly selective.

19. Reading the rest of [28], and the decision as a  whole,  the  appellant
    can be in no doubt that all points in his  favour  have  been  properly
    weighed, including the expert report, but that  his  evidence  has  not
    been found probative, even to the lower standard.  The judge  says,  "I
    accept that he is a Sunni  Muslim  Sudanese  male.   The  rest  of  his
    account I reject in its entirety.  He has failed to establish  that  he
    is ... Gimir [or] that he came to adverse  attention  of  the  Sudanese
    police".  Many good reasons are given  for  that  conclusion,  most  of
    which have not been subjected, and are not open, to any criticism.

20. The grounds amount only to selective and  partial  disagreement.   They
    fail to show that the decision, read as it should be, falls to  be  set
    aside for having involved the making of an error on a point of law.


21. The judge did not resolve the parties' submissions on  whether  country
    guidance was superseded, or should still be followed, and  whether  the
    appellant could succeed on ethnicity alone.  However, the finding  that
    the appellant failed to establish any  part  of  his  claim,  including
    ethnicity, has not been displaced, so that  oversight  (which  was  not
    mentioned by either side) does not matter.

22. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

23. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is preserved.

      [pic]

      26 July 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
