
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02018/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2018                              |On 2 May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     hp
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Morgan Dias Immigration
Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, HP, was born in 1991 and is a male citizen of Iran.   He
    applied for international protection but his application was refused by
    a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  15  September  2016.   The
    appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Atkinson)  of
    which, in a decision  promulgated  on  13  April  2017,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There is one ground of appeal.  The appellant claimed to be  a  genuine
    convert to Christianity.  It is not disputed that he attended church in
    the United Kingdom, has no genuine passport and  will  be  returned  to
    Iran on a laissez passer.  Relying on SSH v HR  (illegal  exit:  failed
    asylum seeker) CG [2016] UKUT 308, the appellant argues that  he  would
    be questioned on return to Iran.  Consequently, and notwithstanding the
    First-tier Tribunal's rejection  of  the  credibility  of  his  claimed
    conversion to Christianity, the appellant (who would not be obliged  to
    lie to the authorities questioning him) would  inform  the  interviewer
    that he had converted to Christianity, albeit solely in order to obtain
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The appellant argues  that  the
    judge erred in law by finding [47] that, "Given that the appellant  has
    not been shown to be an ordinary  (sic)  convert  to  Christianity,  it
    would not be reasonable to expect him to  reveal  nor  likely  that  he
    would reveal such attendance (at church) to the authorities  on  return
    to Iran."  In the light of the fact that the  appellant  would  not  be
    obliged to lie, such a finding was not available to the judge.

 3. Mr Holmes, who appeared for  the  appellant,  at  the  initial  hearing
    developed that argument.  He sought to rely on two unreported decisions
    by Upper Tribunal Judges.  In both decisions, the judges had found that
    the  answers  which  an  appellant  may  give  to  questions  regarding
    conversion to Christianity could give rise to "particular  concern"  in
    the mind  of  an  interviewer  leading,  in  turn,  to  the  returnee's
    detention in Iranian prisons where  conditions  are  likely  to  breach
    Article 3 ECHR.  Whilst I  have  read  my  colleagues'  decisions  with
    interest they are, of course, not binding upon me.  Full copies of  the
    decisions have not been made available; only  extracts  were  provided.
    It is unhelpful and possibly unlawful for me to rely upon passages from
    unreported decisions which are shorn from the context from  which  they
    are extracted.

 4. Mr Mills, who appeared for the Secretary of State, urged me  to  reject
    the appeal arguing that it was not likely that the appellant  would  be
    asked in detail about the Christian conversion. It was highly  unlikely
    that the appellant himself would volunteer details of his contact  with
    the church to his interviewer.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. I find that the appeal  should  be  dismissed.   I  have  reached  that
    decision for the following reasons.  First, I agree with Mr Mills  that
    there is no likelihood whatever of the appellant, an individual who was
    found by the judge to have pretended to have converted to  Christianity
    in order to remain in the United Kingdom, volunteering  particulars  of
    his conversion to the authorities in Iran.

 7. Secondly, I agree with  Mr  Mills  that  telling  the  truth  for  this
    particular   appellant   cannot   legitimately   be   compared   to   a
    characteristic at the core of his personality such as his sexuality  or
    a genuinely  held  religious  or  political  belief.  Accordingly,  his
    propensity to dissemble should feature in the assessment of risk.

 8. Thirdly, I find that the Iranian  authorities  are  unlikely  to  waste
    their time and resources by detaining the appellant, even if he were to
    inform the authorities that  he  had  attended  church  in  the  United
    Kingdom and had been baptised but had done so only in order  to  remain
    in  this  country.   Lying  and  making  false  claims  are   universal
    characteristics and the appellant's behaviour and motivation  will  not
    be unfamiliar to the Iranian authorities.

 9. Fourthly, whilst I accept that  returnees  should  not  in  general  be
    expected to tell lies, it is important to examine  the  characteristics
    which the judge found this appellant to possess.  In essence, the judge
    has found that this appellant is an  entirely  unreliable  witness  who
    will tell lies for his own benefit and  when  it  suits  him.   Bearing
    those characteristics in mind, it is entirely  reasonable  to  conclude
    that, upon return to Iran, he will tell lies to protect himself whether
    or not he might be expected to tell the truth.  The First-tier Tribunal
    is tasked with making findings of fact which may include findings as to
    how a particular individual may behave  in  the  future  in  particular
    circumstances.  The Tribunal has found that this appellant will lie  in
    order to protect himself.  Given that the appellant will know that  the
    Iranian authorities would have no  independent  means  of  finding  out
    about his contacts with a Christian church in the United Kingdom  other
    than out of the appellant's own mouth, it  is  entirely  reasonable  to
    conclude that he would tell lies, if it suited him to do so.

10. Fifthly, we have no idea at all what questions an interviewer may pose.
     We do not know  whether  the  interviewer  will  ask  open  or  closed
    questions.  An open question could, for example, be as  wide  as  "Have
    you ever denigrated Iran in any way whilst you have lived abroad?"   It
    seems likely that very many asylum seekers living in Europe are  likely
    to have spoken ill of the state from which, for whatever  reason,  they
    have fled even if only privately amongst friends and family.  Expecting
    all returnees to refrain from lying whilst having no regard  for  their
    individual characteristics might mean that very many individuals  would
    be likely to incriminate themselves.  Frankly, that is absurd.

11. In the light of my observations as detailed  above,  I  find  that  the
    judge reached findings which were available to him on the evidence. The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

12. This appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 26 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 26 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
