
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02743/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th December 2018                 |On 6th March 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   mr A P
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Phull,  promulgated  on  25th  April  2018,  following  a  hearing   at
    Birmingham on  26th  March  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is an Iraqi national, of Kurdish ethnicity from the  area
    of  Mala  Abdullah,  near  Kirkuk  in  Iraq  (paragraph   14   of   the
    determination).  He was born on 1st April 1998.   He  is  a  male.   He
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 9th February  2018,
    refusing his claim for asylum and for humanitarian protection  pursuant
    to paragraph 339C of HC 395.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he fears persecution  from
    ISIS and the Kurdish Peshmerga because his father worked for the Ba'ath
    Party.  The Respondent Secretary of State  does  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant's father worked for the Ba'ath Party because the answers that
    the Appellant gave in relation to this matter were vague and lacked  in
    detail.  The Appellant states, however, that an  article  published  in
    the Institute for War and Peace dated 20th March  2018,  confirms  that
    Kurds did work for the regime of Saddam Hussein (see paragraphs  15  to
    16 of the determination).   As  such,  he  would  be  at  risk  now  of
    persecution if he were to be returned.



The Judge's Findings

 4. In a comprehensive and clear determination, the judge held that it  was
    not made out that the Appellant's father worked for  the  Ba'ath  Party
    for two essential reasons.  First,  that  "the  Appellant  didn't  have
    information about his father's involvement in the Ba'ath Party and said
    in  interview  that  his  father  had  not  spoken  to  him  about  his
    involvement ..."  What the Appellant had  learned  about  his  father's
    involvement came from his mother who had told the Appellant  that  "his
    father had a high-ranking position in the party".   The  Appellant  had
    also said that his family moved from Haji Ava  to  Mala  Abdulla,  near
    Kirkuk, "where the  population  is  majority  Kurdish".   However,  the
    Appellant claims then to have  said  that  his  family  left  Haji  Ava
    "because they feared the Kurdish authorities could find out  about  his
    father's role with the Ba'ath Party".  This led the judge to  make  the
    second finding in relation to the Appellant's  credibility.   Secondly,
    therefore, it was said that it was not credible  that  the  Appellant's
    father feared the Kurdish authorities "because had this been  the  case
    he would not have moved his family to an area, which was  predominantly
    Kurdish" (paragraph 17).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.







Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  erred  in  law  with
    respect to her findings at paragraph 17 in two vital respects.   First,
    whereas the judge held that  "the  Appellant  didn't  have  information
    about his father's involvement in the  Ba'ath  Party"  (paragraph  17),
    this ignored the fact that the Appellant was only 5 years of age at the
    time.  He was a minor both at that time and at the time when he claimed
    asylum.  It was the Appellant's case that it was  his  mother  who  had
    informed him on various occasions, upon enquiry by the Appellant as  to
    why they had moved from Haji Ava to Mala Abdulla,  that  the  move  was
    necessary because "his  father  had  a  high-ranking  position  in  the
    party".

 7. Secondly, the suggestion that the Appellant's  father  would  not  have
    realistically moved the family for fear of "the  Kurdish  authorities",
    to an  area  "which  was  predominantly  Kurdish"  (paragraph  17)  was
    untenable because what the Appellant's  family  feared,  were  not  the
    Kurdish people themselves, but the Kurdish authority,  which  stood  to
    persecute them for the father's involvement in helping  Saddam  Hussein
    as an agent.  This ignored the  answers  that  the  Appellant  gave  to
    questions during the interview (see questions 117 to 119; and questions
    127 to 130).  The Appellant had gone on to say  that  had  they  stayed
    where they were they would have been persecuted.  They  had  stayed  in
    Haji Ava.  However the Ba'ath Party collapsed in 2003.  He  states  "if
    he had stayed there, all  of  us,  our  family  members  would've  been
    arrested" (see question 132).

 8. Thirdly, the grounds go on to state that regard should have  been  had,
    in the circumstances of this case, where the Appellant was 5  years  of
    age when he moved, to the fact that he was a minor.  This is clear from
    paragraph 351 of the Immigration Rules,  which  makes  it  quite  clear
    that,

         "A person of any age may  qualify  for  refugee  status  under  the
         Convention ... However, account should be taken of the  applicant's
         maturity and in assessing the claim of a child more  weight  should
         be given to objective indications of risk than to the child's state
         of mind and understanding of his situation.  An asylum  application
         made on behalf of the child should not be refused only because  the
         child is too young to understand the situation ..."

 9. Finally, it is said that there was no clear evidence that the Appellant
    was returnable to the IKR, because he had not actually lived in the IKR
    since the age of 5.  He had moved to Kirkuk, which was not in the  IKR.
    The judge had overlooked this distinction (at paragraph 25).

10. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  14th
    September 2018, on the basis that it was arguable that the findings  in
    respect of relocation disclose an arguable error of law.





Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 6th December 2018, Mr Mukherjee  emphasised
    the grounds of application in detail taking me carefully  through  what
    had been said there.  For his part,  Mr  Kotas  laid  emphasis  on  two
    essential  points.   First,  he  submitted  that  in  relation  to  the
    credibility point, the question was not that the judge  had  chosen  to
    disbelieve  the  Appellant,  without  taking  into  account  that   the
    Appellant was 5 years old, but the fact that the judge did not find  it
    credible that the Appellant's father would have moved the family  to  a
    predominantly Kurdish area in the way that was being suggested, on  the
    basis that he had feared the Kurdish authorities now.  It must  not  be
    forgotten that the Appellant stayed with his family right the way up to
    2014 in any event.  The judge was correct in stating that, "I find that
    it is not made out that  the  Appellant's  father  feared  the  Kurdish
    authorities ..." The issue was not what the Appellant knew but what had
    actually happened.

12. Secondly, there was a question of the viability of return, and  it  was
    entirely open to the judge to conclude  that  the  Appellant  could  be
    returned to the IKR, for the reasons that the  judge  had  given.   The
    judge had made it clear that,

         "I find he can return to IKR.  He has an uncle in Haji Ava  in  the
         IKR.  He could ask his uncle to help to secure his CSID and provide
         support, as he did in the past.  I  do  not  find  the  Appellant's
         evidence plausible that his uncle would not have maintained contact
         with him given the lengths his uncle was prepared to take  to  help
         the Appellant relocate from his home area ..." (paragraph 31).

13. In  reply,  Mr  Mukherjee  submitted  that  one  must  not  ignore  the
    difference between living amongst Kurdish people and being governed  by
    the Kurdish  authorities,  because  it  is  the  latter  who  stood  to
    persecute the Appellant's father in this case.  It was not at all clear
    from paragraph 17 that the judge did take into account the  Appellant's
    minor age  when  making  findings  that,  "the  Appellant  didn't  have
    information about his father's involvement in  the  Ba'ath  Party  ..."
    The judge should have been explicit about this.  The  Appellant  should
    have been asked why it was the case that  he  did  not  know  what  his
    father did, and why it was that what he learnt,  he  only  learnt  from
    what his mother told him.

14. Secondly, the judge had to make proper findings about  the  Appellant's
    ability to procure a CSID card, and then  to  seek  accommodation,  and
    employment, and have the ability to work, and this  was  a  requirement
    that had to be followed before it could realistically be concluded that
    the Appellant was indeed returnable to Iraq, in the manner envisaged by
    the judge.



Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

16. First, the judge observes (at paragraph 28) that,

         "Currently the KRG will consider for return all  persons  of  Iraqi
         Kurdish  ethnicity  who  are  from  an  area  currently  under  the
         administration of the KRG, i.e. the three  Governorates  of  Dohuk,
         Erbil and Suleimaniah and some parts of Kirkuk Governorate (but not
         persons from Kirkuk city)."

17. The Appellant is  not  from  Kirkuk.   He  had,  from  the  age  of  5,
    relocated.  He had gone to Mala Abdulla.  It is  not  clear  that  this
    particular place, which is on the  southern  outskirts  of  Kirkuk,  is
    actually currently covered  by  the  IKR.   If  it  is  not,  then  the
    Appellant would have the same difficulties, which would otherwise apply
    to him in terms of the viability of return to Baghdad or elsewhere.

18. Second, the Appellant had stated that he did not have a  CSID  document
    with him (paragraph 30).  He had said that his uncle was not in contact
    with him, but the judge had disbelieved this  (paragraph  31).   It  is
    nevertheless important to enquire into whether the maternal uncle would
    be in a position to sufficiently help the Appellant to  obtain  a  CSID
    document. These matters may not otherwise have  been  as  important  as
    they are in this case, given that in this case the judge  had  accepted
    that the entirety of the  Appellant's  close  family  were  killed  and
    disappeared by ISIS in 2015 (see paragraph 20  of  the  determination).
    Accordingly, the onus was on the Secretary of State to  show  that  the
    maternal uncle would be in a position to support  the  Appellant.   The
    grounds of application state that this had been done in Ali (J) v  SSHD
    (PA/08458/2016), and this would have included an assessment of  whether
    the maternal uncle would be able and willing to provide  the  necessary
    help and support.

19. Third, I accept that there does appear to be a  confusion  between  the
    Kurdish authorities and the Kurdish people.  The Appellant had made  it
    clear (at paragraph 134) that his family left Haji Ava which was in the
    IKR, in order to escape the Kurdish authorities, because his father had
    been identified as a Ba'ath member and supporter.  They then  moved  to
    an area, where there were no Kurdish authorities, although  there  were
    Kurdish people, and this was in the time of Mala Abdulla.   It  cannot,
    accordingly, be so confidently stated that the father  would  not  have
    had a fear of the Kurdish authorities simply on account of having moved
    from an area controlled by the Kurdish authorities, to  an  area  where
    the Kurdish people predominated.



Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I remake
    the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge  Phull,  so
    that evidence can be provided as to the Appellant's ability to  procure
    a CSID card, in order to enable him to travel in  the  manner  that  is
    normally envisaged, particularly in the light  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant is not actually from Kirkuk, and may well  not  therefore  be
    automatically returnable to Kirkuk.

21.  An anonymity order is made.




    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

22. The appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 4th March 2019
