
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02953/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2018                           |On 23 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     bb
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Burton &
Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bell promulgated on 31 July 2017 dismissing the protection appeal of BB
    against a decision of the Respondent refusing  asylum  in  the  UK  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  10
    March 2017.  The appeal is brought pursuant to  permission  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 2 January 2018.


2.   The Appellant is a 27 year old citizen of Iran.  His  personal  details
    are a matter of record on file and I do  not  reproduce  them  here  in
    keeping with the anonymity  direction  that  has  been  made  in  these
    proceedings and which I continue.


3.   The Appellant's claim for protection was based on events that  occurred
    on 26 or 27 February 2016 during the course of his voluntary work  with
    the Red Cross/Red Crescent in  Iran.   The  Appellant  claims  that  in
    consequence of those events he is now at risk on the basis of  being  a
    perceived supporter of the Komaleh Democratic Party ('KDP'), a  Kurdish
    pro-independence movement.


4.   The nature of the incident on 26 or 27 February 2016 is  summarised  at
    paragraph 5 of the Decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  essence,
    the Appellant was part of a crew sent to attend a  collision  that  had
    occurred between a car and a lorry.  The driver of the car was found to
    be dead, but  the  passenger  was  alive  albeit  badly  injured.   The
    passenger of the car was taken by the Appellant and his colleague  from
    the car and placed in the  ambulance  which  then  headed  towards  the
    hospital in Marivan.  During the course of the journey a car pulled out
    in front of the ambulance stopping  it,  and  two  armed  men  emerged,
    opened the back door of the ambulance, took the  injured  man's  mobile
    telephone from the crew, and transferred the  patient  into  their  car
    before driving off.  The Appellant and his colleague then  returned  to
    the Red Crescent base where they noticed  a  lot  of  unusual  activity
    involving vehicles of the security services. It is the Appellant's case
    that he was then detained, questioned and  ill-treated  in  respect  of
    what had happened to the patient - who, it was said, was a  significant
    member of the KDP; the Appellant was accused of assisting the party.


5.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department rejected  the  substance
    of the Appellant's claim for reasons set out in the RFRL.  A summary of
    the Respondent's conclusions appears at paragraph  36:  the  Respondent
    rejected the Appellant's claim to have been a volunteer  with  the  Red
    Cross/Red Crescent, and rejected the Appellant's claim to be of adverse
    interest on the part of the authorities.


6.   On appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    had established that he was indeed a volunteer with the  Red  Cross/Red
    Crescent (paragraph 19).   It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge also accepted that if the Appellant were perceived to be
    someone involved with the KDP then  he  would  be  at  risk  on  return
    (paragraph 17).  However, the Judge  did  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    account of the key event that had, on his  case,  led  to  the  adverse
    interest in him: (see paragraph 20 et seq.).


7.   In considering the key event the Judge in part said this:

    "He claims that the authorities took the  injured  person  out  of  the
    ambulance and arrested, detained and tortured  the  Appellant  and  his
    colleague" (paragraph 22).


8.   It is accepted by the Respondent that the Judge was in  error  of  fact
    to characterise the Appellant's claim in these terms.  It was  no  part
    of the Appellant's account that it was the authorities that  had  taken
    the injured person out of the ambulance;  rather  his  account  carries
    with it the possibility that it was the KDP members who had intercepted
    the ambulance, perhaps in order to sequester  their  injured  colleague
    and thereby avoid him falling into the  hands  of  the  authorities  as
    might happen at the hospital.


9.   The Respondent has filed  a  Rule  24  response  in  these  proceedings
    acknowledging an error of fact on the part of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, and also in terms accepting that "this error affects the Judge's
    credibility findings".  In the circumstances the Respondent invites the
    Tribunal to determine the appeal again.


10.  I accept that the error of fact  was  sufficiently  fundamental  as  to
    amount to an error of law, and that it  was  material  to  the  Judge's
    evaluation of the core of the Appellant's claim.


11.  Indeed, it is common ground  before  me  that  in  circumstances  where
    there has been a fundamental misunderstanding of a key element  of  the
    Appellant's case, it is right and appropriate that  he  should  have  a
    fresh hearing of his appeal  before  a  different  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.


12.  In  this  context  Mr  Nicholson  brought  to  my  attention  that  the
    Appellant would now also like  to  advance  an  additional  element  in
    support of his claim for protection in the UK: his  claimed  conversion
    to Christianity.  This is not a matter that has previously been  raised
    and I leave it to the Appellant and his  representatives  to  determine
    the best way forward in this regard, bearing in mind that this  may  be
    considered to be a 'new matter' which will require the consent  of  the
    Respondent  if  it  is  to  feature  as  an  element  of  the   current
    proceedings: see section 85(5) and (6) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002. This is not a matter for me to make  any  findings
    or determination upon today.


Notice of Decision

13.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law
    and is set aside.


14.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Bell.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 18 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
