
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
pa/02084/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 October 2017                       |   On 15 November 2017              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                    mr SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Popal, Counsel instructed by Bespoke Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.   His  date  of  birth  is  1
    February 1975.  He appeals, with  permission,  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision refusing his claim for asylum.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  in  January
    2003.  When his period of leave expired he remained in  the  UK  as  an
    over stayer.  In April 2014 he applied for leave to remain on the basis
    of family and  private  life.  This  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in July 2014.  On 27 June 2016 he  was  served  with
    administrative removal notice papers as an over stayer.  On 1 September
    2016 he claimed asylum. The respondent refused his asylum claim by  way
    of a decision dated 16 February 2017.  The appellant  appealed  against
    that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. In a decision promulgated on 11  May  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not find the appellant to be a credible witness and found that the core
    details of his  claim  were  not  credible.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  Human
    Rights grounds.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 7 June 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Landes
    refused the  application  for  permission  to  appeal.   The  appellant
    renewed his application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    and on 5 September 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt granted the appellant
    permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 6. The grounds of appeal assert that the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    sexuality and subsequently his credibility failed to  apply  the  UNHCR
    guidelines correctly or  rationally.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred by applying an objective standard in reaching the  decision  that
    the appellant is not gay.  The UNHCR guidelines on assessing  sexuality
    state that "assessment  of  credibility  in  such  cases  needs  to  be
    undertaken in an individualised and sensitive way".   The  blanket  and
    generalised method of assessing  the  appellant's  sexuality  that  has
    infected the entire decision is neither individualised or sensitive and
    therefore the judge's findings that the account is implausible and that
    the appellant's homosexuality is fabricated to  bolster  his  claim  is
    irrational.  It is submitted that credibility based solely on the basis
    of stereotyped notions does not satisfy the  individualised  assessment
    needed to comply with Article 4(3) of the Qualification  Directive  and
    Article 13(3)(a) of the Procedures Directive.  Reliance  is  placed  on
    the case of C-148/13 to C-150/12 A, B  and  C  v  Staatssecretaris  van
    Veiligheid en Justitie [2014].  The judge has erred by failing to  note
    that  not  declaring  homosexuality  at  the  outset  to  the  relevant
    authorities  and  in  the  screening  interview  cannot  result  in   a
    conclusion that the individual's declaration  lacks  credibility.   The
    judge erred in applying the correct psychological consideration set out
    by the UNHCR guidelines that state that LGBT  individuals  may  harbour
    deep shame and/or internalised homophobia, leading them to  deny  their
    sexual orientation and/or to adopt verbal and  physical  behaviours  in
    line with heterosexual norms and roles.  The cultural background of the
    appellant plays a large part in how  the  person  self  identifies  and
    applicants from highly intolerant countries may not readily identify as
    LGBTI.  It is submitted that to expect  those  with  such  deep  rooted
    psychological and emotional conflict and turmoil to be able to  give  a
    consistent account of feeling gay is irrational and  inconsistent  with
    how to properly assess  the  credibility  of  the  appellant.   At  the
    screening interview the Home Office Presenting Officer and finally  the
    judge all applied and expected  a  higher  standard  of  proof  without
    following the Sivakumaran guidelines of a lower standard of proof.   It
    submitted that it is irrational to  expect  the  appellant  to  give  a
    consistent and strong evidentiary account of his homosexuality  and  to
    assess lack of credibility for failing to do so.  It is  irrational  to
    infer that a person  already  having  lived  a  life  under  close  and
    prejudicial scrutiny to then hear from those he is  seeking  validation
    and understanding from that he is in fact not gay and  is  lying  would
    feel under  pressure  and  unable  to  give  a  clear  recollection  on
    everything that occurred during his 'coming out' period.

 7. The judge has materially erred in law by stating that  the  details  of
    the claim are not credible and to have been belatedly made up  and  has
    therefore come to a perverse conclusion that the appellant is  not  gay
    and is fabricating his story. This  is  contradictory  to  Home  Office
    guidelines.  It  submitted  that  to  implicitly  require  photographic
    evidence to demonstrate homosexuality holds little probative value  and
    is contrary to the respect  for  private  and  family  life  and  human
    dignity.  It submitted that it is irrational for the judge to infer  in
    paragraph [16] of the  decision  that  the  appellant's  reluctance  or
    inability to coherently describe detailed aspects of his personal  life
    should be taken as a lack of  credibility.   It  is  irrational  and  a
    material error on the part of the judge in paragraph 34 to not consider
    that the removal of the appellant  would  be  unduly  harsh  given  the
    consequences he would face were he returned to Bangladesh as  a  failed
    asylum seeker who ran a case on the  grounds  of  homosexuality.   This
    fact in itself would put the appellant at a higher risk of  persecution
    in his home country given the  cultural  and  religious  prejudice  and
    animosity in Bangladesh to both homosexuals and those seeking asylum in
    the UK on such grounds.

Preliminary Issue

 8. At the beginning of the hearing Ms  Popal  raised  the  issue  that  an
    interpreter was not present.  She indicated that her instructions  were
    that a request for an interpreter to be present at the hearing had been
    made by her instructing solicitors.  I adjourned briefly to  enable  Ms
    Popal to obtain confirmation from her instructing solicitor.   After  a
    short adjournment Ms Popal indicated that her instructing solicitor had
    assured her that an application had been made for an interpreter to  be
    present at the hearing and that this had been requested  on  the  basis
    that this was an error of law hearing.  Ms  Popal  indicated  that  her
    instructing solicitor would confirm when the application had been  made
    to the Upper Tribunal.  I  therefore  adjourned  for  a  further  short
    period to enable Ms Popal to obtain evidence of  when  the  application
    had been submitted.  When the hearing resumed Ms Popal advised that  in
    fact no application had been made by her instructing solicitor  for  an
    interpreter to be present.   Ms  Popal  made  an  application  for  the
    hearing to be adjourned so  that  an  interpreter  could  attend  at  a
    hearing on another  date  and  that  her  instructing  solicitor  would
    undertake to ensure that an interpreter was present and would fund  the
    cost.  I asked Ms Popal to indicate how the absence of  an  interpreter
    at this error of law hearing would lead to unfairness on  the  part  of
    the appellant. I asked her to provide me with a practical example  also
    of how the hearing would be unfair given that Ms Popal  indicated  that
    she had no intention of going beyond the grounds  of  appeal  that  had
    already been submitted and the skeleton argument that was submitted  on
    the day of the  hearing.   Ms  Popal  indicated  that  the  appellant's
    understanding of English was very limited and that she had been  unable
    in conference to  properly  take  any  instructions.   Her  instructing
    solicitor had not provided an interpreter today to enable her to have a
    conference with her client prior to the commencement of  this  hearing.
    In essence Ms Popal's submissions were that  this  is  the  appellant's
    appeal, he has a right to participate which means  that  he  should  be
    able to understand what is happening during the course of  the  hearing
    and to understand what is being said on his behalf.  She submitted that
    the appellant has paid the cost of instructing Counsel in this case and
    he wishes to have an interpreter available.  She submitted that it  was
    in the interests of justice that an appellant can  participate  in  his
    hearing by understanding what is happening at the hearing.

 9.  I  invited  submissions  from  Mr  Diwnycz.   He  submitted  that   no
    application for an interpreter had been made and that it  was  not  the
    duty of the Tribunal to provide an interpreter  for  an  error  of  law
    hearing.  He submitted that even if the appellant  was  able  to  speak
    English to an appropriate standard he  might  not  understand  all  the
    legal concepts that are discussed in a court in any event.

10. I refused the application  for  an  adjournment.  Directions  had  been
    served on the appellant's representative. At paragraph 8 it is  clearly
    directed that any request for the services of an  interpreter  must  be
    made to the Tribunal in writing at latest 7 days  before  the  hearing.
    Despite the initial assurances that such an application had  been  made
    none had been made. Whilst an appellant should be enabled to understand
    proceedings in this case full grounds of appeal and a skeleton argument
    had been submitted and it was  confirmed  that  he  was  aware  of  the
    content of those documents. Ms Popal had no intention of adding to what
    was set out therein beyond the  usual  amplification.   The  overriding
    objective is to ensure that cases are  dealt  with  fairly  and  justly
    which includes ensuring, so far as practicable, that  the  parties  are
    able to participate fully in the proceedings. The  unfairness  that  Ms
    Popal identified if I were to proceed was that the appellant could  not
    participate fully as he could not understand the proceedings. This  was
    an error  of  law  hearing.  Full  instructions  had  been  taken.  The
    appellant's instructing solicitor had not arranged for  an  interpreter
    to attend to assist Ms  Popal  with  taking  any  further  instructions
    should they have been necessary on the morning of  the  hearing.  There
    was no new material that Ms Popal intended to raise. Most significantly
    the appellant's representative had  not  made  an  application  for  an
    interpreter to be present despite the clear directions given. There  is
    also a need to avoid unnecessary delay. Taking all these  factors  into
    account I considered that the appellant would not be unduly  prejudiced
    by failing to understand what was being said at the hearing and that by
    proceeding the hearing would still be fair. He was fully aware  of  the
    points that were being made on his behalf, he was not going to be asked
    to give evidence and it was very unlikely that he  would  be  asked  to
    clarify any matters. His participation  was  limited  to  understanding
    what was being said in submissions.

Submissions

11. Ms Popal took me  through  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   She
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had applied the  wrong  standard
    of proof.  In paragraph 9 of the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  set
    out that the standard of proof was a reasonable degree  of  likelihood.
    She submitted that it was the wrong standard.  The standard  is  a  low
    standard.  It has to be more than merely  fanciful.   She  referred  to
    paragraph 16 of the decision and said that the  judge  finds  that  the
    appellant's  account  is  implausible.   The   difficulty   with   that
    assessment is that  the  judge  had  failed  to  correctly  assess  the
    appellant's account.  She referred to the Home Office Guidance  API  on
    Sexual Orientation in Asylum Claims which states at page 13:

         "Recognising,  understanding  and  accepting   one's   own   sexual
         orientation, if it differs from mainstream social expectations, can
         be a long and/or painful process, and in some instances,  may  only
         come in later stages of life.  In such cases this must not be  seen
         as undermining the genuineness  of  an  individual's  claim.   Many
         claimants may come from cultures which shun any open discussion  on
         sexual orientation and it should be noted  that  LGB  activity  and
         identity  will  often  be  surrounded  by  taboo,  stereotypes  and
         prejudice and be seen as being contrary to the fundamental  morals,
         religious and  political  values  of  many  societies.   Discussing
         matters such as sexual orientation will for many, in  the  official
         context of an asylum interview, be extremely daunting.  It is to be
         expected that some LGB asylum seekers may struggle to  talk  openly
         about their sexual orientation.  If find it difficult  to  disclose
         material information in a coherent or detailed manner."

12. She submitted that when considering  the  appellant's  credibility  the
    judge should have  had  regard  to  the  entirety  of  the  claim,  the
    specificity of detail, consistency and corroborating evidence  supplied
    by  the  appellant.   The  starting  point  when   considering   sexual
    orientation is self-identification.  It is clear in this  instance  the
    appellant identifies as gay and he has done so for a significant period
    of his life.  The judge failed to take any of  this  into  account  and
    simply applied an objective test  as  opposed  to  self-identification.
    Reference is made to the case of NR (Jamaica) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 856 which made it clear  that  what
    is relevant is current identity.  The key consideration must be focused
    on assessing the  current  sexual  orientation  of  the  claimant.   It
    submitted that had the judge applied the proper test  and  weight  when
    assessing  credibility  the  judge  would  have  determined  that   the
    appellant would be at a real risk of persecution  as  outlined  in  the
    case of HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon).  She submitted that the  case  law
    indicates that the history is not  indicative  of  sexual  orientation.
    Many people may continue in heterosexual relationships but realise only
    later that they are gay.  The judge makes no findings and does not take
    into  account  how  people  would  express  themselves  in   homophobic
    societies.  She submitted a person from that background would struggle.



13. With regard to the requirement for corroborative evidence she submitted
    that it was perverse for the judge to require that  the  appellant  had
    witness evidence from his mother and friends.  She  asserted  that  the
    Secretary of State would argue in such circumstances that such evidence
    was merely self-serving.  She referred to the judge's reliance  on  the
    case of TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40  and  submitted  that  this  is
    confined to cases where there is documentary evidence and there  is  no
    good reason why that documentary evidence has not been  provided.   The
    judge has erroneously stated that the appellant has failed  to  give  a
    detailed account.  The appellant could still be gay and never have  had
    a boyfriend.  This does not mean that it cannot be accepted that he  is
    gay.  She submitted the judge has disregarded  the  guidance  and  case
    law.

14. Mr Diwnycz relied on the  Rule  24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    decision was within the spectrum available to the judge.  He  submitted
    that in the TK (Burundi) case this is extended beyond mere  documentary
    evidence.  He referred to  paragraph  16  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and submitted that Judge Callow did not take the point against
    the appellant that there is no documentary evidence.  He submitted that
    the appellant has not given any  reason  why  he  has  not  called  any
    witnesses.  He submitted that the appellant's evidence was inconsistent
    and vague and that is what has sunk his credibility, not  the  lack  of
    any corroborative evidence.  He submitted that the judge  is  bound  by
    law notwithstanding any Home Office guidance.  The decision is one that
    was open to him.

15. In reply Ms Popal submitted that TK (Burundi) is limited  to  objective
    evidence where there is no cogent reason given as to why that  evidence
    is available and it expressly states  that  it  refers  to  independent
    evidence.  The evidence of his mother and friends would be unlikely  to
    be considered to be independent evidence.  The judge  has  not  applied
    the Home Office guidance and had no regard to it.

Discussion

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly sets out in  paragraph  10  the
    approach to be adopted when considering a claim that  an  appellant  is
    gay as per HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon).  In paragraphs 11  and  12  the
    First-tier Tribunal considers the case of Minister voor  Immigratie  en
    exile [2013] EUECJ C-199/12 concerning  criminalisation  of  homosexual
    acts and the case of A, B and C  which set out that in the  context  of
    assessing an asylum claim based on fear of persecution  on  grounds  of
    sexual orientation 'must be interpreted as precluding... the  competent
    national authorities from finding that the statements of the  appellant
    for asylum lacked credibility merely because the applicant did not rely
    on his declared sexual orientation on the first occasion he  was  given
    to set out the ground for persecution.'

17. It is clear that the judge was well aware that there  was  a  need  for
    caution where a claim based on sexuality is not  raised  at  the  first
    opportunity. The judge made the following findings:

         "13. It is necessary to make a finding concerning the  evidence  of
             the appellant.  I have made such a finding only  after  mature
             consideration of all relevant and material circumstances.   In
             making  this  finding  I  have  taken  into  account  all  the
             available evidence, in  the  round,  and  have  attached  such
             weight as I consider, after anxious scrutiny, to  be  properly
             attributable thereto.  The reasons for my finding are set  out
             in the  following  examination  of  factors  material  to  the
             finding.  The order in which I  address  the  factors  is  not
             indicative of any relative amount of weight attached to  them,
             but it adopted purely for convenience of exposition.

         14.  In respect of the exercise of assessment of credibility of the
             appellant, I make mention of the provisions of  section  8  of
             the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act
             2004, with which I have complied.

         15.   The  credibility  of  the  appellant  is  affected   by   his
             immigration history and the sequence of events leading to  his
             claim for asylum.  This history shows a course of conduct  not
             consistent with that reasonably to be expected from  a  person
             genuinely in need  of  international  protection.   Since  his
             arrival in  the  UK  the  appellant  failed  to  claim  asylum
             timeously and  only  did  so  after  he  was  served  with  an
             administrative removal order as an overstayer on 27 June 2016.
              Had he not been served with such an order he might never have
             made a claim for asylum.  Despite being aware of the right  to
             claim asylum founded on his sexuality by about 2011  or  2012,
             it was only after  the  rejection  of  a  human  rights  claim
             founded on a family and private life established in the UK and
             the service of the said  administrative  removal  order,  that
             some two months later he made his asylum claim founded on  his
             sexuality.  In giving his  evidence  at  the  hearing  of  the
             appeal, the appellant was vague  and  inconsistent  about  the
             details of his claimed relationships,  not  only  the  one  in
             Bangladesh but the two in the UK, the last of  which  appeared
             to have ended some time ago."

18. The judge is entitled  to  consider  the  immigration  history  of  the
    appellant and to find, on the facts of this case that it weighs against
    the appellant's account. The appellant had been in the UK for 14 years,
    had made an application for leave to remain on the basis of family  and
    private life which was refused in 2014, was served with removal  papers
    almost 2 years later and only then made  a  claim  for  asylum  despite
    being aware that he  had  a  right  to  claim  asylum  around  2011/12.
    However, it is not merely as a result of the  failure  to  declare  his
    sexual orientation on the first occasion that the judge does not accept
    his evidence, this was only one factor.  As set  out  above  the  judge
    found that in giving his evidence  at  the  appeal  he  was  vague  and
    inconsistent. The judge further set out:

         "16. The appellant was implausible.  The core details of his  claim
             are not credible and have belatedly been made up.   In  R  (on
             the application of JB (Jamaica)) [2013] EWCA Civ  666,  [2014]
             Imm AR 1 it was held at  paragraph  29,  'Homosexuality  is  a
             characteristic that cannot  be  reliably  established  without
             evidence from sources external to the claimant himself'.   The
             appellant failed to  call  his  mother  and  friends  to  give
             evidence as to his sexuality.   In  context,  I  draw  on  the
             guidance in TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40; [2009] Imm  AR  3
             at 488 in  which  it  was  held  that  it  was  important  for
             independent supporting evidence to be provided where it  would
             ordinarily  be  available.   Where  there  was   no   credible
             explanation  for  the  failure  to  produce  such   supporting
             evidence, it could be a very strong pointer that  the  account
             being given was not credible.

         17.  It  is  in  these  circumstances  when  addressing  the  first
             question in HJ (Iran; HT (Cameroon):

                  '...when an applicant applied for asylum on the ground  of
                  a well-founded fear of persecution because he was gay, the
                  Tribunal must first ask itself whether  it  was  satisfied
                  that he was gay, or that he would be  treated  as  gay  by
                  potential persecutors in his country of nationality...'

             that I have reached the conclusion that the appellant has  not
             established he is gay or that he would be treated as  such  by
             potential persecutors in his home country.   Accordingly,  his
             appeal fails."

19. These paragraphs must be read in light of the oral evidence set out  by
    the judge (at paragraph 7) and the extensive questions from his  asylum
    interview set out in paragraph 5 containing several questions that were
    asked of the appellant.  When these questions and the answers given are
    considered together with the oral evidence it is  immediately  apparent
    that there is a marked lack of detail in the appellant's evidence.

20. I reject  Ms  Popal's  submission  that  TK  (Burundi)  is  limited  to
    objective evidence where there is no cogent reason given as to why that
    evidence is available.   That  case  concerned  a  lack  of  supporting
    evidence from the mothers of the appellant's children and  evidence  of
    payments made to support the children. The court held:

         "20. The importance of the evidence that emerged in this  Court  is
         to demonstrate how important it  is  in  cases  of  this  kind  for
         independent supporting evidence  to  be  provided  where  it  would
         ordinarily  be  available;  that  where  there   is   no   credible
         explanation for the failure to produce that supporting evidence  it
         can be a very strong pointer that the account being  given  is  not
         credible. It is clear in the circumstances of this  case  that  the
         Judge was in  fact  right  to  disbelieve  the  appellant.  If  the
         appellant had asked the mother of his second child, Ms  N  to  give
         evidence, the truth about her immigration status would have emerged
         and his claim  to  base  an  entitlement  to  family  life  on  his
         relationship with her and the child by her would have failed.  That
         that was the inevitable consequence was made clear by the fact that
         his counsel accepted before us that he could no  longer  rely  upon
         the relationship with Ms N and her daughter and the sole ground  on
         which an Article 8 claim could be advanced was the relationship  to
         his daughter by his first partner.

         21. The circumstances of this case  in  my  view  demonstrate  that
         independent supporting evidence which  is  available  from  persons
         subject to this jurisdiction be provided wherever possible and  the
         need for an Immigration Judge to adopt a cautious approach  to  the
         evidence of an appellant where independent supporting evidence,  as
         it was in this case, is readily available within this jurisdiction,
         but not provided. It  follows  that  where  a  Judge  in  assessing
         credibility relies  on  the  fact  that  there  is  no  independent
         supporting evidence where there should be supporting  evidence  and
         there is no credible account for its absence commits  no  error  of
         law when he relies on that fact for rejecting  the  account  of  an
         appellant."

21. It is clear that the reference to independent evidence includes witness
    evidence  from  those  in  relationships,  including  family,  with  an
    appellant. The judge was entitled to take into account the  absence  of
    such evidence in rejecting the appellant's account.

22. There was no implicit requirement for photographic evidence as averred.



23. As set out in the  above  paragraphs  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision the judge has considered the appellant's case individually. It
    is asserted that the starting point when considering sexual orientation
    is self-identification.  However, as the judge set out a  finding  must
    be made. This can only be  made  after  considering  the  evidence  not
    simply on the basis that an appellant says he is gay. The judge has not
    applied an objective test. He has considered all the evidence  but  was
    not convinced that the appellant was homosexual.

24.  At paragraph 9 regarding the burden of proof the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge set out:

         "9.  I bear in mind the incidence and standard  of  the  burden  of
             proof.  It is for the appellant to establish to  a  reasonable
             degree of likelihood that his professional fear of persecution
             for  a   Convention   reason   is   well-founded,   with   the
             investigation of  both  past  events  and  the  likelihood  of
             prospective harm being undertaken as a single exercise  rather
             than in two stages, and the  standard  being  applied  to  the
             evidence as a whole rather than to each evidential issue....".

25. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge expected a higher  standard
    of proof without  following  the  Sivakumaran  guidelines  of  a  lower
    standard of proof. The expression 'reasonable degree of likelihood'  to
    describe the lower standard of proof  in  asylum  claims  is  a  common
    formulation and is in fact taken from the  case  of  R  v  SSHD  ex  p.
    Sivakumaran (1998)AC 958 , where it was held that the  existence  of  a
    well-founded fear of persecution required the establishment of what was
    described  by  Lord  Keith  of  Kinkel  as  "a  reasonable  degree   of
    likelihood".

26. There is nothing in  the  skeleton  argument  or  the  summary  of  the
    submissions to indicate that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  asked  to
    consider any risk to the appellant based on return as a  failed  asylum
    seeker who had  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of  homosexuality.  No
    objective evidence was referred to support such  a  claim.  It  is  not
    clear how the authorities would become aware of this information.

27. For the reasons set out above the conclusions reached by the judge were
    ones that were open to him. The findings reached were not irrational or
    perverse. There were no  material  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision such that the decision should be set aside.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the Secretary of State stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 14 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw



