
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/02867/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                             |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|on 12 October 2016                         |on 13 October 2016             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                          ERANDA RUWAN WEERASINGHA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Lingajothy of Linga and Co
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge O
        R Williams promulgated on the 29 July 2016 following  a  hearing  a
        Manchester on the 14 July 2016.
     2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on the 15  May  1990.
        The Judge considered the evidence provided and dismissed the  claim
        on protection and human rights grounds.
     3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the  basis
        the  Judge  erred  in  applying  UK  domestic  regulation  to   the
        assessment of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
        partner, who it is claimed are in a  durable  relationship,  rather
        than considering the same under the Immigration (European  Economic
        Area) Regulations 2006.
     4. Permission was granted on the basis that "In what was  otherwise  a
        detailed and thorough decision it may be that the  Judge  erred  in
        not applying the EEA Regulations and in not considering the durable
        relationship aspect of the EEA Regulations".



Error of law


     5. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal is made out in relation to the dismissal of  the  appeal  on
        protection and/or human rights grounds.
     6. In relation to the EEA  aspect,  the  original  grounds  of  appeal
        contain a challenge to the respondent's decision "(a) To refuse him
        international protection based upon the  1951  Refugee  convention,
        and, (b) To fail to recognise his human rights pursuant to the 1950
        European Convention European Convention on Human Rights".  There is
        no challenge to the decision on an EEA law ground.
     7. Mr Lingajothy was asked whether he had applied for and been granted
        permission to amend his grounds to include this additional head  of
        challenge. He stated he had neither applied for  nor  been  granted
        leave to amend although the EEA aspects formed part of his skeleton
        argument and oral submissions. That may be  the  case  but  neither
        constitutes an application to amend or grant of such permission.
     8. It was conceded by Mr Lingajothy that this is  case  to  which  the
        provisions of section 85(5) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
        2002, as amended by the  Immigration  Act  2014,  applies.  Section
        85(4) and (5) are relevant. The complete section states:

             85 Matters to be considered


             (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall be
             treated by the Tribunal as including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82(1).


             (2)  If an appellant under section  82(1)  makes  a  statement
             under section 120, the  Tribunal  shall  consider  any  matter
             raised in the statement which constitutes a ground  of  appeal
             of a kind listed in section 84 against the  decision  appealed
             against.


             (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under  section
             120 whether the statement was made before or after the  appeal
             was commenced.


             (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1) against a  decision  the
             Tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks  relevant  to
             the substance of the  decision,  including  a  matter  arising
             after the date of the decision.


             (5)  But the Tribunal must not consider a  new  matter  unless
             the Secretary of State has given the Tribunal  consent  to  do
             so.


             (6)  A matter is a "new matter" if-


                  (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
                  section 84, and


                  (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously  considered
                  the matter in the context of-


                      (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or


                      (ii) a statement made by the appellant under  section
                      120.

     9. As no application to amend the grounds of appeal has been  made  it
        is not disputed by Mr Lingajothy  that  the  EEA  issue  is  a  new
        matter. As such, the First-tier Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to
        consider the new matter unless the Secretary of State had given the
        Tribunal consent to do so. Such consent was  not  sought  or  given
        meaning  the  Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction   to   consider   the
        submissions made in relation to the EEA aspects.
    10. The fact the Judge failed to consider any right  arising  from  the
        existence of the durable relationship is  therefore  not  a  matter
        said to be tainted by arguable legal error as jurisdiction has  not
        been established.
    11. The solution, as the respondent asserts in her Rule  24  reply,  is
        for the appellant to make a formal application for a residence card
        on the basis of the claim to be in a durable relationship  with  an
        EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

Decision

    12. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12 October 2016
