
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02829/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2019                            |On 04 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Goodman dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision dated 1 February 2018 to refuse  his  application
    for asylum and leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant entered the UK on 12 November 2009  and  claimed  asylum,
    but was refused on 4 December 2009.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  His  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Devittie in a decision promulgated on  24  February  2010.   The  Upper
    Tribunal refused permission to appeal on 16 March 2010.  The  appellant
    then made a further submission, which was found by the Home Office  not
    to constitute a fresh claim and rejected on 18 May 2010.

3.   On 9 August 2015 the appellant made a fresh claim for asylum.   It  was
    refused on 15 September 2015.  He  made  an  application  for  judicial
    review.  The respondent  was  ordered  to  re-make  the  decision.   In
    February 2018 the fresh claim was again rejected.  It  was  the  appeal
    against this decision that was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Goodman.

4.   Mr Bramble did accept that there were errors in the  judge's  decision.
    However, he said he had sympathy with the judge.  He said we have a set
    of grounds which needed clarity, and  which  goes  to  eight  pages;  a
    skeleton argument which went  to  twenty  pages;  and  the  judge  made
    reference to three bundles of documents  relied  on  by  the  appellant
    which together totalled 984 pages.  He said that there was no honing in
    of specific issues before the judge.

5.   Ms Walker submitted in line with paragraph 33 of her grounds of  appeal
    that the three bundles, A and B and C amounted to a total of 481 pages,
    not 984 pages as stated by the judge.  In any event, I also sympathised
    with the judge who had so much information before her  and  the  issues
    had not been properly honed to assist her.

6.   The grounds for renewal on which permission was granted amounted to  34
    paragraphs.  Ms Walker put them into three distinct challenges.

7.   The first challenge which I accept was that the judge materially  erred
    by failing to adequately engage with the evidence of ongoing harassment
    of the appellant's parents by the local police, after 2011.  The  judge
    found that the evidence was slender, unconvincing and sparse.  However,
    the judge failed to make a finding on the letter from the local lawyer,
    Mr P A Punethanayagam, regarding the ongoing enquiries whom  the  judge
    at paragraph 30 had described as a respectable local lawyer.

8.   The judge attached little weight to the letter sent by the  appellant's
    father to the Human Rights Commission of Sri  Lanka  seemingly  on  the
    basis that the letter did not mention that he was  detained  or  beaten
    and did  not  mention  that  he  had  been  shown  photographs  of  the
    appellant.  Ms Walker said that in his witness statement, the appellant
    gave an explanation as to why that evidence that been omitted, but  the
    judge did not consider it.

9.   The second challenge was in  respect  of  the  appellant's  profile  or
    perceived profile in the UK and the diaspora and his  involvement  with
    the TGTE.   At paragraph 25, the judge  recorded  the  evidence  of  Mr
    Yogalingam who is an MP of the TGTE.  I accept Ms  Walker's  submission
    that the judge incorrectly recorded Mr Yogalingam's evidence  that  the
    appellant was a coordinator in the TGTE.

10.  I also accept Ms Walker's submission that the judge  failed  to  engage
    with the evidence in bundle  C  of  the  appellant's  involvement  with
    diaspora activities.  Had she done so she would not have described  the
    appellant as being  a  foot  soldier  in  the  TGTE.   The  appellant's
    evidence was that he was a separatist and was identified as such.   His
    name  has  been  published  in  international  media,  articles  and  a
    screenshot on YouTube in respect of his association with  the  TGTE  in
    calling for the establishment of Tamil Eelam.  The evidence shows  that
    the appellant has been critical of the human rights record of  the  Sri
    Lankan government.  This was  a  profile  which  the  judge  failed  to
    properly engage with.

11.  The third challenge was in respect of the judge's  assessment  of  risk
    on return.  I accept Ms Walker's submission that the  judge  failed  to
    consider the significance of the visits made by the local police to the
    appellant's home.  She failed  to  engage  with  submissions  that  the
    appellant's profile, detention and release on the payment  of  a  bribe
    could lead to him being at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

12.  Mr Bramble in short submitted that the appellant had a profile  from  a
    previous appeal which the judge forgot about.  The judge did  not  take
    into account the letter from the attorney.  Mr  Bramble  accepted  that
    the appellant has a public profile as recorded in paragraphs 19  to  21
    of the grounds in relation to his activities in the UK which the  judge
    has not really considered.

13.  In the light of the above submissions I find that the judge's  decision
    discloses material errors of law such that her decision cannot stand.

14.  The judge's decision is set aside in order to be re-made.

15.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Taylor House for rehearing  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Goodman.


Signed                                  Date:  28 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

