

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02722/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 25 May 2017                              |On: 05 June 2017             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Haywood, instructed by Jein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  RM's  appeal  against  the
decision to refuse her protection claim and  granting  her  only  restricted
leave to remain.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and RM as the appellant,  reflecting  their  positions  as
they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 5  October  1986,  of  Tamil
ethnicity. She arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  25  November  2012  and
claimed asylum at the airport. On 3 November 2014  she  was  excluded  under
Article 1F(a) and 1F(c) of the Refugee Convention  but  was  granted  a  six
month period of restricted leave, valid until 2 May 2015. On 30  April  2015
the appellant submitted an in-time application  for  further  leave.  On  27
October 2015 the exclusion was maintained under Article 1F(a) only  and  the
appellant was granted a further six month period of restricted  leave  until
27 April 2016.

The appellant appealed against that decision and her  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 8 and 16 March 2016 and was  dismissed  by  Judge
Beg in a decision promulgated on 1 April  2016.  Judge  Beg's  decision  was
subsequently set aside in the  Upper  Tribunal  on  25  July  2016  and  was
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  afresh  by  a  different
judge. The appeal was then heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot  on  19
December 2016 and was allowed, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  11  January
2017. The Secretary of State sought, and was granted  permission  to  appeal
Judge Talbot's decision. Permission was granted on 8 March 2017.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant joined the LTTE in  December  2002,  after  returning  to  her
village in Trincomalee during the  ceasefire.  Between  2002  and  2004  she
delivered letters and parcels for the LTTE, although she did  not  know  the
contents, and in 2004 she joined the  intelligence  wing  of  the  LTTE  and
received special training which involved passing messages, contacting  other
members and using code words. Between 2004 and 2005 she  passed  information
to the LTTE about army movements and Karuna group movements  and  passed  on
the names of people giving tips to the army.  Some  members  of  the  Karuna
group she had informed on were taken by the LTTE  for  punishment  and  were
kept in LTTE custody for indefinite periods and put  in  dark  cells.  Those
that had committed atrocities such as extortion,  killings  and  rapes  were
given the death sentence. Some of the members of the public she informed  on
were put in jail. The appellant said that she was  aware  that  some  people
were detained and some were executed but she did not know the  details.  She
continued to work for the intelligence group of the LTTE  after  she  became
aware of the punishments they carried out, and until 2007, after which  time
she lost contact with the LTTE due to the eastern province falling into  the
hands of the army. Between 2007 and 2008 she worked for an NGO. On  4  April
2011 she was arrested at home by the army and held in detention  in  Colombo
for 10 days, where she was questioned, ill-treated, physically and  verbally
abused and raped. She was released after  her  father  sought  help  from  a
lawyer and an MP and reported weekly  to  the  police.  She  applied  for  a
student visa to come to the UK in August 2011 but was  refused.  Her  father
was beaten to death on 19 November 2011 and her  mother  sent  her  to  live
with her uncle in Trincomalee. Intelligence officers often came to her  home
and demanded that her mother disclose her whereabouts. On 10 July  2012  she
received a call informing her that her mother and sister  were  dead.  On  3
October 2012 the appellant was arrested again at her aunt's  house  and  was
again ill-treated  in  detention  including  being  raped  and  burned  with
cigarettes. Her uncle secured her release by paying  a  bribe  and  she  was
released on 19 November 2012, following which he arranged for her  to  leave
the country. The appellant stated that she feared being arrested,  detained,
tortured and killed if she returned to Sri Lanka.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, noted that the  LTTE  had
been responsible for a wide range of war crimes and crimes against  humanity
and  for  the  persecution  of  its  opponents  throughout  Sri  Lanka.  The
respondent had regard to Article 7 of the Rome Statute in regard  to  crimes
against humanity and to Article 8 in regard to war  crimes.  The  respondent
set out the provisions of Article 1F(a) of the Refugee  Convention  and  the
relevant test in JS (Sri Lanka), R (on the application of)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2010] UKSC 15  and  applied  them  to
the appellant's case, considering that the appellant had  knowledge  of  the
crimes the LTTE were committing and  that  she  intended  to  contribute  to
their  commission.  The  respondent  considered  that  the   appellant   had
knowledge that the LTTE punished  and  indefinitely  detained  some  of  the
people against whom she gathered information  and  reported  and  was  aware
that  some  people  were  executed.  The  respondent  considered  that   the
appellant intended to contribute to the commission  of  these  crimes  since
she continued to work  for  the  LTTE  even  after  becoming  aware  of  the
punishments they carried out. The respondent therefore considered  that  the
appellant acted with knowledge and intent and  that  she  knowingly  made  a
significant contribution both individually and as part of a  joint  criminal
enterprise to various Article 7 crimes against humanity and  Article  8  war
crimes and thus met the test in JS and ought to be  excluded  under  Article
1F(a) of the Refugee Convention. The respondent conceded that there were  no
grounds for her exclusion under Article 1F(c) as  previously  believed.  The
respondent  considered  that  there  were  also   reasonable   grounds   for
considering that the appellant was a danger to the security of  the  UK  and
that Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention was engaged. On the basis  that
Article 1F(a) and Article  33(2)  were  applicable  to  the  appellant,  the
respondent issued a certificate that she was not entitled to the  protection
of Article 33(1) of the Refugee Convention and  refused  her  asylum  claim.
The appellant was also  excluded  from  being  considered  as  eligible  for
humanitarian protection. It was considered, however, that the appellant  was
at risk of suffering treatment contrary to Article 3  of  the  ECHR  and  on
that basis she was granted a period of restricted leave to remain.

The appellant appealed  against  that  decision  on  the  grounds  that  the
respondent had failed to meet the burden of proving that there were  serious
grounds for considering  that  she  had  committed  war  crimes  and  crimes
against humanity in the period during which she worked  as  an  intelligence
agent for the LTTE. It was  asserted  in  the  grounds  that  the  appellant
denied that she knowingly and intentionally participated in war crimes  and/
or crimes against humanity. Whilst she was aware that those  apprehended  by
the LTTE were subjected to punishment it was  her  understanding  that  that
was after a formal hearing. It  was  asserted  further  that  there  was  no
evidential basis for the  respondent's  invocation  of  Article  33(2).  The
appellant maintained that the removal of herself, her dependent son and  his
father would be in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.


The appellant's appeal was initially  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Beg. The appellant gave evidence that she did not  attend  the  LTTE  formal
hearings but she had heard that the LTTE conducted enquiries and that  there
were court hearings. She believed that the hearings were fair  hearings,  to
find out the truth. Her only direct knowledge  about  LTTE's  legal  avenues
came from a land dispute concerning her uncle's land which had  been  fairly
resolved by the LTTE. She did not know  what  happened  to  the  people  she
informed on. Judge Beg did not accept the appellant's evidence, she did  not
find it credible that the appellant was unaware that war crimes  were  being
committed by the LTTE and she did not accept the appellant's account of  the
LTTE conducting a fair legal system. She upheld the  respondent's  exclusion
decision and dismissed the appeal.


Judge Beg's decision was set aside on the basis that she  had  reversed  the
burden of proof by expecting the appellant to prove her case.


The appellant's appeal then came before the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard
afresh. Judge Talbot heard the appeal on 19 December  2016.  He  heard  from
the appellant. The appellant's evidence before Judge  Talbot  was  that  she
had never herself witnessed any atrocities or other abuses by the LTTE.  She
saw the LTTE as providing assistance to local civilians and was  aware  that
they ran charities and orphanages. She said that they had set  up  a  system
of courts with appointed judges and had a police force and she  gave  as  an
example when her uncle  went  to  court  because  of  a  land  dispute.  She
believed that the courts operated fairly to establish  someone's  punishment
if found guilty. She had only been 17 when she started helping the LTTE  and
she did not hold any rank in the intelligence  wing  but  simply  passed  on
information and delivered parcels and messages. She  believed  that  members
of the Karuna Group behaved badly and were responsible  for  sexual  attacks
and seizure of property and she was prepared to pass on  intelligence  about
them because she believed their activities posed a threat to  the  LTTE  and
caused serious harm to civilians. She knew that members of the Karuna  Group
could be held for long periods in dark cells and  she  was  aware  that  the
death sentence could be carried out, but she did not know what  happened  to
the particular people she informed on. She  was  not  aware  that  the  LTTE
administered torture or that the people on whom she had informed  would  not
be  subject  to  proper  court  procedures.  If  she  had  known  that   the
information she revealed would lead to the  people  being  tortured  or  not
being  treated  fairly  by  the  court  she  would  not  have  provided  the
information. It was only in 2009 towards the end of the war that  she  heard
that the LTTE were accused of being a terrorist organisation.

Judge Talbot considered that the appellant had been clear and consistent  in
what she had said about her state of knowledge at the time she  was  helping
the LTTE. He found her evidence of her belief that there was a proper  legal
system in place within the LTTE to be plausible in light of the  documentary
evidence produced and concluded that  the  respondent  had  been  unable  to
demonstrate that the appellant would have been aware of  practices  such  as
torture being carried out against the people she informed  on  or  that  the
court process was carried out in an arbitrary or summary fashion.  He  found
that the respondent had failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof  to  show
that there were serious grounds for considering that the appellant  had  the
requisite knowledge and intention to establish her  criminal  liability  for
the crimes  committed  by  the  LTTE.  The  judge  found  further  that  the
respondent had provided no evidence to support  the  view  that  there  were
reasonable grounds for regarding the appellant as a danger to  the  security
of the UK. He concluded that the respondent was not entitled to exclude  the
appellant from the full protection of the Refugee Convention  and  that  the
appellant was at risk of persecution and entitled to the protection  of  the
Refugee Convention. He allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.

The respondent sought permission to appeal Judge Talbot's  decision  on  the
basis that the judge had  materially  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
appellant should not  be  excluded  from  the  Refugee  Convention.  It  was
asserted in the grounds that the judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons
for finding the appellant's role in the intelligence wing of  the  LTTE  did
not lead to crimes against  humanity  and  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
consider the appellant's narrative against the backdrop  of  the  background
material. The fact that the appellant thought that there was a legal  system
in place did not provide a defence to a crime  against  humanity.  What  was
relevant was that the appellant was aware that those she  gave  intelligence
on could be subject to punishment and  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
that. The judge failed to make proper findings on what the appellant did  or
did not know in relation to how the LTTE treated those who were detained.


Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
was subsequently granted in the Upper  Tribunal  on  8  March  2017  on  the
grounds that the judge's assessment of exclusion was arguably inadequate.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before me on 25 May 2017. Both parties made submissions.  Mr
Wilding objected to the admission by Mr Haywood of  an  unreported  decision
from the Upper Tribunal (AA/01049/2008).  I  noted  that  the  decision  had
already been referred to by the First-tier Tribunal  and  therefore  advised
the parties that I was aware of its contents, but that I  would  not  accord
it any particular weight given its unreported status.

Mr Wilding submitted that the judge's decision  was  wholly  inadequate  and
only dealt with the relevant issue in one paragraph, [17], with the rest  of
the decision simply setting  out  the  background.  He  submitted  that  the
appellant had passed on intelligence about those acting  against  the  LTTE,
namely members of the Karuna group and civilians, resulting in those  people
being detained and executed, and that it was no answer to say that  the  key
question was whether it seemed plausible that the claims of a  proper  legal
system would have been accepted by someone like  the  appellant.  There  had
been no consideration by the judge as to why a  terrorist  organisation  had
the standing to  hand  down  judgment  in  a  criminal  matter.  Mr  Wilding
submitted that there had been a complete disregard  for  the  key  question,
the JS test, namely whether there were serious reasons for considering  that
the appellant had voluntarily  contributed  in  a  significant  way  to  the
prosecution of crimes against humanity. The judge had failed to make  proper
findings in that regard. It  was  not  clear  if  he  was  saying  that  the
appellant's explanation amounted to a defence, whereas it was no defence  to
say that she thought there was a legal process, since the LTTE was  not  the
state.

Mr Haywood, in his submissions, said that the crucial question  was  whether
the appellant had the required mens rea and the judge  properly  found  that
she did not. Whatever  its  international  status,  the  LTTE  was  a  quasi
government entity administering significant areas of Sri Lanka  and  had  an
obligation to operate a legal system, which it did. The judge accepted  that
the appellant had no  awareness  that  the  LTTE  tortured  people  and  she
regarded  them  as  a  legitimate  entity.  The   judge   directed   himself
appropriately in regard to actus  rea  and  mens  rea  and  the  burden  and
standard of proof. His findings of fact were not challenged.  He  found  the
appellant's evidence consistent and found that what she believed to  be  the
case was plausible in the context of the  background  material.  Mr  Haywood
relied   on   the   unreported   case   of    Sinnathamby    Sivanantharajan
(AA/01049/2008). He submitted that there was neither the actus rea  nor  the
mens rea and the judge was entitled to conclude as he did.


Mr Wilding, in response, submitted  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
judge's findings of fact because no findings had  actually  been  made.  The
judge had simply found the appellant's evidence to be  consistent,  but  had
made no findings on credibility and no findings on the background  material.
The judge made no finding on actus rea and in any event the appellant  could
not succeed on that basis. With regard  to  mens  rea,  the  judge  did  not
answer the questions  forming  the  test  in  JS.  Mr  Hawood  responded  by
submitting that the judge had made clear findings and had  clearly  accepted
the appellant's evidence.

Legislative Framework

Article 1F of the Refugee Convention states as follows:

    "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any  person  with
    respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
    (a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war  crime,  or  a  crime
    against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn  up
    to make provision in respect of such crimes;
    (b) he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the  country
    of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee;
    (c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and  principles
    of the United Nations"

The relevant legislative framework in Article 7 of the Rome Statute  of  the
International Criminal Court, which defines crimes of humanity, and  Article
8 of the Rome Statute which defines war crimes, is set out at [16]  to  [20]
of the refusal decision.

Article 30 of the Rome Statute sets out the Mental element as follows:


    1. Unless otherwise provided, a person shall be criminally  responsible
       and liable for punishment for a crime within the jurisdiction of the
       Court only if the material elements are committed  with  intent  and
       knowledge.


    2. For the purposes of this article, a person has intent where:
       (a) In relation to conduct, that  person  means  to  engage  in  the
       conduct;
        (b) In relation to a consequence, that person means to  cause  that
       consequence or is aware that it will occur in the ordinary course of
       events.
     3.
       For the purposes of this article, 'knowledge' means awareness that a
       circumstance exists  or a consequence will  occur  in  the  ordinary
       course  of  events.  'Know'  and  'knowingly'  shall  be   construed
       accordingly."

The Supreme Court in JS, when focussing  on  the  mental  element,  held  as
follows:
   1. "Of course, criminal responsibility would only attach  to  those  with
      the necessary mens rea (mental element). But, as article 30 of the ICC
      Statute makes plain, if a person is aware that in the ordinary  course
      of events a particular consequence will follow from his actions, he is
      taken to have acted with both knowledge and intent. (I would for  this
      reason  reject  the  respondent's  criticism  of  the  omission   from
      paragraph 21 of the German court's judgment of any separate  reference
      to intent; that  ingredient  of  criminal  responsibility  is  already
      encompassed within the Court's existing formulation).
   1. Similarly, and I think consistently with this,  the  ICTY  Chamber  in
      Tadic defines mens rea in  a  way  which  recognises  that,  when  the
      accused  is  participating  in  (in  the  sense  of  assisting  in  or
      contributing to) a common plan or purpose, not necessarily  to  commit
      any specific or identifiable crime but to further  the  organisation's
      aims by committing article  1F  crimes  generally,  no  more  need  be
      established than that the accused had personal knowledge of such  aims
      and intended to contribute to their commission.
   1. Returning to the judgment below with these considerations in  mind,  I
      have to say that paragraph 119 does seem to  me  too  narrowly  drawn,
      appearing to confine article 1F liability essentially to just the same
      sort of joint criminal enterprises  as  would  result  in  convictions
      under domestic law. Certainly para 119 is all too easily read as being
      directed to specific identifiable crimes rather than, as to my mind it
      should be, wider concepts of common design, such as the accomplishment
      of an organisation's purpose by whatever means are necessary including
      the commission of war crimes. Put simply,  I  would  hold  an  accused
      disqualified under  article  1F  if  there  are  serious  reasons  for
      considering him voluntarily to have contributed in a  significant  way
      to the organisation's ability to pursue its purpose of committing  war
      crimes, aware that his assistance will in fact further that purpose. "
The last section, which I have highlighted, is considered as the JS test.

 Consideration and findings.

It seems to me that a significant part of  the  criticism  levelled  at  the
judge's decision is its brevity. There is,  indeed,  some  justification  in
such  a  criticism,  particularly  as  exclusion  cases  such  as  this  are
difficult and involve complex  legal  principles,  and  the  judge's  actual
findings were restricted to a limited  number  of  paragraphs.  However  the
issues in the appellant's case were in fact  fairly  narrow,  in  that  they
largely consisted of an assessment of the appellant's credibility  and  thus
the focus of the judge's findings, and the basis of his  decision,  was  the
question of her knowledge and intent.

Whilst Mr Haywood sought briefly to raise the issue  of  actus  reus  as  an
alternative, there was little attraction in that argument, and it  is  clear
that  the  judge's  decision  turned  on  the  question  of  mens  rea,  the
appellant's knowledge and intent, and that that was the determinative  issue
in her case.

The question for me, therefore, is  whether  the  judge's  findings  on  the
appellant's knowledge and intent were properly made. The starting  point  is
the findings of fact made by the judge on the appellant's claimed  knowledge
and intent. Whilst Mr Haywood submitted that the Secretary of State had  not
challenged the judge's positive credibility findings,  it  is  Mr  Wilding's
submission that  the  judge  actually  made  no  findings  of  fact  on  the
appellant's evidence and the background evidence.  I  am  not  in  agreement
with Mr Wilding on that matter, although I can see  why  he  makes  such  an
argument, given that the judge did not specifically state that  he  accepted
the appellant's evidence. Nevertheless,  having  referred  at  [14]  to  the
relevant credibility issue it is clear that the judge went  on  to  consider
credibility in the following paragraphs, having regard at [15]  to  [17]  to
the  appellant's  claimed  knowledge  of  the  LTTE's  activities  and   the
existence of a functioning and fair legal system, referring at [15]  to  the
consistency of her  evidence  and  at  [17]  to  the  plausibility  of  that
evidence in the context of the  overall  circumstances  and  the  background
information. A plain reading of the judge's findings  at  [14]  to  [17]  is
that he did indeed accept her evidence  and  found  her  to  be  a  credible
witness.


Accordingly the judge accepted that, whilst the  appellant  was  aware  that
people on whom she  had  informed  could  be  liable  to  severe  punishment
including imprisonment in harsh conditions and even execution,  it  was  her
understanding that such punishments was meted out only after  a  formal  and
fair legal process in  which  there  was  proper  legal  representation  and
properly appointed judges and only after they  had  been  found  guilty.  He
also accepted the appellant's claim to have no  knowledge  of  people  being
tortured whilst in  LTTE  custody  and  that  if  she  had  known  that  the
information she gave would have led to torture or unfair  treatment  by  the
court she would not have provided the information.


The respondent's grounds  assert  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  proper
reasons for coming to such a conclusion and that such a  narrative  was  not
considered against the backdrop of the background material  relied  upon  in
the refusal decision. However the judge plainly  did  consider  the  country
evidence and he referred to it at [17], albeit not in any great  detail.  He
provided reasons why he considered that the appellant could  plausibly  have
held the beliefs that she did, accepting Mr Haywood's  submission  that  she
would have had a very polarised view of the conflict  given  her  youth  and
the perceptions of people in  the  village.  Mr  Haywood's  submissions,  as
recorded by the judge at [11], referred to the perceived status of the  LTTE
in villages such  as  the  appellant's  where  they  were  regarded  as  the
liberators and legitimate representatives of the Tamil people and  as  a  de
facto state  controlling  that  part  of  the  country.  The  judge  clearly
accepted that to be the case on the basis of  the  country  evidence  before
him, as he said at [17], and thus  found  plausibility  in  the  appellant's
claim as regards her knowledge and intent.


Criticism is made of the judge's reliance at  [17]  upon  partisan  evidence
emanating from the LTTE about  their  legal  system.  It  was  Mr  Wilding's
submission that the appellant's belief about a legal system being  in  place
did not provide a defence against  crimes  of  humanity,  particularly  when
that legal system was not one set up and recognised by  the  state.  However
the point being made by  the  judge  was  not  that  there  was  necessarily
legitimacy in the LTTE's legal system but that  the  appellant's  perception
of a fair legal process was a credible one and was a relevant  consideration
in assessing her knowledge. He noted that she had  had  some  experience  of
the court system as a result of a  land  dispute  in  which  her  uncle  was
involved and accepted that that may have reinforced her belief in the  legal
system administered by the LTTE. It was the judge's  conclusion,  therefore,
that this further lent plausibility to the appellant's claim as regards  her
knowledge and intent in relation to the punishments meted out  to  those  on
whom she had informed. I see no reason why the judge  was  not  entitled  to
reach such a conclusion.


Mr Wilding submitted further that the judge had  not  applied  the  relevant
test in JS, but I do not agree. Although the judge produced a  long  extract
from the case without any apparent analysis at [13], it is clear  from  [14]
that  he  was  aware  of  the  relevant  considerations  in  that  case,  he
identified that the burden of proof lay upon the respondent and he  set  out
the correct test for considering exclusion under Article 1(F) and then  went
on to apply that to the evidence, giving his conclusion at the end of [17].


Accordingly, whilst the judge's conclusions are brief it seems  to  me  that
he took account of all relevant matters and provided clear findings  on  why
he reached the conclusions that he did.  The  conclusions  that  he  reached
were, in my view, reasonably and  properly  open  to  him  on  the  evidence
before him.

For all of these reasons I conclude  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  The  sole
challenge in the grounds is to  the  judge's  findings  on  exclusion  under
Article 1F(a) of the Refugee  Convention.  There  is  no  challenge  to  his
decision  neither  under  Article  33(2)  nor  on  his  finding  as  to  the
appellant's  entitlement  to  protection  under  the   Refugee   Convention.
Accordingly the judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal  on  asylum
grounds is upheld.

DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a  point  of
law. I do not set aside the decision. The decision to allow the  appellant's
appeal therefore stands.



    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  I  maintain  that
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 2 June
2017
