
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02781/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2018                             |On 13 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Osman [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Chaudry, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant was born on 1 January  1985  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Sudan.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Manchester) against a decision of the Secretary of State  refusing  him
    international protection.  That decision is  dated  11  February  2018.
    The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on  18  April  2018,
    allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Manchester relied upon the existing country guidance case  of  AA
    (Non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00056.   The
    Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Paramor sought to
    persuade the judge in his  submissions  to  depart  from  that  country
    guidance.  The judge  declined  that  invitation  and  found  that  the
    country guidance case of AA should be followed and that  the  appellant
    as a non-Arab Darfuri, would be at risk  anywhere  within  Sudan.   The
    grounds assert that the judge  misunderstood  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note (CPIN) which was published in August 2017  upon  which
    the Secretary of State sought to rely.  The judge had failed  "to  look
    at the evidence  holistically".   The  CPIN  shows,  according  to  the
    Secretary of State, that the situation with non-Arab Darfuris in  Sudan
    has improved while there remained a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  for
    those with political profile there was no longer  a  risk  of  anything
    more than societal discrimination on  the  basis  of  non-Arab  Darfuri
    ethnicity alone.

 3. The judge correctly directed himself  that  he  should  rely  upon  the
    country guidance of AA unless there were  good  reasons  for  departing
    from it.  At [31] he wrote:

         "In this case, although I  have  studied  with  care  the  skeleton
         argument and the evidence quoted within it, it is right, that it is
         largely based on the guidance for decision makers in  the  CPIN  of
         August 2017 and in turn is stated to be  substantially  sourced  in
         the joint report of the Danish  Immigration  Service  and  UK  Home
         Office  Fact-Finding  Missions  of  February  -  March  2016.   The
         significance of this is that, although it is stated to postdate the
         country guidance case of MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015]  UKUT  00010
         (IAC) it can only be on the basis of evidence  allegedly  ...  only
         twelve months after the country guidance case was promulgated which
         I find questionable given the fact of the persecution of  the  non-
         Arab Darfuris by the Sudanese government has  been  an  issue  over
         many years."

 4. The judge concluded [32] that "the evidence presented to me in the form
    of the skeleton  argument  does  not  amount  to  very  strong  grounds
    supported by cogent  evidence  justifying  a  departure  from  guidance
    offered by the country guidance cases [of AA and MM]".  Earlier in  the
    decision [29] the judge had found that the appellant had failed to show
    that he would be exposed to a real risk of persecution  on  account  of
    being perceived as a threat as a political  opponent  to  the  Sudanese
    government.

 5. The judge has found  that  the  evidence  contained  in  the  CPIN  was
    insufficient, without more, to displace the country guidance.   He  has
    given a clear and intelligible reason for that finding, namely that the
    fact-finding report upon which the CPIN  is  based  was  produced  only
    twelve months after the Upper Tribunal had found that  non-Darfuris  in
    Sudan were at risk.  The judge was not persuaded that circumstances had
    changed in such a short period of time following the  country  guidance
    decision.  For the reason he has  given,  I  find  that  the  judge  is
    entitled to rely upon the country guidance.  I am  not  satisfied  that
    his refusal to depart from the country guidance amounts to an error  of
    law for  the  reason  given  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  or  at  all.
    Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 10 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

