
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02382/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 October 2016                   |On 31 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                       Mr Iroshan Illanag Don Lalindra
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and his  date  of  birth  is  8
    August 1985.  He made an application for asylum that was refused by the
    Secretary of State in a decision of 23 February 2016.  The Secretary of
    State refuses his application. The appellant appealed  and  his  appeal
    was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Baldwin  following  a
    hearing on 18 August 2016.  The decision was promulgated on  26  August
    2016.

2.   The appellant case can be summarised. He  witnessed  the  abduction  of
    his cousin, Arul.  The matter was then  reported  to  the  police,  who
    arrested and charged an individual.  Following  this  Arul's  wife  was
    threatened by two men who put pressure on her to drop  the  case.   The
    appellant  provided  a  statement  to  the  LLRC  (Lessons  Learnt  and
    Reconciliation Committee) on 16 June 2010 following the abduction.   He
    made a statement to the police but his account was that  they  did  not
    act on this.  The appellant was detained and mistreated on 2 July  2010
    and then released and placed on reporting conditions.   He  provided  a
    more detailed statement to the LLRC on 13 August 2010.  He came to  the
    UK on 7 September 2010 and did not continue to report as he should have
    done.  On 30 March 2011 the  police  attended  his  home  in  order  to
    execute an arrest warrant and the appellant's mother was  arrested  and
    detained for a period of five  days.   Four  days  before  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  produced  documents  in
    support of his appeal, namely a letter from an attorney in  Sri  Lanka,
    and photocopies of two summonses and an arrest warrant.

3.   The appellant came to the UK as a  Tier  4  dependant  on  7  September
    2010.

4.   Judge Baldwin made the following findings;

         "2.  Mr Bassi sought an adjournment in order that  the  genuineness
             of the Summonses and Warrant provided  very  recently  by  the
             Appellant could be verified by RALON checking with the Issuing
             Police Station in Sri Lanka.  Whilst I was  aware  that  there
             would be some situations where a local check could properly be
             made with an organisation no member of which  was  an  alleged
             actor of persecution, Article 22 of the Council  Directive  of
             2005 on Asylum Procedures appeared to preclude an approach  to
             the  police  in  a  claim  such  as  that  of  the  Appellant.
             Furthermore, whatever steps were  taken  by  RALON  to  delete
             particulars of the Appellant's name in  any  enquiry,  it  was
             self-evident that if the documents in  question  were  genuine
             the subject's name would  immediately  become  apparent.   Not
             only would such an enquiry appear to be in breach  of  Article
             22 and Rule 339IA, there was a real risk that an enquiry might
             trigger an interest in the Appellant that might not have  been
             present before and possibly put at risk close relatives  still
             in Sri Lanka.  There would also  be  a  real  possibility  the
             police would say that  a  non-genuine  document  was  in  fact
             genuine so as to increase the likelihood of him being returned
             and to allow him to be so as to increase the likelihood of him
             being returned and to allow him to be  questioned  as  to  why
             Ralon were making enquiries about him.  Whilst Mr  Martin  did
             not oppose the adjournment request, I was not  satisfied  that
             it would be proper to grant an  adjournment  for  the  purpose
             sought and I was satisfied  that  it  was  fair  and  just  to
             proceed.


         16.  The Appellant and his wife  provided  brief  Statements  which
             they adopted orally in Sinhalese, neither being content to use
             English.  She states she was not married to Don  when  he  was
             detained but did know something of the  history  and  she  had
             thought it was a good idea for him to go to LRRC,  given  that
             it had been set up by  the  Government.   She  had  agreed  he
             should continue trying to help his cousin but also thought  it
             was a good idea for her to get on with  her  applications  for
             studies to help him get away for  a  bit.   After  failing  to
             answer a question repeatedly put relating to roughly when  she
             first learned of  the  existence  of  the  summonses  and  the
             Warrant, she asked for time to think about it.  I allowed  her
             to do so and she then said she learned of the  summonses  from
             his mother soon after January/February 2011 and in March  2011
             her mother mentioned a  warrant.   He  provided  copies  of  2
             summonses, dated 5.1.11 and 20.1.11 respectively, for  him  to
             attend Court  on  20.1.11  and  8.2.11  respectively,  plus  a
             warrant dated 5.3.11 relating to  his  failure  to  appear  at
             court on 8.2.11.  The Appellant told me he could  not  provide
             the originals because the original of neither type of document
             is left.  He also provided a letter from his solicitors to  an
             Attorney  in  Wattala  which  asks  for  11  questions  to  be
             addressed, but it is clear that the Attorney's letter was  not
             written in response to Nag Law's letter because the former pre-
             dates the latter.  The Appellant told  me  he  was  unable  to
             provide this correspondence until very  recently  because  the
             Attorney had changed his address and telephone number  and  he
             had chosen to rely on his mother to pursue this  and  she  was
             quite old.  The letter from the Attorney makes it  clear  that
             it is written in response to instructions from the Appellant's
             brother.  The summonses and warrant are the  certified  copies
             he obtained.  The Attorney states he  believes  the  Appellant
             would be arrested on return and the outcome 'quite  pathetic'.
             The Appellant's mother, he states, was detained for 5 days and
             released on one year's reporting conditions,  though  he  does
             not indicate whether he acted for her in this  regard  or  had
             any personal knowledge of this, or was relying solely on  what
             the Appellant's brother had told him, though in respect of his
             assertion he acted for  the  Appellant  in  July  2010  he  is
             clearly holding that out as personal knowledge.  He attaches a
             Bar Association Card issued on 27.9.13 which records the  same
             address as that on his August 2016 headed notepaper.  He makes
             no mention of any  reason  for  the  delay  in  the  Appellant
             causing him to be approached for assistance.


         21.  The onus of proving the documents the Appellant  has  provided
             are genuine is  on  the  Appellant.   That  issue  has  to  be
             considered in the context of the evidence as a whole  and  the
             Appellant's lack of opposition to the Respondent's request  to
             check  the  genuineness  of  the  documents.   That  said,   a
             represented  Appellant  would   presumably   know   that   the
             Respondent would probably be acting in breach  of  Article  22
             and Rule 339IA if she acted upon this and that if she did  so,
             even if there were not a real risk before, it  might  well  be
             possible to argue a real risk after the Sri Lankan authorities
             were approached.


         22.  The Appellant is not a Tamil and he has never  supported  LTTE
             or the Tamil cause.  Nor has he demonstrated in the UK against
             the Sri Lankan Government during the 70  months  he  has  been
             here.  On  the  face  of  it  he  would  therefore  hardly  be
             perceived to be supportive of the Tamil cause.   However,  the
             issue in this case is whether he did  file  a  Statement  with
             LLRC in mid-2010,  ostensibly  because  the  police  were  not
             acting upon the report he made to the police about his brother-
             in-law being abducted on 6.2.08.  He has not provided  a  copy
             of the Statement he says he made to LLRC nor, more tellingly I
             find, a single piece of correspondence  from  them  concerning
             the complaint.  Furthermore, at Interview  he  made  it  clear
             that the police did act upon his report because they not  only
             identified the owner of the phone who made  the  ransom  call,
             they also arrested that man and  put  him  before  the  court.
             That strongly suggests that the police  were  satisfied  there
             was a prima facie case against the Arrestee and that they were
             satisfied that the Arrestee was not acting as an agent of  the
             authorities.  He stated that, following  intimidation  of  the
             abductee's wife, she withdrew the case,  but  hat  would  seem
             implausible as she was not a witness to the abduction and  was
             at home in Negambo when the Appellant and his brother-in-law's
             brother reported what the two of them had witnessed.  If there
             was a court appearance by the Arrestee, as the first Appellant
             claims, and it was later withdrawn, then  there  should  be  a
             record of this in the Court's Register but no extract has been
             provided.


         23.  I turn next to the two summonses and the warrant provided at a
             very late stage in a Bundle  not  submitted  until  just  four
             working days before the Hearing.  In this  regard,  the  first
             Appellant faces not  inconsiderable  obstacles.   Firstly,  he
             made it very clear  in  Interview  that  he  had  no  evidence
             whatsoever of a warrant ever having been issued.  If he had no
             evidence but could see a possible way of  obtaining  it,  then
             that would have been the time to say that and to  explain  why
             he had not already taken steps to obtain it, given  that  four
             months had already passed since he claimed asylum.   Secondly,
             he faces the difficulty that his wife made it clear  that  she
             knew of the existence of both the summonses and the warrant in
             the first quarter of 2011,  soon  after  they  were  allegedly
             issued.  If this were so and they were genuine,  the  question
             which then arises is why it took 4.5 years to  get  around  to
             claiming asylum, an issue to which I now turn.


         24.  The Appellant maintains he was advised in, effect, not to both
             claiming asylum - relying instead on further applications as a
             dependant of his wife.  His evidence  has  not  been  entirely
             consistent about this, shifting from taking  advice  from  one
             solicitor, to taking advice from four solicitors over a  2-day
             period.  Whilst recognising  that  not  every  person  holding
             themselves out as having Immigration Law expertise does indeed
             have it, the Upper Tribunal has made it clear  that  where  an
             Appellant  maintains  that  a   previous   representative   is
             responsible for something which  is  being  held  against  the
             Appellant, that representative should be written to,  inviting
             their response - and that letter and any  response  should  be
             placed before the Tribunal - ('BT'  (Nepal)  at  paragraph  19
             ante).  There is no evidence to show that this was ever  done.
             Nor is there any evidence that efforts have been made  by  the
             Appellant or his representative to trace one or more of  them.
             I find it highly implausible, if the Appellant did take advice
             on this from one or more representatives, that he would not be
             able to remember one single  name  or  one  single  address  -
             (beyond the very vague indication of  two  of  them  being  in
             'East London').  I find it not credible that he ever did  take
             legal advice on this and this failure to do so is not  helpful
             to his general credibility.


         25.  I turn next to  the  very  late  submission  of  letters  from
             relatives and a Sri Lankan Attorney.  I find  the  Appellant's
             assertion that it took him many months to locate the  Attorney
             highly  implausible,  though  it  might,  of  course,  not  be
             implausible that it would take him many months to identify one
             who was content to  provide  doubtful  evidence.   It  is  not
             suggested that he forgot the name of an Attorney  he  says  he
             used years ago and it is, I find, simply not credible  that  -
             with or without the assistance of the U.K. solicitors who have
             been representing him since at least the  beginning  of  March
             2016 -  he  would  not  have  been  able  to  track  down  the
             whereabouts of  a  practising  Attorney  in  Sri  Lanka  quite
             quickly, with or without his mother's assistance.  It is  also
             clear that the Attorney's letter pre-dates the letter from Nag
             Law to him, as it is that the Attorney's letter was written on
             the basis of matters referred to in a 'telephone conversation'
             between the lawyers and information provided by the brother  a
             week earlier.  As the Attorney does not suggest he represented
             the Appellant's mother, it would appear  he  would  have  been
             reliant on the brother for  information  about  this  and  the
             Attorney mentions no personal knowledge he  has  of  it.   The
             question which arises is not just why all  this  evidence,  in
             the form of summonses, a warrant and letters from an  Attorney
             and several relatives was not provided  much  earlier:  it  is
             also why at least some of this was not obtained  in  the  four
             months between the time the Appellant finally  got  around  to
             claiming asylum and the date of his Interview.  If  the  claim
             were genuine, and they both clearly knew of the Summonses  and
             Warrant and representation of the Appellant by an Attorney  in
             Sri Lanka as far back as early 2011 - there should  have  been
             more than enough time to secure  documentary  proof  of  these
             matters before he was even interviewed.  The Appellant is  not
             some uneducated youth.  He was already 25 when he entered  the
             UK and he stated in Interview he was tri-lingual.  His wife is
             the same age and has spent years studying in the UK to  Degree
             Level.  Between them they should have been very well-placed to
             find out what to do  soon  after  they  became  aware  of  the
             summonses and a warrant if these are genuine.  When  all  this
             is considered alongside all the other evidence,  I  find  that
             these  documents  are  not  proven  to  be  genuine  and   the
             assertions of the Attorney cannot be relied upon.  There is  a
             complete absence of any corroborative documentation  from  the
             LLRC.  That Body may have been wound down some time  ago,  but
             it is hardly likely if a complaint were made to  it  that  the
             Appellant or his brother's brother-in-law or  the  wife  would
             not  have  retained  some  documentation  relating  thereto  -
             particularly if the husband  has  remained  missing  all  this
             time.  It is the involvement of the LLRC in the  investigation
             as to the disappearance of his brother which is at the  centre
             of this claim  -  and  a  failure  to  provide  any  documents
             relating  thereto  is,  I  find,  a  notable  failure  and  is
             significant.  The Appellant, I conclude, has not  proven  even
             to the low standard required that he is of adverse interest in
             Sri Lanka or that he has a well-founded fear of persecution or
             serious ill-treatment there, or that there is a case  for  the
             grant of Humanitarian protection.


         26.  No submissions were made in relation to Article 8.  The family
             would be returned together to a country which the parents left
             six years ago, where they have spent most of  their  life  and
             where their language of choice is spoken.  The child  is  only
             2,  and  evidence  of  their  lives  here  beyond  the  wife's
             apparently completed studies is notable for its absence.  They
             clearly have close relatives in Sri Lanka, and with all the UK
             Higher Education the wife has apparently  now  completed,  she
             should be very well equipped to undertake  work  at  a  higher
             level than she was when she left Sri Lanka.  The circumstances
             are far from being exceptional, their removal would be neither
             disproportionate nor unreasonable  and  it  would  be  in  the
             interests of effective  immigration  control.   The  claim  in
             respect of Articles 5, 6 and 14 have not been articulated  and
             are not made out."


Conclusions


5.   Paragraph 6 of the grounds argues that  the  respondent  had  a  viable
    route in respect of the verification of the documents and chose not  to
    follow it and the case  of  PJ  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 is relied upon (specifically paragraphs
    30, 31 and 32).  It is argued that it was not open to the Secretary  of
    State to mount a challenge to the documents  and  therefore  the  judge
    erred at [25] of his decision.  The Court of Appeal in PJ decided  that
    there is no rebuttable presumption that  documents  produced  in  these
    circumstances are reliable and that the relevant jurisprudence does  no
    more than indicate that in circumstances of  a  particular  case  there
    exceptionally necessitate an element of investigation by  the  national
    authorities, but that this will often be disproportionate, not feasible
    or unjustified.  There was no breach of obligation in  this  case  that
    would render the Secretary of State unable to mount a challenge  as  to
    the  documents  authenticity.   The  documents  were  not  before   the
    Secretary of State until four days before the  hearing  and  the  judge
    concluded that the enquiries envisaged by the  Home  Office  Presenting
    officer were not feasible for the reasons he  gave.   The  case  of  PJ
    turned on its own special facts which are readily distinguishable  from
    the facts of this case.  For the reasons given by the Court of  Appeal,
    in that case there was strong prima facie evidence of the authenticity,
    and hence reliability, of a warrant issued  by  a  Magistrate  for  the
    appellant's arrest, as two separate lawyers (one of whom  was  accepted
    by the UT Judge to be a bona fide lawyer) had retrieved a copy from the
    court file on two separate occasions.  The documents in this case  were
    not before the Secretary of State until four days prior to the hearing,
    the judge did not accept the reasons for the delay  and  the  enquiries
    envisaged by the Secretary of State were not feasible.

6.   There is no challenge in the grounds to the judge's decision to  refuse
    to adjourn the case.  There was no argument before me  that  there  was
    arguable procedural unfairness as a  result  of  the  decision  of  the
    judge.  It is clear that the  respondent  was  willing  to  attempt  to
    verify the documentation but the judge did not consider that the  route
    proposed by the Presenting Officer was a viable  route.   There  is  no
    challenge to this decision.

7.   The remaining challenges  are  in  my  view  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the judge. The appellant made two statements  to  the  LLRC
    and the judge was wholly entitled to take into account that he had  not
    produced a "single piece of correspondence concerning  the  complaint".
    He provided statements in June 2010 and in August 2010 and  in  between
    those two dates his account is that he was arrested.  The  LLRC  ceased
    to exist in November 2011 according to the appellant but this does  not
    give rise to an arguable error of law.

8.   The judge found that it was implausible that  Arul's  wife  could  have
    withdrawn the complaint as she had not witnessed the abduction.  It  is
    suggested in the grounds that as the next of kin she had the  power  to
    withdraw the complaint. Furthermore it is also argued  in  the  grounds
    that the judge was critical of the fact that there was no court  record
    of the proceedings involving the abduction but as the appellant was not
    a party to the proceedings he could not have obtained these.  The judge
    was entitled to conclude that Arul's wife could not  influence  matters
    as she was not a witness.  The  findings  were  entirely  open  to  the
    judge.  The appellant's case was that there was a  court  hearing  that
    was subsequently withdrawn and the judge was entitled to conclude  that
    it was reasonable to expect some corroborative evidence of this.  It is
    asserted that the judge was wrong to consider the  delay  in  obtaining
    documents damaging to the appellant's  credibility  with  reference  to
    [24] and it is argued that the judge  was  unrealistic  to  expect  the
    appellant to be able to obtain evidence  relating  to  previous  advice
    that had been given to him by solicitors or legal representatives.  The
    judge was manifestly entitled to take into account that  the  appellant
    had delayed, by a significant period of time,  in  claiming  asylum  as
    damaging to his credibility.  He was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's evidence about previous advice was not consistent.
9.   The judge was entitled to reject the appellant's evidence  in  relation
    to the delay in obtaining documents.  In relation to  the  letter  from
    the attorney the judge did not accept the appellant's evidence that  it
    had taken him many  months  to  locate  the  attorney  because  he  had
    forgotten the attorney's name.  Again this was a finding that was  open
    to the judge and one that was grounded in the evidence.  What weight to
    attach to the documents was a matter for the judge.   I  note  what  is
    said in the grounds about the letter and the date of the letter but the
    judge notes that the attorney referred to a telephone conversation with
    the appellant's solicitors.

10.  To summarise, the grounds  expanded  on  in  oral  submissions  by  the
    appellant's Counsel do not identify an arguable error of  law  and  the
    decision of the judge to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  is
    maintained.  The judge made findings that are grounded in the  evidence
    and adequately reasoned.  The grounds amount to a disagreement with the
    findings and an attempt to re-argue the case.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed. The decision of the FtT to dismiss  the
appeal on asylum grounds is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 27 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


