
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02712/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2017                            |On 20 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Namani instructed by Yemets Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.


Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Georgia who was born on 9 July 1969.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 26 February 2013 with his  wife  and  two
    children.  He had previously claimed asylum in France on  26  May  2009
    but that was refused on appeal on 16 July 2012.  The appellant and  his
    family then came to the UK clandestinely.

 3. The appellant's wife initially claimed  asylum  using,  as  it  is  now
    accepted, a false name and falsely claiming to be  a  Syrian  national.
    Her claim was refused on 15 January 2015.   She  subsequently  withdrew
    her appeal against that decision on 10 June 2015.

The Appellant's Claim

 4. The appellant then claimed asylum on 23 June 2015 with  his  family  as
    dependants.  The appellant claimed to be of the Ezidi religion and from
    Georgia.  He claimed that in April 2009, he and his wife were  attacked
    by a number of men, four of whom were policemen, when they were opening
    their shop because a business rival or  competitor  wanted  to  acquire
    their sought-after location.  The appellant and his wife were taken  to
    hospital  where  she  suffered  a  miscarriage.   The   appellant   was
    unconscious and  remained  hospitalised  for  twelve  days.   His  wife
    remained in hospital for fourteen days.  The police refused  to  attend
    when they were told the family's surname.

 5. Subsequently, the Prosecutor's Office and police failed to  investigate
    the matter.  The appellant was beaten and detained by  the  police  and
    only released after a bribe was paid by his wife.  They were told  that
    an allegation had been made that they had attacked  the  policeman  who
    had come to the shop and they were accused of selling contraband.

 6. Subsequently, their home was searched and, in the course of the search,
    a pistol and ammunition were found which the appellant claims  was  not
    his and had been "planted" by the police.  A warrant was issued for the
    appellant to attend the police station the next day but he did  not  do
    so hiding in a friend's house nearby where he stayed for two days until
    the family left Georgia on 14 May 2009.

 7. They travelled through Europe eventually arriving in France and claimed
    asylum.  Following the refusal in July 2012, the  appellant  asked  his
    father  to  enquire   whether   there   were   any   pending   criminal
    investigations against him.  When his father enquired, he was beaten up
    and hospitalised.  The appellant and his family then decided to come to
    the UK which they did with the aid of an  agent  who  advised  them  to
    claim to be Syrian nationals.

 8. The appellant remained in contact with his parents and they sent on  to
    the appellant court papers which, it is  claimed,  showed  that  on  19
    February 2014 the appellant had been prosecuted and  sentenced  in  his
    absence in Georgia to five years'  imprisonment  for  possession  of  a
    firearm and ammunition.   The  court  papers  had  been  given  to  his
    neighbours who passed them to his parents.

 9. The appellant claims that if he and his family returned to Georgia they
    were at risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment.

10. On 4 November 2015, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 14 June 2016, Judge M M Thomas dismissed the appellant's appeal
    on all grounds.  First, she did not accept that the  appellant  was  of
    the Ezidi religion.  Secondly, in any event, even if he were he had not
    established that there was a risk of persecution as an Ezidi on  return
    to Georgia.  Thirdly, the judge made an adverse credibility finding and
    rejected the appellant's account of past ill-treatment  including  that
    he had been convicted in his absence of a firearms offence.

12. The  judge  also  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

13. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal  but  on  8
    August 2016 the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  Rintoul)  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

14. On 31 August 2016, the Secretary of State filed a  rule  24  notice  as
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

15. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

16. The appellant relies upon essentially five grounds.

17. First, the judge was wrong to make an adverse finding  in  relation  to
    the appellant's claimed faith without considering the hospital  reports
    which were relevant to his general credibility and his  claim  of  past
    persecution.

18. Secondly, in considering the documents the judge was wrong to  conclude
    that they were not "authentic".  It was no  part  of  the  respondent's
    case that the documents were not genuine.

19. Thirdly, the judge was wrong to infer that the only explanation why the
    appellant had not submitted in translation a copy of  the  full  asylum
    decision in France was because what was therein set out  differed  from
    his factual account in this appeal.

20. Fourthly, in finding that the appellant was not of the Ezidi faith, the
    judge  did  not  find  persuasive  inconsistencies  in   his   evidence
    identified by the respondent and the judge's reason for  not  accepting
    his faith was unsustainable, namely that the evidence he  gave  to  the
    Tribunal as to his faith was "generic" and "basic".

21. Finally, the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's explanation, namely a change in President  in  Georgia  was
    the reason for the nearly five years delay in prosecuting the appellant
    for the alleged offence.

22.  On  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Richards   accepted   that   the
    determination could, perhaps, have been structured differently but,  he
    submitted, the judge had to take the points in some order and  she  had
    dealt with every piece of the evidence.  Her reasons were adequate  and
    she had clearly,  in  considering  the  documentation,  had  regard  to
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318.

23. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had  given  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the appellant had failed to establish his  faith  and,  in
    any event, she had found he would not be at risk even if he was  Ezidi.



24. Further, the judge was entitled to draw an adverse inference  from  the
    fact that  the  appellant  had  submitted  a  number  of  documents  in
    translation but had not submitted the asylum decision in France.

25.  Finally,  there  was  no  reliable  information  to  substantiate  the
    appellant's explanation for the delay in his being prosecuted.

Discussion

26. In considering a  judge's  determination  and  whether  it  is  legally
    flawed, it must be read as a whole.  It would, as a  general  rule,  be
    wrong to read it in a  compartmentalised  and  piece-meal  fashion.   A
    judge should generally be understood not to have embarked upon drafting
    a judgement without having well in mind the totally of the matters that
    he must deal with.   Necessarily, however, judges must deal with points
    and issues in some order.  The order in which  they  do  so  may  well,
    perhaps usually, not be crucial.  What is important is that  the  judge
    considers all the evidence relevant to an issue and reaches sustainable
    findings.

27. Here, the judge accepted (at para 38) that the "sole issue in this case
    is credibility".  There were principally two  factual  issues.   First,
    had the appellant established his claimed religion?  Secondly,  had  he
    established the past persecution, including  the  conviction  which  he
    claimed to be the basis for his risk on return?  Whether  the  evidence
    established a risk on return, if those matters were themselves  proved,
    was a further factual  issue  but  did  not  turn  on  the  appellant's
    credibility but essentially upon the background evidence.

28. In this case, the judge first dealt with the  appellant's  "nationality
    and ethnicity".  In relation to  that,  she  examined  the  appellant's
    evidence relevant to his knowledge of the religion at paras 43-46.   At
    para 45, she observed that the information  he  gave  could  have  been
    obtained on the internet and was "basic".  Then  at  paras  47-53,  the
    judge considered the expert report of Professor Hewitt which she  found
    to be "unhelpful and  unreliable"  and  which  as  a  consequence,  she
    concluded he should "attach little weight to" (see para 53).  Then,  at
    para 54, she considered DVD evidence which she found to  be  unhelpful,
    not least because  there  was  no  independent  interpretation  of  its
    contents.  Then at paras 55-56,  the  judge  dealt  with  the  evidence
    concerning the appellant's asylum decision in France.  The  judge  said
    this:

         "55. The Appellant provided for the purposes of this appeal a  copy
             of  the  decision  from  his  asylum  application  in   France
             (Document B61-66).  The first 2 pages of  that  decision  have
             been translated.  The Appellant stated in  evidence  that  the
             decision was in total approximately 10 pages setting  out  the
             reasons why the asylum application was refused.  He stated the
             reason why translated versions of those remaining  pages  have
             not been provided was because it was too expensive.   However,
             his grounds for seeking asylum now are the same grounds as  he
             asserted when he made his asylum application in France.

         56.  I do not find this explanation credible.   The  Appellant  has
             had the benefit of legal advice throughout.  He will have been
             aware that in establishing credibility the consistency of  the
             Appellant's evidence is critical.  I can only infer  that  the
             decision why the Appellant has not obtained a  translation  of
             the full asylum decision is because what is set out within  it
             differs in factual account to the facts before this  tribunal.
             There can be no other reason.  I  make  this  finding  on  the
             basis that the Appellant has obtained translated versions of a
             number of documents however what could only  be  considered  a
             key  document  supporting  the  consistency  of  the   factual
             evidence, he has failed to translate."

29. Then, at para 57 the judge turned to what she stated to be  the  "first
    issue for determination in this appeal", namely whether  the  appellant
    was of the Ezidi religion.  At 57-58 she said this:

         "57. The first issue for determination in this  appeal  is  whether
             the Appellant is of Ezidi religion.   I  have  already  stated
             that albeit I do not identify any significant inconsistency in
             the Appellant's evidence relating to  his  knowledge  of  this
             religion there was, on the contrary, nothing  of  significance
             asked relating to it outside of what could easily be  accessed
             on the Internet.  The Appellant  concedes  that  he  uses  the
             Internet.  In fact all the information asked  of  him  can  be
             found  within  the  contents  of  document  L  and  M  in  the
             Respondent's bundle.  The Appellant at  the  asylum  interview
             gave little insight into his practice of his religion however;
             I would accept he was not asked questions which  required  him
             to do so.  The only  information  asked  in  relation  to  the
             practice of his religion related to as to whether he was  able
             to practice it in Georgia.  His evidence in  summary  was  not
             that he could not but that it is difficult to do so.

         58.  Therefore, reverting to the question as to whether I  consider
             the Appellant is of Ezidi religion.  In short, no.  I  do  not
             accept the truth of the Appellant's evidence  in  relation  to
             this.  The Appellant has demonstrated  his  complete  lack  of
             understanding and knowledge specifically by  being  unable  to
             identify whether it was a nationality, ethnicity or  religion.
             Throughout this appeal the Appellant has asserted that  he  is
             Ezidi nevertheless, no substantive evidence has been  produced
             in  support  of  this.   In  general  his  understanding   and
             knowledge of his religion is basic.  At hearing the  Appellant
             without prompting sought to demonstrate some further knowledge
             of Ezidi relevant to religious holidays however,  again,  what
             was stated was generic."

30. The judge went on at paras 59-61 to consider  the  background  evidence
    and in para 61 concluded:

         "In summary, even if it was accepted that the appellant was of  the
         Ezidi religion, which it is not, I do not accept that as  an  Ezidi
         he would be at risk of persecution on return to Georgia."

31. The appellant's case was not that he was at risk on return  to  Georgia
    merely because he was an Ezidi rather he claimed to be at risk  because
    of the events in 2009 and his subsequent  conviction  (falsely)  for  a
    firearms offence which may well have arisen because of his religion.

32.  Thus  far  in  the  judge's  reasoning  she  has  not  considered  the
    appellant's account of the events in 2009, nor has she  considered  the
    documents such as the hospital reports (said to support  what  happened
    in 2009) and the court documents relating to his 2014 conviction.

33. The judge turned to the documents in para 62 of  her  determination  as
    follows:

         "The Appellant has adduced  hospital  reports  in  support  of  the
         physical injuries he  contends  he  and  his  wife  sustained  from
         beatings when  in  Georgia  and  a  report  regarding  injuries  he
         contends his father sustained when he went  to  enquire  about  the
         pending criminal  action  against  the  Appellant.   Whether  these
         documents are authentic or not is immaterial on  the  basis  of  my
         findings in relation to the Appellant's religion and  the  risk  of
         persecution  on  return.   Nevertheless  on  the   basis   of   the
         credibility findings I have already made and the  further  findings
         which I will make when dealing  with  credibility  in  relation  to
         paragraph 339L of the  Rules  and  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  ("the  2004
         Act") I am not satisfied that these  documents  are  authentic.   I
         make a similar finding  in  relation  to  the  document  which  the
         Appellant relies upon in relation to his conviction.   There  is  a
         letter from Professor Hewitt (B38 - Appellant's bundle) as  to  the
         authenticity of that document however I attach little weight to his
         conclusions for  the  same  reasons  as  previously  identified  in
         paragraphs 48 - 53.  Professor Hewitt gives no  explanation  as  to
         his credentials for assessing the authenticity of the document  and
         none are detailed within Appendix 1 of  his  report.   Further,  he
         gives no explanation  as  to  why  he  considers  it  an  authentic
         document."

34. There is, in my judgment, two difficulties with the judge's  reasoning.
    First, whilst it is true that the documents are not directly related to
    the appellant's claimed  faith,  they  are  directly  relevant  to  his
    general credibility as well as the particular events he  relied  on  in
    2009 and the conviction in 2014 as the  basis  of  his  claim.   In  my
    judgment, the  judge  was  wrong  to  assess  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claimed faith in  pure  isolation  (at  paras  57-58).   Of
    course, the judge had to consider the evidence directly relevant to his
    claimed religion but she had to do so in the context of her  assessment
    of the appellant's general credibility including consideration  of  the
    documents.  Secondly, in considering the documents the judge appears to
    be not satisfied that they are "genuine".  It is difficult to see  what
    else the judge meant when she concluded that they were not "authentic".
     It was not part of the respondent's case that the documents  were  not
    genuine.  The burden of proving that would have been on the  respondent
    and it is difficult to see what, if  any  evidence,  before  the  judge
    could have justified such a finding.

35. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had not intended to use the  words
    "authentic" to mean  "genuine"  as  was  clear  from  para  63  of  the
    determination where the judge referred to Tanveer Ahmed, the well-known
    case which requires a judge to determine whether a document is reliable
    having regard to all the evidence.

36. Paragraph 63 begins with a consideration of aspects of the  appellant's
    evidence and then, in the second half,  deals  with  the  documents  as
    follows:

         "In summary I do not accept the Appellant's explanation in relation
         to this conviction.  I do not  accept  that  it  would  have  taken
         nearly 5 years for the Appellant to be prosecuted  in  relation  to
         this alleged offence.  I do not accept his assertion that it is  as
         a result of the change of  President  in  2013  that  the  criminal
         charge was pursued.  Further the Appellant has been inconsistent as
         to the length of  the  sentence  which  I  consider  a  fundamental
         inconsistency.  At the time of the asylum  interview  he  indicated
         that he had been sentenced to 6 years.  In the statement in support
         of his asylum application (document F1 and F2 Respondent's  bundle)
         he again states 6 years (paragraph 13) yet  now  states  it  was  5
         years.  The conviction shows that a  'Lia  Gurgenidze'  represented
         him on the date of the hearing.  No explanation is given as to  why
         he was  represented  if  he  purportedly  knew  nothing  about  it.
         Similarly he states he found out about the conviction as  a  result
         of his previous neighbours giving the conviction  document  to  his
         parents.  This is not credible.  Why would a notice  of  conviction
         be given to the neighbours?  I do  not  accept  the  truth  of  the
         Appellant's evidence on this issue.  I am in no doubt that for some
         reason the Appellant had to leave Georgia otherwise,  why  would  a
         person uproot his family, leave his  business,  his  home  and  his
         extended family.  Nevertheless, I do not accept that it was for any
         of the reasons asserted.  Further, having considered  the  totality
         of the evidence I even question the dates that  the  Appellant  has
         given of departure.  The Appellant  has  chosen  not  to  have  the
         French asylum decision translated.  As  previously   stated  I  can
         only assume that this is for one reason and that is that  there  is
         information within that  decision  which  would  impact  upon  this
         appeal.  Therefore, considering all of the factors as set out above
         and in accordance with the guidance given in Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]
         UKIAT 00439 which is that it is for an Appellant  to  show  that  a
         document on which he seeks to rely can be relied on,  Tanveer Ahmed
         requires I, the decisionmaker, to consider whether  a  document  is
         one on which reliance should properly be placed  after  looking  at
         all the evidence in the round.  A  failure  by  the  Respondent  to
         establish an allegation of forgery to  the  appropriate  degree  of
         proof on the balance of probabilities does  not,  of  itself,  show
         that the document is reliable.  It is still necessary  to  consider
         whether reliance can be placed on a document after looking  at  all
         of the evidence in the round.  Therefore, relying on Tanveer  Ahmed
         it is for the Appellant to show that the document  is  reliable  in
         the same way as any other piece of evidence relied upon and  it  is
         for me to consider whether that document may be relied upon  having
         considered all the evidence in  the  round.   I  have  concerns  in
         relation to the authenticity of these documents and those  concerns
         are very much triggered as a result of the findings I have made  in
         relation to the  identified  credibility  issues  relating  to  the
         inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence.  I therefore attach no
         weight to these documents."

37. Whilst the judge does refer to Tanveer Ahmed and the issue  of  whether
    the documents are "reliable", again she referred to  her  "concerns  in
    relation to the authenticity of these documents" which have been  "very
    much triggered" by her findings in relation  to  credibility  based  on
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence.  The inconsistencies would
    appear to be those set out at the beginning of para 63,  which  relates
    to the appellant's alleged conviction.  To the extent that  they  might
    have been treated as a basis for a finding that the court documents are
    false, it is wholly unclear how they could have led to a  finding  that
    the hospital documents were false.

38. The judge turned to the central issue of the appellant's credibility at
    paras 64-66 where she said this:

         "64. In making my decision I have considered paragraph 339L of  the
             Rules which imposes on the Appellant a duty to submit  to  the
             Respondent material factors needed to substantiate his  asylum
             claim.  I do not intend to set out in full what  those  listed
             factors are however; when considering them  I  do  not  accept
             that the Appellant has made a genuine attempt to  substantiate
             his claim.  The Appellant came to the UK on 26  February  2013
             when an asylum claim was made deliberately in his wife's  name
             and using  alias  names,  Syrian  names,  to  avoid  detection
             principally so that they would not be returned to France.   It
             is not clear from the papers as to when it was discovered that
             the  Appellant  and  his  family  were  not  Syrian  nationals
             however, it would appear  to  have  been  sometime  after  the
             screening interview on 21 May 2013, as the screening interview
             records the Appellant's wife as still asserting at  that  date
             that they were Syrian nationals.  On  30  September  2013  the
             then solicitors, Harding Mitchell solicitors, wrote to the  Mr
             Richard Walker of the Respondent advising of  the  Appellant's
             wife and family's true  nationality  and  identities  and  the
             reason for the nondisclosure.  On the 25  November  2014  when
             the  Appellant's  wife  attended  her  asylum  interview   she
             confirmed this position.  On that date she asserted  that  the
             Appellant was no longer living with her (question  56  -  page
             C11 Respondent's bundle) however, other  than  that  reference
             there has never been any other reference to the Appellant  and
             his wife splitting up.  It was only after  that  decision  was
             refused that the Appellant then made an asylum application for
             himself naming his wife and children as his dependents.  I  do
             not consider that the Appellant's application was  made  in  a
             timely fashion.  What is clear is that the only reason why the
             Appellant decided to disclose their true identity at the  time
             of his wife's asylum application was because  of  the  removal
             direction made for their return to France, which is  confirmed
             in the letter from his solicitors  dated  30  September  2013.
             Further, even after his wife's asylum application was  refused
             they still chose to appeal  and  even  when  that  appeal  was
             withdrawn the Appellant then waited  nearly  6  months  before
             then  making  his  application.    The   Appellant   has   not
             established his general credibility  and  his  evidence,  when
             looked at in the round is implausible  based  upon  background
             information.  On that basis he does not meets the requirements
             of paragraph 339L.

         65.  Further, in making a decision I have considered the 2004  Act.
             Section 8 imposes an  obligation  on  the  Appellant  to  have
             provided information as soon as possible of  material  factors
             required to substantiate an asylum and/or human rights  claim.
             A failure by the Appellant to  provide  such  information  may
             potentially damage his credibility.  I do not intend to repeat
             what I have already set out at paragraph 64 above but for  the
             same reasons section 8 is engaged.

         66.  There is no need to recite any more of the evidence  that  has
             led me to my conclusion in relation to the  asylum  claim.   I
             have had the benefit of seeing and listening most carefully to
             the Appellant as he gave evidence.  Further, I  have  compared
             his oral evidence with his written accounts as  given  in  the
             screening and asylum interview and also those of his  wife  as
             given in her screening and asylum interview in addition to the
             Appellant's written statement  and  [the  Appellant's  wife's]
             written statements for hearing.  I do not find the Appellant's
             evidence credible."

39. The judge was faced with a number of interwoven  factual  issues  which
    had to be determined.  I have borne in mind  that  a  judge's  decision
    must  be  read  as  a  whole  (see  my  comments  at  para  26  above).
    Nevertheless, the compartmentalised treatment  of  the  issues  in  the
    determination has led me to conclude that, in my  judgment,  the  judge
    has failed properly to consider  all  the  evidence  in  assessing  the
    truthfulness of the  appellant's  claim.   She  has,  in  my  judgment,
    prematurely  determined  whether  the  appellant  has  established  his
    religion without dealing with it in the context of his  credibility  in
    general.  Further, in reaching her finding in respect of his  religion,
    the judge failed to consider  the  documentary  evidence  and  has  not
    clearly  differentiated  between  the  assessment  of   the   documents
    "genuineness" (which was not in issue) and their  "reliability"  (which
    was).

40. Further, I accept  Ms  Namani's  submission  that  the  judge  was  not
    entitled to reach an adverse inference in respect  of  the  appellant's
    failure to submit a translated version of his French  asylum  decision.
    It is, perhaps, noteworthy that it was the  appellant  that  put  these
    documents into evidence.  The  appellant's  explanation  cited  by  the
    judge was that it was "too expensive" to translate the  document.   The
    appellant's oral evidence was also that he had provided  the  documents
    to his solicitors.  On the basis of this evidence, it was  not,  in  my
    judgment, a proper inference that the absence of a translation had only
    a sinister explanation.  It  also  appears  from  the  renewed  grounds
    drafted by the appellant's Counsel at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    that at the outset of the proceedings the absence of a translation  was
    raised and the judge indicated "that in her mind  the  French  decision
    should  have  no  impact  on  her  decision".    The   respondent   was
    unrepresented at the hearing and I see no  reason  to  doubt  Counsel's
    statement set out in the grounds.   This  is  an  additional  troubling
    aspect of the judge's treatment of the absence of a translated  version
    of the French decision.  Clearly, the absence of it did factor into the
    judge's findings adverse to the appellant.

41. In my judgment, these errors resulted in the judge failing properly  to
    consider overall the  appellant's  credibility  and  reach  appropriate
    factual  findings  in  respect  of  his  claimed  religion   and   past
    persecution.  The errors are material.  I do not  accept  Mr  Richards'
    submission that the error in relation to the judge's finding  that  the
    appellant was not of the Ezidi religion is immaterial because the judge
    also found he would not be at risk as such on return.  That, of course,
    was never part of the appellant's claim.  His faith was merely  a  part
    of the background showing how he had, and would, be treated differently
    by the authorities and why  the  events  of  2009  had  occurred.   The
    finding in relation to his religion is, therefore, a part of his  claim
    even though it is not in itself said to create the risk on return.

42. That, in my judgment, suffices to set aside the  judge's  determination
    and her factual findings.  I should, however,  briefly  deal  with  the
    appellant's other grounds.  The final ground  based  upon  the  judge's
    rejection of his explanation for the delay in  prosecuting  in  between
    2009 and 2014 is, in my judgment, not established.  As I pointed out at
    the hearing, the judge's attention had not been drawn to any background
    evidence to substantiate the appellant's explanation that the change of
    President in 2013 was significant for minorities such as Ezidis.    The
    only evidence which Ms Namani could identify was in the expert's report
    referring to "anti-minority nationalism" in  August  2008.   But,  that
    predated the events in 2009 and could not provide an explanation for  a
    five-year delay based upon the appellant's explanation that the  change
    of President in 2013 made a difference.   I  would,  therefore,  reject
    this ground.

43. Finally, in relation to the judge's treatment of the evidence  directly
    relating to the appellant's religion,  as  I  have  already  said,  the
    judge's finding cannot stand for the reasons I  have  given.   I  would
    simply add  that  I  have  considerable  concerns  as  to  the  judge's
    reasoning, having rejected the respondent's reliance on inconsistencies
    in his  knowledge,  that  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  was
    "generic" and "basic" such that, in itself, it was proper  to  conclude
    that the appellant had failed to establish his religion.

44. Of course, these matters will be reconsidered on the remittal  of  this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Notice of Decision




45. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of a material error of law and cannot stand.
     That decision is set aside.

46. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding, and having regard to  para
    7.2 of the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,  the  appropriate
    disposal of this appeal is  that  it  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo re-hearing before a judge other than Judge  M  M
    Thomas.




                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

