
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/02352/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport          |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 February 2018                       |  On 20 March 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     KRK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford of Counsel, instructed by Migrant
Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Woolley who in a determination promulgated on  10  April  2017
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
    State to refuse asylum.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Libya born  on  20  September  1989.   He
    claimed asylum on the basis that he had been a member of  a  particular
    militia group in Libya.  His group had been captured by another  group.
    He had however escaped from detention by the other group, fled  to  his
    brother's house and then left Libya.  At the beginning  of  the  appeal
    the judge was asked to adjourn  the  appeal  so  that  psychiatric  and
    expert reports could be obtained.  The judge refused the adjournment on
    the basis that legal aid had been refused  on  two  occasions  and  the
    judge  considered  that  the  appeal  could  be  properly  and   fairly
    determined without  the  reports.   The  judge  moreover  having  heard
    evidence did not accept that the appellant's claim was  credible.   The
    judge therefore dismissed the appeal.

3.   Although permission to appeal was refused in the First-tier  permission
    was granted in the Upper Tribunal on grounds of appeal  which  referred
    to the decision of the Tribunal in ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG  [2017]
    UKUT 263 (IAC).

4.   I indicated at the beginning of the appeal that I considered there  was
    no error of law in the decision of the judge to refuse the  application
    for an adjournment.  Proper reasons for the refusal had been given  and
    the decision of the judge on that issue was well reasoned.

5.   I also stated that I considered that the judge was  fully  entitled  to
    find the appellant's claim was not credible.  The grounds of appeal  on
    that point had argued that the judge had been wrong to place weight  on
    the fact that  the  appellant  had  not,  until  the  date  of  hearing
    indicated that he had suffered sexual abuse by his captors and that the
    judge was wrong to place weight on the late disclosure  of  that  claim
    and ignore the reasons given for that late disclosure.  Be that  as  it
    may, however, I consider that the appellant's claim of  having  escaped
    from detention while naked and having to climb a high wall covered with
    razor wire is not credible and I consider that the judge's findings  of
    fact were open to the  judge -  there  was  nothing  perverse  in  the
    decision.

6.   However the country guidance case of ZMM does state in  paragraph  94:-




         "The violence in Libya has reached such a high level that there are
         substantial grounds for believing that a returning civilian  would,
         solely on account of his presence on the territory of that  country
         or region, face a real risk of being subject to  a  threat  to  his
         life or person.".


    That country  guidance  case  therefore  indicated  that  Libyans  were
    entitled to the protection of Article 15(c) because of the situation in
    Libya.

7.   The judge cannot be criticised for  not  applying  a  country  guidance
    case which was not promulgated until after the  determination  in  this
    case.  However, as Mr Richards very properly conceded the fact is  that
    the background material on which  the  Tribunal  relied  when  reaching
    their conclusions in ZMM related to the  period  when  the  appellant's
    claim was made and determined in the First-tier.  It is appropriate for
    me therefore, while concluding that the judge did not err when  finding
    that the appellant's  claim  was  not  credible  and  in  refusing  the
    application for the adjournment, to set aside the judge's decision.

8.     Having  done  so  and  with  the  agreement  of  all  parties  it  is
    appropriate that I should, following the decision  in  ZMM,  allow  the
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the judge in the First-tier is set aside.

The appellant's asylum appeal is  dismissed.   This  appeal  is  allowed  on
humanitarian protection grounds under Article 15(c).



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                             Date: 17 March 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


