


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02144/2019



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On:  12th November 2019                |On:  20th November 2019             |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                    AMYZ
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Collingwood
                    Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Palestinian born in 1971, last resident in  Occupied
    Palestinian Territory in the West Bank.   He  appeals  with  permission
    against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Chambers)  to
    dismiss his protection appeal.
 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim for  protection  is  that  he  is  a
    homosexual, and that his family have discovered this. He claims to have
    a well-founded fear of persecution by his family who will seek to  kill
    him in order to preserve their 'honour'.


 3. It was not in issue that homosexuality falls within the rubric  of  the
    Refugee Convention, since gay men in Palestine could be  considered  to
    be members of a particular social group. Nor was it in issue  that  the
    Palestinian  Authorities  would  fail  to  provide  a  sufficiency   of
    protection for a gay man fearing 'honour'-based  violence.   The  claim
    was nevertheless rejected on the grounds that the Appellant  was  lying
    about being gay.

 4. The only question before the First-tier Tribunal was therefore  whether
    the Appellant had discharged the burden of proof and shown that he  was
    'reasonably likely' to be gay.  The Tribunal was not satisfied that  he
    had. In its decision of the 20th June 2019 the Tribunal found that  the
    Appellant had given chronologically discrepant evidence about  when  he
    was outed in Palestine, when and why he decided to apply for a  British
    visa.   It further placed weight on the fact  that  the  Appellant  was
    married with four children: it found that the Appellant must have  been
    having sex with his wife in the period 1996-2003 because they had  four
    children in that time, during which he was projecting an image that  he
    is a "contented heterosexual".

 5. The Appellant now challenges the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on
    the grounds that the decision is flawed for a failure to take  material
    evidence into account, a failure to  make  relevant  findings  and  for
    taking immaterial matters into account. The particulars are as follows.

 6. First, Mr Brown submits that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing
    to examine with anxious scrutiny, and make findings on a key aspect  of
    the case, namely the sur place evidence of the Appellant's  life  as  a
    gay man in the United Kingdom.   He had placed reliance on the evidence
    of two witnesses who attested that over long hours they had spoken with
    the Appellant and offered him support  in  coming  to  terms  with  his
    identity.  The witnesses were British men who work for an  organisation
    supporting gay asylum seekers. Neither had any doubt that the Appellant
    is gay; in fact it was  their  evidence  that  on  their  very  limited
    resources they would not come to court for an individual if  they  were
    not "convinced" that he was gay and needed  their  help.  Although  the
    Tribunal acknowledges their evidence, and  their  experience  in  their
    field, it  concluded  that  their  evidence  was  outweighed  by  other
    material before it:  "they  are  not  been  in  the  more  advantageous
    position of the tribunal in looking at the totality  of  the  evidence"
    (sic).

 7. Mr Brown takes issue  with  this  reasoning  on  the  ground  that  the
    Tribunal in effect dispenses with this  important  evidence  about  the
    Appellant's current identity, by unduly focusing on  his  narrative  of
    events in Palestine before he left.  Having found that the  account  of
    historical events is untrue, the Tribunal does not go on to ask  itself
    whether, nevertheless, it can be satisfied that  the  Appellant  is  in
    fact gay.

 8. For the Respondent Mr Diwnycz accepted, and I found, that  this  ground
    is made out. The  Appellant  may  have  exaggerated  or  even  invented
    evidence about what happened  before  he  left  Ramallah  in  order  to
    bolster his claim, but it is perfectly possible that he is  still  gay.
    That  was  where  the  evidence  of  these  witnesses   assumed   great
    significance. It was incumbent upon the Tribunal  to  examine  it  with
    care: I am satisfied that this it did not do.

 9. Similarly,  the Tribunal's focus on historical events  meant  that  the
    decision did not engage with  the  Appellant's  own  detailed  evidence
    about his experience: the emotional turmoil he had endured as  he  came
    to  the  realisation  that  he  was  gay,   the  tension  between   his
    homosexuality and his love for his wife, and his struggle to  reconcile
    his sexual desires with his Islamic faith. In  granting  permission  to
    appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith said of this ground:

         "The Judge said at [23] that 'core  elements'  in  the  appellant's
         account 'strongly suggest that he has fabricated a story concerning
         the events in his home country'. Arguably, it was not open  to  the
         judge to state that 'core elements' of the appellant's account  had
         been fabricated in circumstances when he had  not  engaged  in  any
         operative analysis of the 'core' account provided by the  appellant
         of the realisation of his homosexuality"

10. Mr Brown's second submission concerned the finding made by the Tribunal
    that the Appellant had been a 'contented  heterosexual'  whilst  living
    with his wife. Here the Tribunal appeared to place  significant  weight
    on the fact that the Appellant is married with four children. Before me
    Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that in the particular  circumstances  of  this
    case, where the Appellant has from the outset advanced a  narrative  of
    being a married man who gradually came to  a  realisation  that  he  is
    homosexual, it  is  difficult  to  see  what  adverse  inference  might
    legitimately be drawn from the fact that the Appellant  once  lived  an
    outwardly heterosexual  existence.  It  is  a  sad  reality  that  most
    homosexual  people  in  the  world  today   are   required   by   their
    circumstances to live an outwardly heterosexual  life.   I  agree  that
    placing weight on that matter the Tribunal erred in  taking  immaterial
    matters into account.


11. Given that all of the findings of fact have been set aside I agree that
    it is appropriate that this is a matter that is remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.








    Anonymity Order

12. The Appellant continues to seek international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decisions

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside for error of
    law.


14. The decision in the appeal is to be remade following a fresh hearing in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

15. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   12th
                                November 2019
