

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/02289/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5 April 2017                            |On 16 April 2018                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     FG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolatti, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

An order has been made under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellant being identified. Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to a contempt of court.


1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 14 February 2017 refusing him further to remain on either protection
    or human rights grounds.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Albania born [ ]  1997.   He  claims  to
    have arrived in the UK on 31 July 2014 and  he  claimed  asylum  on  12
    August 2014.  His application was refused but in the light of  his  age
    he was granted leave to remain until 25 March 2015.  On 24  March  2015
    applied for further leave to remain but this was  refused  and  is  the
    subject of this appeal.

3.    He claimed that he would be at risk  of  serious  harm  on  return  to
    Albania because of a blood feud between his family and another  family.
    The feud started following a car accident in  December  2004  involving
    the appellant's uncle and a member  of  the  other  family.   When  the
    appellant turned 16 his family received calls saying that he would  now
    be included in the blood feud.  He left Albania in  June  2014  because
    his family were worried about his safety.

4.    The  respondent  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  identity  and
    nationality were as claimed but not that  he  was  involved  in  active
    blood feud.  In the alternative, it was the respondent's view that  the
    appellant could  seek  protection  from  the  Albanian  authorities  or
    relocate in an area away from his home area.

The Hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal

5.    Having considered the evidence both oral and  documentary,  the  judge
    was not satisfied that the appellant had shown that he was at any  real
    risk of harm of return,  having  failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  was
    involved in a blood feud.  The judge referred to  the  decision  in  EH
    (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 348 and to the guidance  that,  in
    order to succeed in such a  claim,  there  should  be  some  individual
    evidence of the existence of the feud.  He found that there  was  none.
    The judge also took into account a document obtained from  the  British
    Embassy in Tirana and produced on the day of the hearing, which  showed
    that no feud between the families said to be involved was  recorded  as
    existing.  Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

The Error of Law

6.    In the grounds of appeal, it is argued firstly, that the  judge  erred
    in law by treating the guidance in EH as identifying a requirement  for
    corroboration of the appellant's own account  and  secondly,  that  his
    acceptance of the contents of the Embassy letter failed  to  take  into
    account submissions made on behalf of the  appellant  that  the  letter
    could not be relied on to exclude the likelihood of a blood feud.

7.    At the hearing before me, Mr Jarvis indicated that  it  was  his  view
    that there was merit in both those grounds.  In particular in [22],  it
    appeared that the judge was discounting the evidence of  the  appellant
    on the basis that there was no corroborative evidence and further, when
    considering what weight to give to the letter from the  Embassy,  there
    was no indication that the judge had considered the submissions made on
    that issue identified in the grounds.

8.    I agree that Mr Jarvis' concession is rightly made and that the  judge
    erred in law as argued in the grounds.  Both representatives submitted,
    and again I agree, that the proper course  is  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.

Decision

9.    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted for further consideration by the First-tier Tribunal
    by way of a full hearing before a different judge.

10.   In the light of  the  issues  raised  in  this  asylum  appeal,  I  am
    satisfied that this is a proper case for an order to be made under rule
    14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I  make
    an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely
    to lead to the appellant being identified.




Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 10 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
