
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02515/2017
                                                               pa/02518/2017
                                                               pa/03772/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2018                            |On 02 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                   E M m y
                                    G y M
                                   M C T M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are nationals of Cameroon.  The First Appellant  is  the
    mother of the second and third Appellants.  They claimed asylum on  the
    basis of having a well-founded fear of persecution because of the First
    Appellant's imputed political opinion.  That application was refused by
    the Respondent on 5 April 2017.  The Appellants appealed  against  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal and the  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ghani in a decision promulgated on 16  August
    2017.  Judge Ghani found that the First  Appellant's  account  was  not
    credible and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


2.   The Appellants sought permission to appeal against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and permission was granted on 16  January  2018  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins who gave permission because  he  concluded
    that it was arguable that the Judge ignored an expert's report from  Dr
    Charlotte Walker-Said dated 13 June 2017 which appeared to  assist  the
    appellant.  Although that was the main error that was apparent he  gave
    permission on each of the grounds.

3.   The appeal therefore comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  determine
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

4.   The Respondent conceded in the  Rule  24  response  that  there  was  a
    material error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  did  not
    oppose the Appellants' application for permission to appeal.

5.   At the hearing before me Mr Mills accepted that the error  lay  in  the
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal to engage at all with  the  expert's
    report.

6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not at any point refer  to
    the expert's report which supported the First Appellant's account  that
    she was likely to have been placed in the category of persons deemed  a
    threat  to  national  stability,  political   integrity,   and   social
    tranquillity.  The expert's report is well reasoned and it has not been
    suggested that the expert did not have  sufficient  expertise  for  the
    report to have independent evidential value.  In the circumstances  the
    First-tier Tribunal's failure to have any regard to  the  report  is  a
    clear error of law.

7.   Both representatives agreed that in the circumstances the matter  would
    have to be remitted to First-tier  Tribunal  and  consequently  in  the
    light of the fact-finding required and with regard to paragraph 7.2  of
    the Practice Statement I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal to
    be heard by a judge other than Judge Ghani.

No anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 14 October 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


