
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02998/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th September 2020                |On 26th October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     AHA
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  As
the appeal raises matters regarding a claim for international protection,
it is appropriate for an anonymity direction to be made.  Unless and until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


Remote Hearing


   1. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference
      hearing held during the Covid-19 pandemic. Neither party objected to a
      remote hearing. I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the
      hearing room and building were open to the public. The hearing was
      publicly listed, and I was addressed by the representatives in exactly
      the same way as I would have been, if the parties had attended the
      hearing together.  At the outset Mr Gayle confirmed that the appellant
      would not be joining the hearing and he does not object to a remote
      hearing in his absence.  I was satisfied: that this constituted a
      hearing in open court; that the open justice principle has been
      secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there
      has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as
      necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the
      interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding objective
      to proceed with a remote hearing because of the present need to take
      precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was
      satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with
      fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of
      the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated
      costs and resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was
      satisfied that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


Introduction


   2. The appellant is a national of Iran.  He claims to have fled Iran on
      10th October 2018. He arrived in the UK on 20th December 2018 and
      claimed asylum.  The claim was refused by the respondent for reasons
      set out in a decision dated 15th March 2019. The appellant's appeal
      against that decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Shepherd for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 30th October
      2019.


   3.  Judge Shepherd found the appellant's account to have been recruited
      by his uncle to distribute leaflets for the KDPI, fundamentally
      unbelievable.  She also rejected the appellant's claim that his
      brother had, under interrogation, informed on the appellant and
      identified the appellant as the owner of leaflets found following a
      raid on the family home.  Judge Shepherd noted that on his own
      account, the appellant has used at least three alternative names since
      leaving Iran, and that when interviewed in March 2019, he failed to
      refer to any social media activity or the use of what he claimed to be
      his real name, which I shall refer to as [AZ], as a profile name. At
      paragraph [36], Judge Shepherd said:


         "(x) ... The overall significance of this is of course that he says
         he believes himself to be monitored by the Iranian authorities in
         respect of his online activity, but I find that the way in which
         his account of online social media participation has developed over
         time, piecemeal and with significant omissions, undermines that
         account.


         (xi).    This is particularly exemplified by his use of alternative
         names. He mentioned for the first time early on in oral evidence
         the name "[AZ]", and declared it to be his real name. I am firmly
         of the view that this is not his real name. I am reinforced in this
         because in his oral evidence he was asked about his Facebook
         profile photo and name, a copy screenshot of which was submitted
         for the first time in a letter to the tribunal dated 8 August 2019,
         3 days before the hearing. He said the photo was not him, but that
         of Qazi Mohammed, but that the name "[AZ]" which appears next to
         the photo in the profile is his name.  The inference I am to draw
         is that he could be identified from this by his "real" name.  But I
         conclude that this is untrue for two reasons. In the first place
         the hearing was the first time "[AZ]" had ever been mentioned. He
         does not even refer to this name in his appeal statement. Even to
         the lower standard the explanation for this must be that he had
         realised that it would be obvious that he could not in fact be
         identified from the copy Facebook profile which had been submitted
         late before the hearing. In the second place slightly earlier in
         cross examination (p8) when asked why he believed he is
         specifically monitored by the Iranian state he answered;- "...
         because I have my own photo in my profile and they know me...".
         Only a few questions later, as I noted above, he said the photo was
         of another, Qazi Mohammed.  In other words this appellant's
         account, both as to his true identity and any online identity he
         claims to have, is inconsistent."


   4. Judge Shepherd considered three images purportedly posted on the
      Facebook account of [AZ], and the submission made on behalf of the
      appellant that the "live-stream" from which those photographs were
      taken, would identify the appellant.  Judge Shepherd concluded that
      the photographs do not assist the appellant establish that he could be
      identified from that, or any other Facebook material.  At paragraph
      [36(xiii)], Judge Shepherd went on to say:


         "The appellant suggests that the authorities would be able to
         identify him from facial recognition using two sources of material:
         photos posted on Facebook pages of him apparently outside the
         Iranian Embassy holding up a cartoon (of which I have been shown
         three stills from the "live") and in addition, from any images
         captured by the authorities directly of demonstrators outside the
         Embassy. Evidence that he has so demonstrated in that location are
         put in the form of undated photographs, said to be of him at a
         demonstration in that place. The photographer is not identified and
         does not provide a statement. Only one of the photos is a selfie.
         The position of the appellant in all of them, including the selfie,
         is singular. In all of the images the appellant is placed standing
         with his back to the Embassy, whilst most of the others present and
         (sic) facing towards the Embassy.  It is unlikely in my view that
         even if he were present at a demonstration outside the Iranian
         Embassy as claimed, any surveillance cameras would be able to
         capture evidence of this appellant at such an angle to those
         cameras to afford identification. As to the "Live", the person
         recording the "live" is not identified, and once again there is no
         evidence from him or her."


   5. For the numerous reasons set out at paragraph [36] of her decision,
      Judge Shepherd concluded, at paragraph [37], that the appellant's
      account to have been known as a KDPI sympathiser at the time of
      leaving Iran, and/or having come to the attention of the Iranian
      authorities for political activism since leaving Iran, has been
      fabricated. She went on to consider whether the appellant would be at
      risk upon return as someone who had exited illegally and claimed
      asylum. She referred to the relevant country guidance, noting in
      particular that since 2016 the Iranian authorities have become
      increasingly suspicious of, and sensitive to Kurdish Political
      activity.  She noted, at [39], the authorities now operate a 'hair-
      trigger' approach to those suspected or perceived to be involved in
      Kurdish activities or support for Kurdish rights. She noted the
      threshold for suspicion is low, and the reaction of the authorities is
      reasonably likely to be extreme.  At paragraph [39], she said:


         "... Had I accepted this appellant's account therefore clearly he
         would be entitled to protection."


   6. However the appellant had failed to persuade Judge Shepherd, even to
      the lower standard, that he has come to the adverse attention of the
      Iranian authorities in either respect. She concluded that the
      appellant would return as a failed asylum seeker, and that alone.


   7. The appellant's grounds of appeal run to some 20 paragraphs and make
      several criticisms of the assessment of the evidence and findings made
      by the Judge.  What are described as grounds of appeal, fail to
      delineate the grounds relied upon.  Permission to appeal was granted
      by Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell on 15th January 2020.  The grant of
      permission is limited to the points made at paragraphs [3] - [4] of
      the grounds.  In granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell
      stated:


         "2.  The appellant's claim was based on his political activity in
         Iran and the UK. At [37], the judge reached a clear conclusion that
         the appellant's account of being known as a KDPI sympathiser at the
         time of leaving Iran and to have come to the attention of the
         Iranian authorities for political activism since leaving Iran had
         been fabricated. There were extensive reasons given for those
         conclusions, and it is not established that the judge arguably gave
         inadequate reasons for them, or that they were perverse, or that
         they were reached in contravention of the guidance in cases such as
         Y v SSHD ]2006] EWCA Civ 1223.  I agree with the judge who refused
         permission to appeal in the FtT that these complaints amount, in
         truth, to nothing more than a disagreement with findings of fact
         which were reached lawfully by the Judge. She was plainly aware of
         the country guidance and the background material and she reached
         sustainable findings on the credibility of the appellant's account
         in light of that material.


         I grant permission to appeal on the sur place argument which is
         made most succinctly at [3] - [4] of the grounds of appeal,
         however.  Even though the judge gave clear and sustainable reasons
         for rejecting the appellant's KDPI affiliation in Iran and his
         claim to have come to the attention of the authorities as a result
         of his sur place activities in this country, it is arguable that
         she failed to consider the likely result of the interrogation and
         'hair trigger' enquiries which would await the appellant on return.
         I do not understand the judge to have rejected the appellant's
         claim to have been involved in sur place activity and it was
         arguably incumbent upon her to consider whether that would be
         revealed at the 'pinch point' of return and, if so, how it would be
         viewed by the authorities. She arguably failed to do so, and
         arguably focused instead on the separate question of whether the
         appellant's sur place activities are already known to the
         authorities."


   8. Before me, Mr Gayle adopted the written submissions that had been sent
      to the Tribunal by email on 19th May 2020, replying to written
      submissions received from the respondent.  The appellant submits that
      it is accepted that the appellant has attended demonstrations outside
      the Iranian Embassy and that Judge Shepherd "... considered Facebook
      evidence provided by the appellant".  The appellant submits the
      suggestion that the Iranian authorities would consider the appellant's
      activities as anything other than anti-regime, is perverse. The
      appellant submits that the respondent has made no mention of the
      country guidance set out in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430, and
      on a proper application of the country guidance the appellant would be
      at risk upon return to Iran.


   9. Mr Gayle submits that on the accepted facts, the appellant's
      attendance at demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy establishes
      that he would be at risk upon return to Iran.  He submits that when
      considering the photographs showing the appellant's attendance at
      demonstrations, Judge Shepherd makes criticism because in the images,
      the appellant is placed standing with his back to the Embassy, whilst
      most of the others present are facing towards the Embassy. Mr Gayle
      submits Judge Shepherd failed to understand that the appellant took
      the photographs in that way, so that they show the Embassy in the
      background and evidence his attendance at the demonstrations, but that
      is not to say the appellant stood with his back to the Embassy
      throughout the demonstrations.  The purpose of the photographs was to
      show the appellant's attendance at the demonstrations. Without such
      evidence the respondent would be unlikely to accept the appellant's
      word that he had attended demonstrations outside the Embassy.  Mr
      Gayle submits that in any event, the Iranian authorities do not only
      monitor from within the Embassy.  The Security Services have
      sophisticated means to monitor the sur place activities of individuals
      and it is inevitable they use spies amongst the demonstrators to
      identify those demonstrating.  Furthermore, one of the photographs was
      of the appellant in a Hi-Viz vest, and the appellant is likely to be
      viewed as a steward at the demonstration and that increases his
      profile.  Mr Gayle submits facial recognition technology has developed
      since the decision in BA (demonstrators in Britain- risk on return)
      Iran CG [2011] UKUT in which the Upper Tribunal noted there was no
      evidence of the use of facial recognition technology at Imam Khomeini
      International Airport. He refers to the decision of the Upper Tribunal
      in AB and Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015]
      UKUT 0257 (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal considered whether the use
      of social and other internet-based media (including the use of
      Facebook by Iranian nationals located in the United Kingdom to make
      actual or perceived criticisms of the Iranian state) is reasonably
      likely to come to the attention of the Iranian authorities because
      those authorities have the capability to monitor the use social and
      other internet-based media by Iranian nationals based outside of Iran.


  10. He submits facial recognition technology is now available on smart
      phones, and it is inevitable that it is being used by the Iranian
      regime to monitor and identify activists.  Furthermore, although Judge
      Shepherd rejected the appellant's claim that his real name is [AZ], it
      is clear from the photographs that were before the FtT that
      photographs of the appellant at demonstrations have been posted on
      that Facebook account, liked and commented upon.


  11. Mr Gayle submits Judge Shepherd failed to consider the risk upon
      return on the basis of the accepted evidence that the appellant had
      attended demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy.  He submits that
      in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430(IAC), the Upper Tribunal held
      that the "Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as a
      'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to be
      involved in Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish
      rights. By 'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion is
      low and the reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely to be
      extreme".  He submits that at paragraph [41] of her decision, Judge
      Shepherd, drawing upon paragraph [97] of HB (Kurds), accepted that a
      returnee without a passport is likely to be questioned on return.  He
      submits the combination of the appellant's Kurdish ethnicity, his
      illegal exit from Iran, and his participation in demonstrations
      outside the Embassy, is sufficient to establish that he will be
      subjected to the 'hair trigger' approach adopted by the Iranian
      authorities against those suspected of or perceived to be involved in
      Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish rights.  He
      submits it would be na�ve to assume that the Iranian authorities would
      accept the appellant is being honest when he says he is not 'anti-
      regime', when he returns as a Kurdish failed asylum seeker, who has
      attended demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy.  Mr Gayle submits
      that upon a proper application of the country guidance set out in HB
      (Kurds), the appellant has established that he would be at risk upon
      return to Iran.


  12. In reply, Mrs Aboni adopted the respondent's written submissions
      settled by Stefan Kotas and dated 16th May 2020.  The respondent
      submits that on a proper application of the relevant country guidance
      set out in SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG and
      AB and others (internet activity - state of evidence) to the facts
      found by Judge Shepherd, it was open to her to find that the appellant
      will be of no adverse interest to the authorities upon return. There
      are two strands to the sur-place activities relied upon by the
      appellant. In so far as he relies upon his attendance at
      demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy, if on return  he is asked
      about the demonstrations, and he gives a truthful answer, that will
      reveal that the appellant did not know what the first demonstration
      was about and the two other demonstrations related to women's rights
      and opposition to capital punishment.  Mere attendance at those
      demonstrations is not something that could properly be construed as a
      matter the Iranians authorities would have any real adverse interest
      in. Insofar as the appellant relies upon on-line activity, the
      appellant's claim that his real name is [AZ] was rejected by Judge
      Shepherd.  All the appellant is left with, is the three photographs
      relied upon from the Facebook account of [AZ].  The appellant accepts
      that the photograph on the Facebook profile page is not a photograph
      of the appellant but a photograph of Qazi Mohammed.  The respondent
      submits that the appellant has not engaged in  'blogging' in the sense
      described in AB and Others, and the appellant has failed to establish
      that he can be identified as someone who makes any criticism of the
      regime, from what is posted on the Facebook account.  It is said that
      on a global assessment of the appellant's profile, he would be an
      individual who was of no previous adverse interest to the authorities,
      and someone who has attended three demonstrations in the UK.  At one
      of the demonstrations the appellant did not know what he was
      demonstrating about. At its highest there is a Facebook account that
      is not in the appellant's name, but on which the appellant can be seen
      attending demonstrations.  Mrs Aboni submits it was open to Judge
      Shepherd to find that the appellant could not be identified from that
      material.


  13. Mrs Aboni submits in HB (Kurds) Iran CG the Upper Tribunal confirmed
      that Kurdish ethnicity is a risk factor which, when combined with
      other factors, may create a real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
      treatment.  It is a factor of particular significance when assessing
      risk but "other factors" will include the matters identified in
      paragraphs (6)-(9) of the headnote.  She submits Judge Shepherd
      carefully considered the evidence of the appellant and it was open to
      her to find that the appellant has not come to the adverse attention
      of the Iranian authorities as someone who is suspected or perceived to
      be involved in Kurdish activities or support for Kurdish rights.


Discussion


  14. Judge Shepherd rejected the appellant's claim to have been recruited
      by his uncle to distribute leaflets for the KDPI.  The appellant
      relies upon the risk upon return to Iran because of the things that he
      has done since leaving Iran.  That is, his attendance at three
      demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy and what is posted on the
      Facebook account of [AZ] showing the appellant attending
      demonstrations in the UK.


  15. The issue in the appeal before the FtT was what would await the
      appellant on return to Iran in light of the findings made by Judge
      Shepherd regarding the appellant's sur place activities in the UK.  At
      paragraph [37] of her decision, Judge Shepherd referred to the country
      guidance and properly noted that since 2016 the Iranians authorities
      have become increasingly suspicious of and sensitive to Kurdish
      political activity. She noted they now operate a 'hair-trigger'
      approach to those suspected or perceived to be involved in Kurdish
      activities or support for Kurdish rights. She noted the threshold for
      suspicion is low and the reaction of the authorities is reasonably
      likely to be extreme.  Judge Shepherd undoubtedly had the country
      guidance in mind when reaching her decision.


  16. At paragraph [41] of her decision Judge Shepherd referred to the
      relevant Country Guidance and noted that it is not disputed that a
      returnee without a passport is likely to be questioned on return.


  17. In AB and others (internet activity - state of evidence) v SSHD, the
      Upper Tribunal concluded:


         466. It is very difficult to establish any kind of clear picture
         about the risks consequent on blogging activities in Iran. Very few
         people seem to be returned unwillingly and this makes it very
         difficult to predict with any degree of confidence what fate, if
         any, awaits them. Some monitoring of activities outside Iran is
         possible and it occurs. It is not possible to determine what
         circumstances, if any, enhance or dilute the risk although a high
         degree of activity is not necessary to attract persecution.


         467. The mere fact of being in the United Kingdom for a prolonged
         period does not lead to persecution. However it may lead to
         scrutiny and there is clear evidence that some people are asked
         about their internet activity and particularly for their Facebook
         password. The act of returning someone creates a "pinch point" so
         that a person is brought into direct contact with the authorities
         in Iran who have both the time and inclination to interrogate them.
         We think it likely that they will be asked about their internet
         activity and likely if they have any internet activity for that to
         be exposed and if it is less than flattering of the government to
         lead to at the very least a real risk of persecution.


         468. Social and other internet-based media is used widely through
         Iran by a very high percentage of the population and activities
         such as blogging may be perceived as criticisms of the state which
         is very aware of the power of the internet. The Iranian authorities
         in their various guises both regulate and police the internet,
         closing down or marking internet sites although this does not
         appear to be linked directly to persecution.


         469. The capability to monitor outside Iran is not very different
         from the capability to monitor inside Iran. The Iranian authorities
         clearly have the capacity to restrict access to social internet-
         based media. Overall it is very difficult to make any sensible
         findings about anything that converts a technical possibility of
         something being discovered into a real risk of it being discovered.




         470. The main concern is the pinch point of return. A person who
         was returning to Iran after a reasonably short period of time on an
         ordinary passport having left Iran illegally would almost certainly
         not attract any particular attention at all and for the small
         number of people who would be returning on an ordinary passport
         having left lawfully we do not think that there would be any risk
         to them at all.


         471. However, as might more frequently be the case, where a
         person's leave to remain had lapsed and who might be travelling on
         a special passport, there would be enhanced interest. The more
         active they had been the more likely the authorities' interest
         could lead to persecution.


         472. The mere fact that a person, if extremely discrete, blogged in
         the United Kingdom would not mean they would necessarily come to
         the attention of the authorities in Iran. However, if there was a
         lapse of discretion they could face hostile interrogation on return
         which might expose them to risk. The more active a person had been
         on the internet the greater the risk. It is not relevant if a
         person had used the internet in an opportunistic way. The
         authorities are not concerned with a person's motivation. However
         in cases in which they have taken an interest claiming asylum is
         viewed negatively. This may not of itself be sufficient to lead to
         persecution but it may enhance the risk.


  18. In HB, the Tribunal heard oral evidence from two expert witnesses,
      Anna Enayat and Professor Emile Joff�.  It declined to give guidance
      to the effect that a risk of persecution arises where an individual is
      involved in the making, re-posting or otherwise publicising critical,
      insulting satirical etc comments about Islam, Islamic religious
      figures, the Qur'an, Iran's policies or regime members, online on
      social media networks whether in Iran or abroad; see [81].  At
      paragraph [82], the Upper Tribunal said:


         "However, we consider that such proposed guidance is way outside
         the scope of the case before us and in any event is far too widely
         drawn. Although there was evidence before us regarding the
         potential risk for those whose internet activity/social media use
         may attract the adverse attention of the authorities, that was not
         a matter which the parties or experts engaged with in relation to
         the giving of country guidance in terms, for example, of the
         ability of the Iranian state to monitor such activity. Indeed, in
         oral evidence Ms Enayat said that she had not been asked to deal
         with the question of social media in her instructions (although she
         had given evidence on the issue in AB and Others). We also take the
         view that such a consideration is likely to require some technical
         evidence and such was not before us. Social media use is however,
         relevant to this particular appellant's appeal and we consider it
         in that context."


  19. The contents of the Facebook posts in HB are referred to in paragraphs
      [111] to [112] of the decision:-  "In general, as revealed in the
      posts that have been translated, they express support for the Kurdish
      political cause and express opposition to the Iranian regime. They
      consist of shared posts from individuals and from, for example, the
      Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan (PDKI) Scotland and one from
      Denmark".


  20. At paragraphs [113] to [116], the Upper Tribunal said:


         "113.    Mr Metcalfe submitted that there is insufficient evidence
         that the Iranian authorities would necessarily be aware of that
         material and that the evidence did not establish that the Iranian
         authorities routinely inspect the internet profiles of failed
         asylum seekers.


         114. However, we noted at [97] above that itis not disputed that a
         returnee without a passport is likely to be questioned on return,
         confirmed in the expert evidence before us and recognised in
         existing current country guidance, for example, SSH and HR. Ms
         Enayat's evidence was that it is part of the routine process to
         look at an internet profile, Facebook and emails of a returnee. A
         person would be asked whether they had a Facebook page and that
         would be checked. When the person returns they will be asked to log
         onto their Facebook and email accounts. That is also the effect of
         her evidence given in AB and Others which was accepted by the
         Tribunal in that case (see [457]).


         115. Mr Metcalfe accepted that the material posted by the appellant
         on Facebook, if it became known to the authorities, would expose
         him to prosecution with a risk of imprisonment and that this would
         result in a real risk of ill-treatment. It was also accepted that
         the appellant's Facebook page is currently visible to the public at
         large.


         116. We are satisfied that the content of the appellant's Facebook
         page would become known to the authorities on return as part of the
         process of investigation of his background. That is the effect of
         the expert and background evidence before us.  It is then, no step
         at all to the conclusion that this would involve a real risk of
         persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment in his case, by reason of
         detention and ill-treatment and likely prosecution. His Facebook
         posts would reveal not only his support for Kurdish rights but also
         his having insulted the Iranian regime and leading figures in it.
         This is reasonably likely to be regarded not only as having
         'crossed the line' in terms of political views or activity, but
         also in terms of religious dissent."


  21. The ultimate question is whether the behaviour of the appellant, no
      matter how cynical or manufactured, would result in a risk of
      persecution on return; if so then he may establish his right to
      protection. But that is not the end of the issue. Having established
      the particular behaviour, the next question to be asked is whether
      that behaviour does place the appellant at risk.


  22. Here, Judge Shepherd found that the appellant had failed to persuade
      her that he has come to the adverse attention of the Iranian
      authorities either on account of the Facebook account, or because he
      had attended demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy.


  23. The country guidance establishes that on return, it is part of the
      routine process to look at an internet profile, Facebook and emails of
      a returnee.  Judge Shepherd recorded, at paragraph [27], the
      appellant's evidence that when he arrived in the UK, he opened a
      Facebook account for himself and started to find friends in the UK as
      well as in Iran.  She was plainly aware that there was a Facebook
      account relied upon by the appellant and that the posts on that
      account included a 'live stream' of a demonstration outside the
      Iranian Embassy, on which the appellant can be seen.  The Facebook
      account relied upon by the appellant is an account in the name of [AZ]
      and at paragraph [36(xi)], Judge Shepherd rejected the appellant's
      claim that his real name is [AZ].


  24. Judge Shepherd noted that the three images relied upon by the
      appellant are stills from the "Live Stream" posted on the Facebook
      account of [AZ].  She rejected the appellant's claim that he could be
      identified from that, or any other Facebook material.  That was in my
      judgement a finding and conclusion that was perfectly open to Judge
      Shepherd.  She had rejected the appellant's claim that his real name
      is [AZ], and it follows that she rejected the claim by the appellant
      that the Facebook account in the name of [AZ] is a Facebook account
      that belongs to the appellant.  The posts on the Facebook account had
      not been translated.  The  images that were relied upon by the
      appellant are 'stills' from a 'live stream', and in my judgment it was
      plainly open to the Judge to conclude, as she did at paragraph
      [36(xii)], that the appellant would not be identified from that
      material.   On return, the appellant will no doubt be honest as to his
      identity when questioned.  The Facebook account relied upon by the
      appellant is not a Facebook account in the name of the appellant and
      there is no reason, being honest when questioned, why he should claim
      to be [AZ] and disclose a Facebook account that does not belong to
      him. If asked on return if he had a Facebook account he could,
      legitimately, say no.


  25. All that remains is the appellant's claim that he has attended three
      demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy.  At paragraph [21] of her
      decision, Judge Shepherd referred to the claim made by the appellant
      when he was interviewed by the respondent in March 2019, that he had
      attended a demonstration against the Iranian government.  At
      paragraphs [25] and [26], she referred to two further demonstrations
      attended by appellant since his interview, and the photographs relied
      upon by the appellant to evidence his attendance.  Judge Shepherd did
      not reject the appellant's claim that he had attended demonstrations
      outside the Iranian Embassy, but found it is unlikely that any
      surveillance cameras would be able to capture evidence of the
      appellant.  The photographs relied upon by the appellant show the
      appellant to be standing towards the back of the group of protesters
      demonstrating outside the Embassy.  Whilst I quite accept the
      appellant, in one photograph appears to be wearing a Hi-Viz vest, and
      that he is unlikely to have stood with his back to the Embassy
      throughout the demonstrations, it was in my judgement open to Judge
      Shepherd to conclude that the appellant could not be identified.  The
      relevant Country guidance indicates some surveillance at
      demonstrations but there is nothing to suggest the appellant's profile
      would place him at risk.


  26. The Facebook posts as described, the photographic evidence before the
      FtT and the appellant's evidence regarding the demonstrations
      attended, together with the lack of other political activity were all
      considered by Judge Shepherd, who, in the context of the appellant's
      overall lack of political engagement and lack of explanation for his
      attendance at demonstrations, reached a conclusion that was open to
      her.  Judge Shepherd was not satisfied that the appellant has been
      involved in any political opposition to the Iranian government such as
      would put him at risk upon return. At most, from the evidence that was
      before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant has attended three
      demonstrations and he appears in a 'live stream' posted on the
      Facebook account of someone else. On return, when questioned, the
      appellant has no reason to inform the Iranian authorities that he has
      been involved in anti-government activities because his attendance at
      the demonstrations was not predicated upon any genuine political
      involvement. For him to assert otherwise, would be inaccurate.


  27. On a proper application of the country guidance set out in HB (Kurds)
      it is clear that those of Kurdish ethnicity are reasonably likely to
      be subjected to heightened scrutiny on return to Iran. However, the
      mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity with or without a
      valid passport and even if combined with illegal exit, does not create
      a risk of persecution. Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor
      which, when combined with other factors, may create a real risk. Even
      low-level activity perceived to be political, such as, possession of
      leaflets supporting Kurdish rights involves a risk of persecution but
      each case depends on its own facts. Judge Shepherd carefully assessed
      the likelihood of the appellant's activities bringing him to the
      adverse attention of the authorities. She rejected the appellant's
      underlying account of events in Iran and found that the appellant
      would not be identified as someone of adverse interest because of his
      sur place activities.  It was open to her to reach that decision for
      the reasons she has given.


  28. Judge Shepherd acknowledged that if she had accepted the appellant's
      account of events, he would clearly be entitled to protection.  Judge
      Shepherd carefully considered the evidence of the sur place activities
      relied upon by the appellant in the context of the relevant
      jurisprudence and concluded, in line with country guidance, that the
      activities of the appellant would not lead to his identification as
      someone suspected or perceived to be involved in Kurdish activities or
      support for Kurdish rights. That was a conclusion the judge was
      entitled to come to, on the evidence before her.


  29. Although the decision could have been better expressed, an appellate
      court should resist the temptation to subvert the principle that they
      should not substitute their own analysis and discretion for that of
      the Judge by a narrow textual analysis which enables it to claim that
      the Judge misdirected themselves.  It is not a counsel of perfection.
      An appeal to the Upper Tribunal is not an opportunity to undertake a
      qualitative assessment of the reasons to see if they are wanting,
      perhaps even surprising, on their merits.


  30. A fact-sensitive analysis of the risk upon return was required.  In my
      judgement, Judge Shepherd clearly had in mind the "pinch point" at
      which the appellant will be brought into direct contact with the
      authorities in Iran, and is likely to be questioned.  She concluded
      that the appellant would be returned as a failed asylum seeker, and
      that alone.  It is clear that the more active a person has been, the
      more likely the authorities interest could lead to persecution.  The
      findings made by Judge Shepherd were findings that were properly open
      to her on the evidence before the FtT.  Judge Shepherd found the
      appellant will not come to the attention of the authorities in Iran on
      account of his sur place activities, or be regarded as someone
      perceived to be involved in Kurdish political activities or support
      for Kurdish rights.  The findings cannot be said to be perverse,
      irrational or findings that were not supported by the evidence.
      Having carefully considered the decision of the FtT, I am quite
      satisfied that the appeal was dismissed after the judge had carefully
      considered all the evidence before her and upon a proper application
      of the country guidance.


  31. It follows that in my judgment, there is no material error of law in
      the decision of Judge Shepherd and I dismiss the appeal.


Decision


  32. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Shepherd promulgated on 30th October 2019 shall stand.


  33. I make an anonymity direction.




Signed   V. Mandalia                     Date:        18th October 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



