
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02535/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On April 27, 2017                      |On May 4, 2017                      |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                              MR MOHAMmED ZYDAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, Counsel, instructed by Immigration Advice
Service
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Libya.  He arrived  in  this  country  on
    July 2, 2015 and claimed asylum. The respondent refused his application
    for asylum on October 26, 2015.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on November 9, 2015 under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3.  His  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Malik
    (hereinafter called the Judge) on November 10, 2016 and in  a  decision
    promulgated on December 13, 2016 the  Judge  refused  his  appeal.   He
    appealed that decision on December 28, 2016 but Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Dineen refused permission to appeal. Grounds  of  appeal  were
    renewed and Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson granted permission finding  it
    arguable the Judge had erred on her assessment of the medical  evidence
    and this impacted on his assessment of the evidence.

 4. I do not make an anonymity order in this case.

    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Ms Faryl relied on the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  the  Judge's
    approach was wrong. The Judge had failed to  have  regard  to  material
    contained in  the  appellant's  bundle  that  as  a  Black  Libyan  the
    appellant would face persecution. The fact he could not name the  group
    who kidnapped him was a minor issue in circumstances where  there  were
    over 1700 armed groups. The medical evidence confirmed his injuries and
    the Judge's treatment of the medical report was inadequate. The  expert
    made it clear that certain injuries were consistent with his claim. The
    expert was qualified to make the findings he did and the Judge gave  no
    real reasons for rejecting  the  same.  The  expert  had  distinguished
    between self-inflicted and those inflicted by other means and the Judge
    failed to attach sufficient weight to the report. She  submitted  there
    was an error in law.

 6. Mr Harrison adopted the Rule  24  response  dated  April  4,  2017  and
    submitted the Judge had carefully considered all of  the  evidence  and
    attached appropriate weight to the expert report. The Judge's  findings
    on the expert evidence was open  to  her.  The  Judge  was  not  making
    medical findings but simply interpreting the evidence that  was  before
    her. The Judge considered at paragraph [35] whether the appellant would
    be  at  risk  but  concluded  his  account   lacked   credibility   and
    consequently his case had not been made out.

 7. I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

 8. Two primary challenges were made to the Judge's decision in relation to
    her handling of both the country  evidence  and  the  expert  evidence.
    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson  concentrated  on  the  latter  in  giving
    permission.

 9. The expert had examined the appellant's scarring and noted the  account
    he had given. The Judge considered this report in its entirety  and  at
    the same time she considered the account  given  by  the  appellant  of
    events in Libya.

10. The Judge accepted the appellant was from Ajdabiya, Libya  and  was  of
    Tebu ethnicity. The Judge had  to  consider  his  claim  to  have  been
    abducted twice and tortured. To assist her with that decision the Judge
    considered the evidence provided by  the  scarring  expert.  The  Judge
    noted the  expert's  conclusions  but  balanced  the  expert's  opinion
    against the fact he had similar scars elsewhere on  his  body  that  he
    attributed to forfeit games he played with friends.

11. Ms Faryl submits that the  Judge  should  have  accepted  the  expert's
    findings but that approach ignores the Judge's own role. As the arbiter
    of findings of facts she was entitled,  if  she  provided  reasons  for
    doing so, to reject the expert's evidence.  In  his  own  evidence  the
    appellant accepted that some of the scars on his body were inflicted by
    friends and the Judge concluded that there was nothing  in  the  expert
    report that she believed ruled out  the  fact  that  the  other  scars,
    identified as the effects of torture, to have been carried out  by  the
    appellant's friends. Ms Faryl submitted that the expert ruled that  out
    but the expert merely states at paragraph [50] of the report  that  the
    scars could not be caused by accident or chance. He concluded they were
    deliberately inflicted on the appellant  and  they  were  not  everyday
    injuries.

12. The Judge noted that the appellant had similar  injuries  committed  by
    his friends as part of a forfeit game and  I  am  satisfied  that  that
    particular finding was open to the Judge. She had made adverse findings
    about his claim and concluded that these injuries were  not  caused  as
    part of torture but were part of a forfeit game. This was not the Judge
    placing herself in the position of a scarring  expert  but  simply  her
    examining the evidence and making findings. The fact is  the  appellant
    opened the door to such a finding when he explained similar scars  were
    caused during a game. Whilst he denied these were part of  a  game  the
    Judge was entitled to reject that account and having  done  so  it  was
    open to her to make the findings she did on the scars.

13. In paragraphs [31] to [34] she considered his claim of  being  abducted
    and thereafter made findings open to her on those issues. Many of those
    findings remain unchallenged.

14. Ms Faryl other primary submission related to the  Judge's  approach  to
    the risk facing Black Libyans. The Judge  quoted  from  AT  and  others
    (article 15c; risk  categories)U  Libya  [2014]  UKUT  318.  The  Judge
    referred to FA (Libya; article 15c) Libya CG  [2016]  00413  (IAC)  and
    remarked at paragraph [37] of her decision that she had considered  the
    evidence in the appellant's bundle but she then  went  onto  find  that
    merely being present did  not engage article 15c. She  concluded  there
    was no evidence that an article 15c situation existed in Ajdabiya  that
    would engage article 15c.

15. Ms Faryl submits the Judge failed to consider the evidence contained in
    the appellant's bundle but the Judge noted what the Tribunal said in AT
    about black Libyans and the discrimination was something recognised  in
    articles contained in the appellant's bundle. Whilst AT  is  no  longer
    country guidance the latest country guidance report and other  material
    does  not  say  the  position  for  the  Tebu  or  Black  Libyans   has
    deteriorated to engage either the Refugee Convention or article 15c.

16. The Tribunal reminds us in FA that each case is fact sensitive and I am
    satisfied the Judge properly considered the issues raised by  Ms  Faryl
    both before me and before the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In those circumstances, there is no error in law.

    DECISION

18. There was no error in law and the Judge's decision shall stand.

Signed                              Date     May 3, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made as the appeal was dismissed.


Signed                              Date     May 3, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
