
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02523/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 October 2018                     |On 19 October 2018                |
|                                              |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     HN
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr K Wood, instructed by Immigration Advice Service
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devlin promulgated 30.4.18, dismissing  on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    5.2.18, to refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    24.5.18 but when the application was renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt granted permission.

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below I found that there was such error of  law
    in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to  require
    it to be set aside and remade.

 4. The grounds address two main issues: (1) the appellant's  status  as  a
    former UNHCR mandate refugee and the Home Office policy with regard  to
    the same; (2) the 'release document' which  the  appellant  claims  was
    given to him on release from detention and which he handed to the  Home
    Office  at  his  substantive  asylum  interview.  This   document   was
    subsequently lost.

 5. I find that the appellant was the victim of  procedural  unfairness  in
    respect of both issues, the reasons for which the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge may not have been aware.

 6. Between [112] and [152] Judge Devlin addressed the appellant's account.
    The UNHCR registration document is  addressed  from  [130].  The  judge
    proceeded to criticise the appellant, particularly at [134] for failing
    to provide evidence of provenance or from the UNHCR to confirm that  he
    has been recognised as a refugee, or the grounds on which the  decision
    was based and what investigation was conducted. The judge  stated,  "It
    seems to me that the appellant might reasonably have been  expected  to
    have produced such evidence. There is no reason for his failure  to  do
    so. These considerations affect the weight I am able  to  attribute  to
    the said document.

 7. In fact, the Home Office's published policy on UNHCR mandated  refugees
    follows the decision of the Court of Appeal in MM (Iran) v SSHD  [2010]
    and places  an  obligation  on  decision  makers  to  engage  with  and
    investigate  asylum  applicants  whose  claims  involve  such   status.
    Decision makers are required to confirm the details  and  circumstances
    of the status with the UNHCR Legal Protection Team in London.  Further,
    such status is to be given considerable weight unless there are  cogent
    reasons not to do so. It is questionable whether the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State properly engages with this issue.  However,  it  was
    the duty of the Home Office to draw the policy to the attention of  the
    tribunal but failed to do so. In the circumstances, it  was  unfair  of
    the the First-tier Tribunal Judge to criticise the  appellant  for  not
    providing better evidence as to  his  UNHCR  status.  For  that  reason
    alone, the decision is flawed and cannot stand.

 8. The second point in relation to the 'release document' is also  treated
    unfairly in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  barely
    mentions it. It was produced by the appellant to the respondent at  his
    substantive asylum interview but it had  been  allegedly  lost  by  the
    respondent and  could  not  be  produced  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing. I  can  see  from  the  judge's  notes  of  the  evidence  and
    submissions  that  this  issue  was  addressed   by   the   appellant's
    representative, who suggested that  as  the  respondent  had  lost  the
    document the appellant should be given the  benefit  of  the  doubt  by
    finding that it existed and contained the information described by  the
    appellant in his interview. The document and  the  submission  was  not
    adequately addressed in the decision of the  tribunal.  It  is  obvious
    that  the  loss  of  the  document  bears  on  the  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's factual claim. The only reference to the
    document is at [142] where  the  judge  makes  an  adverse  credibility
    against the appellant in respect of the document.

 9. As it happens, the document has now  been  found  in  the  respondent's
    file, where it was all along, and it was produced at the hearing before
    me. Given the existence of the document the judge's  adverse  treatment
    of the appellant on this issue amounted to procedural unfairness.

10. For these reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  made  in
    substantial error of law and cannot stand. Very fairly, Mr Tan said  he
    was unable to resist the appeal on grounds of procedural unfairness.

Remittal

11. I considered with the two representatives whether this  was  an  appeal
    that  could  or  should  be  retained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a
    continuation hearing. However, I am also concerned  that  the  original
    decision of the Secretary of State in this matter ought to be looked at
    again in light of the points made above as to  the  UNHCR  and  release
    documents. The former requires some  investigation  work  by  the  Home
    Office and the latter will require translation. The  first  will  be  a
    matter for the Secretary of State to consider and my observation is not
    material to the outcome this decision. However, to enable consideration
    to be given to the remaking of the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    it would be better if  the  matter  were  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Further, it would not be possible to proceed with the hearing
    immediately, given the need for the investigation into the UNHCR status
    by the respondent and the translation of the release document on behalf
    of the appellant.

12. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the  findings  on  a  crucial
    issue at the heart of an appeal are undermined, as  they  are  in  this
    case, effectively there has not been a  valid  determination  of  those
    issues.

13. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.



Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated





Consequential Directions

15.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester;

16. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

17. The ELH is 4 hours;

18. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Devlin and Judge Buchanan;



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. However, given the circumstances of this case, I  make
an anonymity order.



Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated













