
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02758/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16 January 2018                          |On18 January 2018              |
|                                            |                               |
|                                            |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 AA (Libya)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Verity Adams of Counsel, instructed by Bradford
Law Centre
For the respondent:    Mr Myroslav Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,
I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs
otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of publication
thereof shall identify the appellant, whether directly or indirectly. This
order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with
this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal refusing him leave  to  remain  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection or human rights grounds.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Libya.

Background

 2. The appellant in this appeal is a Libyan man, with  a  British  citizen
    wife and two minor children, all of whom are dependants in this appeal.
     The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that he is the son of a  former
    Major in the  Libyan  army  under  President  Qaddafi  (sometimes  also
    written as Gaddafi).  The appellant's father was  a  decorated  officer
    who was highly regarded as a loyal and faithful servant by the  Qaddafi
    regime.  Following the overthrow of President Qaddafi, the  appellant's
    father's health declined and he eventually died.

 3. The appellant is a member of the Warfalla tribe. He was able  to  live,
    discreetly, in Libya for two years after  the  overthrow  of  President
    Qaddafi but he is personally associated with Mr Ramadan Ali Bashir, the
    Secretary-General of Libya under the Qaddafi regime, because he  housed
    him after the overthrow, and his  house  was  searched  by  the  Libyan
    authorities, whom the judge found were probably looking for Mr Bashir.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 4. Having found the above facts to be  proved  to  the  appropriate  lower
    standard, the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded  that  the  appellant
    was an economic migrant who had fabricated the core of  his  claim  and
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  there  was  in  the
    decision no adequate consideration of the section 55 best interests  of
    the   appellant's   children,    the   provisions   of    sub-paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended), the country
    of origin information to which he  was  referred  at  the  hearing,  or
    broader Article 8 ECHR issues  concerning  children  in  Libya  and  in
    particular, chronic malnutrition as it affects the children.

 6. The granting judge considered it to be  'at  least  arguable  that  the
    judge was confused in his approach to Article 8 which arguably  amounts
    to a material error of law'.  No issues in the grounds of  appeal  were
    excluded.

Rule 24 Reply

 7. There was no Rule 24 Reply.

 8. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

 9. At the hearing, I received  oral  submissions  from  Ms  Adams  and  Mr
    Diwnycz.  It is not necessary to set out  those  submissions  in  full,
    save where referred to below.

10. The appellant relied in part on a  document  issued  by  the  Jamestown
    Foundation on 2 June 2011, before the fall of Qaddafi, entitled Libya's
    Warfalla Tribe Switching Loyalties? which indicated that:

         "Incorporating over one million of Libya's six million people,  the
         loyalty of the Warfalla to the Qaddafi regime is considered  to  be
         one of the most important factors in the survival or demise of  the
         existing power structure. ...

         The Warfalla, together with  the  Qadhafa  and  the  Magarha,  have
         traditionally been considered the pillars of  the  Qaddafi  regime,
         dominating the security services and the leadership of the military
         ... the Warfalla remain prominent  in  the  regime's  revolutionary
         committees, a paramilitary force entrusted with securing loyalty to
         the Qaddafis, by force if necessary."

11. The respondent has issued two country information reports  about  Libya
    in the last year.  The first, in March 2017, entitled Libya: Actual  or
    perceived supporters of former President Gaddafi, at 6.2.1 incorporates
    guidance given in the Australian DFAT report  on  Libya,  that  revenge
    attacks  by  state  and  non-State  actors  continued  against  Qaddafi
    supporters and, crucially, at 6.2.3, against their family members.  The
    DFAT source for that latter assertion is a joint UNSMIL/UNOCHR document
    published in October 2013, entitled Torture and deaths in detention  in
    Libya.  At 6.3, the report records the ill-treatment of Qaddafi's sons.

12. In the respondent's  January  2018  Country  Information  and  Guidance
    Report on Libya entitled Libya: Security  and  humanitarian  situation,
    issued on 12 January 2018, just four days before  the  hearing  of  the
    present appeal, at section 8 the respondent noted  that  indiscriminate
    violence continues in Libya now.  At 8.1.2, the respondent  quoted  the
    UK Foreign Office website updated in November 2017, which says this:

         "The political situation in Libya remains fragile and the  security
         situation remains dangerous and unpredictable. Fighting  can  break
         out anywhere  without  warning,  including  between  local  militia
         groups, and  many  civilians  have  been  killed  in  outbreaks  of
         conflict in residential areas. 'There's a high risk  of  civilians,
         including journalists,  humanitarian  and  medical  workers,  being
         caught  in  indiscriminate  gunfire  or  shelling,  including   air
         strikes, in all areas where there  is  fighting.  'There  has  been
         heavy conflict during 2016 and 2017  in  several  areas,  including
         parts of Tripoli,  Benghazi,  Zawiyah,  Sabratha,  Dernah,  and  in
         central Libya at Barak al Shati, Sebha, As-Sidra and  Jufra.  These
         conflicts include pro-Government of National Accord  (GNA)  forces,
         troops under the control of General Heftar, local militias and also
         extremist groups such as Ansar Al Sharia and  affiliates  of  Daesh
         and Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQ-M). Derna (1300km  east  of
         Tripoli) is under a state of siege by the Libyan National Army with
         all routes in and out closed, and civilians have been killed in air
         attacks on the  city.  'Reports  of  violence,  reprisal  killings,
         looting and human rights abuses continue across the country.'"

13. On the basis of that evidence, Mr Diwnycz did not seek  to  argue  that
    there was no longer an Article 15C risk in Libya as recognised in ZMM.

Discussion

14. The first point which arises from the  judge's  findings  of  fact  and
    credibility is that his statement that  the  core  of  the  appellant's
    account is fabricated is inconsistent with his primary finding that  it
    was credible  and  that  he  accepted  the  core  account.   Those  two
    statements are irreconcilable.  The other grounds of  appeal  are  also
    made out.  There is no alternative but to set the  decision  aside  and
    remake it on the basis of the situation in Libya  today  and  the  risk
    that poses to the appellant.

15. In remaking the decision and assessing the circumstances  today,  I  am
    guided by the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  ZMM  (Article  15(c))
    Libya CG [2017] UKUT 263 (IAC), promulgated on 28 June  2017,  and  the
    judicial headnote to that decision, as follows:

         "The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person."

16. I  consider  first  whether  this  appellant  is  entitled  to  refugee
    protection.  He is the family member of a highly decorated Major in the
    Qaddafi army and has himself sheltered the former Secretary-General  of
    Libya, Ramadan Ali Bashir.  The authorities know that and searched  his
    house for that reason, as the  First-tier  Tribunal  found.   He  is  a
    member of a tribe (the Warfalla) who were very closely associated  with
    the Qaddafi regime.

17. Any or all of those facts would be sufficient to put this appellant  at
    risk of persecution on return to Libya.  The appellant and  his  family
    are entitled to refugee status.

18. As I have found that the appellant  and  his  family  are  entitled  to
    refugee protection, humanitarian protection is not available  to  them.
    However, but for the avoidance of doubt I make it clear  that  if  they
    were not refugees, on the basis of the evidence and authorities  before
    me, they would have been  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  under
    Article 15C.

19. The facts which have led to my finding that the appellant  is  entitled
    to refugee status are also sufficient to meet the Article 3  ECHR  risk
    standard.  As regards human rights and in particular  the  position  of
    the  appellant's  children,  the  First-tier   Tribunal   decision   is
    inadequately reasoned.  It  is  not  necessary  to  make  any  detailed
    findings  under  section  55  or  the  Article  8  provisions  of   the
    Immigration Rules, or outside those Rules, because I have  allowed  the
    appeal on refugee protection grounds.


DECISION


20. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.



Date:         16 January 2018                Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


