
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02545/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 April 2019                              |On 25 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                   mr m p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iran and  whose  date  of  birth  is  21
    September 1982.  His application for  protection  was  refused  by  the
    respondent in a decision dated 6 February 2018.   He  appealed  against
    the decision and his appeal was dismissed on 29 June 2015 by the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The appellant then made further representations and his
    appeal was reconsidered.

2.   Permission to appeal was at first refused by Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft  on  17  October  2018  and  subsequently
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on  9  January  2019.   Judge
    Kopieczek found that it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed
    to undertake a  proper  assessment  of  the  potential  risk  with  the
    appellant's social media content and profile would be discovered on his
    return to Iran and thus the extent to which there would be a real  risk
    of persecution or Article 3 harm as a result.  It may be argued in that
    context that there was an undue emphasis on credibility in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision.

3.   At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both  parties  and  I  am
    persuaded by the submissions made on behalf of the appellant  that  the
    decision is not safe.  Although the case  of  HP  was  not  before  the
    previous Tribunal, however if that case was to be applied to the  facts
    of this case the decision may be arguably different.

4.   Even if, as found by the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant's claim  is
    opportunistic and that the  appellant  is  not  credible,  nevertheless
    perception by the Iranian authorities is the key issue in the appeal in
    that would he be perceived to have, by  his  conduct  in  his  Facebook
    accounts, which can be linked to him by his e-mail  bring  him  to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities.

5.   The appellant's father is a Supreme Court Judge in  Iran  and  this  is
    another factor which must be analysed more carefully because I find  it
    is of some significance to his circumstances and risk.

6.   I therefore find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must  be
    set aside and heard de novo by another judge.

7.   No findings of fact are to be  preserved  and  all  issues  are  to  be
    considered by a judge the first-tier Tribunal other than Judge Fox.

Notice of Decision

8.   Appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date 20th day of April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


