
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/02239/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On February 6, 2018                          |On February 9, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                    [A G]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Greer, Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson and
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction in this matter.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe. On June 8, 2015  the  appellant
    lodged an  application  for  asylum  but  following  an  interview  the
    respondent refused his  application  under  paragraph  336  HC  395  on
    October 14, 2015. The appellant appealed that  decision  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  October
    30, 2015 and the matter was  listed  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Parker (hereinafter called the Judge) on December 14, 2016 and
    in a decision promulgated on January 4, 2017 his appeal was dismissed.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on January 14, 2017 and ultimately
    permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern.  The
    appeal came before me on October 3, 2017.

 4. At [27] of his decision the Judge concluded

         "There is no evidence that the  appellant  would  live  openly  and
         expose him to a risk  of  persecution.  The  evidence  is  that  he
         conducts  his  relationships  in  a  discreet  manner.  His  asylum
         interview shows that he  has  been  reluctant  to  talk  about  his
         sexuality and that this would continue in Zimbabwe".

 5. The Judge failed to have regard to the appellant's answers at Q238  and
    239 of his interview when he stated he wanted to live freely  and  that
    if returned he would have to hide the fact he was bisexual. The Judge's
    finding the appellant would live discreetly contradicted the content of
    both his interview and statement and possibly his oral evidence.

 6. Having heard submissions, I found there was an  error  in  law  on  the
    basis the Judge had failed to  properly  apply  the  principles  of  HJ
    (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 and LC (Albania) v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    351 and LC (Albania) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 351.

 7. A second point was argued. The appellant's former  counsel  argued  the
    Judge had erred in assessing the appellant's claim that the police were
    looking for him and he was at risk. I was satisfied the  findings  made
    by the Judge on this issue were open to him and that the Judge had then
    correctly  proceeded  to  consider  whether  internal  relocation   was
    available.

 8. It was against that background that the matter came back before  me  on
    November 22, 2017.

 9. The hearing on that date had to be adjourned because a new  issue,  his
    relationship to a child born in April 2017, had  been  raised  for  the
    first time.

10. Mr McVeety agreed that this Tribunal could deal with both  matters  but
    as evidence was required I agreed  to  adjourn  the  case  for  further
    evidence to be served confirming his connection to the  child  and  the
    child's nationality.




    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

11. At today's hearing I heard preliminary arguments concerning whether the
    appellant could be questioned about an  inconsistency  in  the  account
    given to the FTT Judge.

12. He had provided his first statement in May 2016 in which he  stated  he
    had not had any time for a relationship with a girl.  He  adopted  that
    statement at his hearing before the FTT  Judge  in  December  2016.  He
    failed to mention at that hearing  that  he  and  Miss  [Z]  had  slept
    together on one occasion.

13. It was only after permission to appeal had been given in  October  2017
    did the appellant disclose not only the relationship but also the  fact
    he had a child from that night together.

14. Mr McVeety wished to revisit the Judge's finding that he was  bi-sexual
    because he clearly had not told the truth at the  hearing  in  December
    2016. Regardless of whether he knew about the baby in December 2016  he
    knew he had slept with her in July 2016 and had misled  the  Judge.  Mr
    Greer argued that the finding should stand as he had always claimed  to
    be bi-sexual and the fact he had had sex in  July  did  not  alter  the
    position.

15. I indicated that as I was making a finding on his sexuality Mr  McVeety
    should be allowed to question him on this issue.  However,  I  made  it
    clear  neither  party  should  revisit  matters  that  were  no  longer
    relevant.

    EVIDENCE

16. Both the appellant and Miss [Z] adopted their statements and gave  oral
    evidence. Both confirmed they met when the  appellant  "followed"  Miss
    [Z] on Instagram and that they met up a few times  culminating  in  one
    sexual adventure in July 2016.

17. Miss [Z] did not tell the appellant  she  was  pregnant  because  after
    their night together he told her he regretted  what  had  happened  and
    that they could not continue their relationship.  They  both  confirmed
    that the appellant was only told about the pregnancy  in  January  2017
    and that he had then taken part  in  pre-natal  classes,  attended  the
    birth and had since played  an  active  role  in  his  daughter's  life
    visiting around 4 times a week. He would often stay over but he and the
    appellant only had a parental relationship now.  She  stated  that  she
    realised he liked men and that they could not be together.

18. The appellant stated that since his daughter was born he  had  not  had
    any relationships with either men or females.  He  previously  met  men
    using the "Grinder" app on his phone but now he hoped to  meet  a  male
    through normal channels. Miss [Z] hoped to settle down with  a  partner
    in the future but at the present time they were both  concentrating  on
    their daughter.

19. The appellant stated that  previously  in  Zimbabwe  he  had  not  been
    prepared to discuss his sexuality but if he were now returned he  would
    live life more openly because he did not want hide his true  self.  His
    preference was for men rather than women. He did not believe  he  would
    be safe anywhere in Zimbabwe.

20. Both Miss [Z] and her parents (in letter and email form)  confirmed  he
    was a good father.

    SUBMISSIONS

21. Mr McVeety submitted the late disclosure of his child and  relationship
    with Miss [Z] raised questions about his sexuality. He had  chosen  not
    to disclose the details of his night with Miss [Z] but if he had,  this
    may have led the Judge  to  reach  a  different  conclusion  about  his
    sexuality. Whilst he acknowledged that there was evidence demonstrating
    the appellant was gay the only evidence of a recent  relationship  with
    anyone was the one with Miss [Z]. The evidence from both was he  stayed
    over up to four nights a week and  the  Tribunal  should  consider  the
    nature of the relationship. If he misled the Tribunal in December  2016
    then it was credible he would do the same now.  Mr  McVeety  questioned
    whether the appellant was gay because if the Tribunal concluded he  was
    not gay  or  bi-sexual  then  no  assessment  on  HJ  (Iran)  would  be
    necessary. If however the Tribunal concluded he was  gay  or  bi-sexual
    then it was necessary to make a finding on how  lived  and  bearing  in
    mind the findings in LZ he submitted the  appellant  could  live  in  a
    different area if he  felt  unable  to  return  to  his  home  area  in
    Bulawayo. With regard  to  article  8  ECHR  Mr  McVeety  accepted  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  daughter.
    If the  Judge  concluded  he  hid  the  truth  in  December  2016  then
    frustrating the authorities  was  a  countervailing  circumstance  that
    could outweigh his claim to remain.

22. Mr Greer submitted the appellant had never claimed to be  gay  but  had
    always claimed he was bi-sexual. He had given evidence to the FTT Judge
    who concluded that he was bi-sexual with a predominant interest in men.
    He submitted that he did not deliberately conceal his relationship with
    Miss [Z]. In his mind it was just one night and  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing he did not know she was pregnant. He had regretted the night as
    it caused awkwardness and he submitted it was not unreasonable for  him
    not to disclose the night. The disclosure of that night with  Miss  [Z]
    would not have altered the core  finding  that  he  was  bi-sexual.  If
    anything, it would have strengthened  the  argument.  As  for  risk  on
    return he submitted the appellant would be unable  to  live  openly  in
    Zimbabwe. He relied on LZ and argued state protection was not available
    and the fact he had problems in Bulawayo meant he  would  not  be  safe
    anywhere else. With regard to article 8 the respondent accepted he  had
    a genuine and subsisting relationship. In the absence of a  criminality
    or a very poor immigration history he submitted removing the  appellant
    would be disproportionate.

    FINDINGS

23. At the resumed hearing I heard from both the appellant  and  Miss  [Z].
    They had both provided witness statements and those statements outlined
    their relationship. Although Mr McVeety cross-examined them  both  they
    maintained that they met through Instagram and had slept together  once
    when Miss [Z] was drunk. The appellant regretted it and that led  to  a
    drop in contact between them.

24. Mr McVeety  has  invited  me  to  make  an  adverse  finding  over  the
    appellant's  failure  to  disclose  this  one  night  of  passion.  The
    appellant for his part says he did not view one  night  together  as  a
    relationship and that he did not see the need to mention that night  at
    the hearing.

25. In his first witness statement at [32] he wrote "I have not  taken  any
    steps to meet women in the UK, I have not  joined  any  dating  sites".
    That statement is dated May 27, 2016 and predated his night  with  Miss
    [Z].

26. The FTT Judge heard the evidence and it was always the appellant's case
    that he was bi-sexual. I am unclear what he was specifically  asked  at
    the hearing but what seems clear to me is  that  when  he  adopted  his
    statement he neglected to mention that he had  had  a  one-night  stand
    with Miss [Z]. He felt able to hand up to the  Judge  evidence  of  his
    sexual activities with males which were in picture form. The Judge  was
    not prepared to look at the photographs for the  reasons  described  in
    [8] of the decision. It was therefore open to the appellant to  correct
    any misunderstanding if he wished.

27. Mr McVeety invites me to find that this omission undermines the Judge's
    findings on credibility. I struggle to see the merit of that submission
    because if anything having sex with  Miss  [Z]  merely  reinforces  the
    appellant's claim he is bisexual.

28. At [20] of the decision the Judge found there was

         "... very little inconsistent evidence in the appellant's story. He
         was not successfully  challenged  in  cross-examination  about  his
         sexuality and the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  gives  inadequate
         reasons as to why he is not considered bisexual. I therefore make a
         finding that he is bisexual as claimed."

29. Nothing presented in evidence to me  persuades  me  that  this  finding
    should be departed from. I therefore intend to approach his claim  that
    he was bi-sexual with a preference for men.

30. The appellant's evidence was  he  lived  discreetly  in  Zimbabwe.  The
    evidence given to me today is that his habits  have  not  changed  very
    much. He has chosen to meet people through a social  media  app  called
    "Grinder". The appellant explained that this was an  app  that  enabled
    men to meet strangers for sex. He does not appear to have gone out  and
    met a male in the old-fashioned sense  although  he  described  in  his
    evidence that this was something he  would  like  to  do  but  so  far,
    despite being here for around 2 � years this remains  something  he  is
    uncomfortable about.

31. In his oral evidence he told me that he would like to live more  openly
    and that may well be his wish, but I question whether he will ever have
    the confidence to live such a life.

32. I understand he may have been reluctant to live such a life in Zimbabwe
    but the United Kingdom does not  have  the  same  prejudices  that  the
    appellant believes would place him at risk in Zimbabwe.

33. I have considered the guidance  in  HJ  (Iran)  and  am  satisfied  the
    appellant would not change his way of life were he to be  returned.  He
    is someone who appears embarrassed by his sexuality hence why he has so
    far chosen to live his life the way he wishes. Nothing I read or  heard
    today persuades me he would act  any  differently  either  here  or  in
    Zimbabwe. He has not had a relationship with anyone for  around  twelve
    months choosing to put his child above  his  sexual  urges.  I  am  not
    persuaded a fear of the authorities  would  be  a  reason  for  him  to
    refrain from seeing males in Zimbabwe.

34. The FTT Judge considered LZ (Homosexuals) in the original decision  and
    the FTT Judge's findings on what was said to have happened in  Zimbabwe
    was previously argued in October before me.

35. At [16] of LZ (Homosexuals) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT  487  the  Tribunal
    stated-

         "Given the absence of general  risk,  a  homosexual  at  local  and
         personal risk in his or her community can  move  elsewhere  without
         much difficulty. That might be within the same city, or in  another
         part of the country. He or she might choose to relocate where there
         is greater tolerance, such as in Bulawayo, but the choice of a  new
         area is not restricted. The option is  excluded  only  if  personal
         circumstances create a risk throughout the country."

36. The country guidance decision does not identify areas but it  is  clear
    the Tribunal acknowledged that homosexuals could, depending on personal
    circumstances, live safely in different parts of the country.

37. I concluded in October the Judge's finding that  he  could  return  and
    live in a different area was open  to  him.  Mr  Greer  suggested  that
    Bulawayo was the safest place for the appellant but the Tribunal in  LZ
    (Homosexuals) made it clear that Bulawayo was not  the  only  area.  LZ
    (Homosexuals) is not an authority that being gay or bisexual places gay
    or bisexual people at risk of persecution.

38.  Whilst I accept the appellant is bi-sexual I do  not  accept  that  he
    would be at risk of persecution were he to be returned.

39. I turn now to the secondary issue of article  8  and  specifically  his
    relationship with his daughter. Whilst Mr McVeety argued that  I  could
    make a finding that he was having a relationship with Miss [Z]  I  find
    nothing in the evidence that supports this argument. Both the appellant
    and Miss [Z] stated their relationship had  been  platonic  since  that
    night in July 2016.

40. This is an appeal on article 8 grounds and I apply the approach set out
    in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027. There is  family  life  and  removing  the
    appellant would interfere with the family life he clearly has with  his
    daughter. Although I did not hear evidence from Miss [Z]'s parents they
    attended the hearing and provided statements confirming  the  role  the
    appellant plays in his daughter's life. Any interference  would  be  in
    accordance  with  the  law  but  such  interference  would  enable  the
    respondent to maintain  immigration  control.  As  in  most  article  8
    appeals the real issue is proportionality.

41. The child is 9 months of age and she is British.  Although  her  mother
    was a Zimbabwean national she came him aged 12 and  is  now  almost  22
    years of age. She has a British passport and she has a part-time job as
    a health care assistant in a hospital. She is the primary carer of  the
    child although the evidence presented suggests the appellant does spend
    around 4 days of the week with his daughter and that  includes  staying
    over on occasions.

42. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act applies and  the  test  whether  it  be
    under Section EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules or article 8
    ECHR is one of proportionality. The  respondent's  August  2015  policy
    also applies as I am dealing with a British child. The issue is whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.



43. The duty in section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009 to have regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of
    children who are in the UK means that consideration of the child's best
    interests is a primary consideration in immigration cases.

44. I start from the position that the best interests  of  the  appellant's
    child is a primary consideration.  The fact the  appellant's  child  is
    British must be given significant weight because the  respondent's  own
    policy "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life: 10  Year
    Routes" states

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano."

45. The policy goes on to explain

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer. In such cases it will usually be  appropriate  to
         grant leave to the parent or  primary  carer,  to  enable  them  to
         remain  in  the  UK  with  the  child,  provided  that   there   is
         satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship. It may, however, be appropriate to  refuse  to  grant
         leave where the conduct of the parent or primary carer  gives  rise
         to considerations of such weight as to justify separation,  if  the
         child could otherwise  stay  with  another  parent  or  alternative
         primary carer in the UK or in the EU."

46. I am satisfied that the best interests of the child is to remain in the
    United Kingdom. However,  the  "best  interests"  assessment  does  not
    automatically resolve the  reasonableness  question.  If  it  did  then
    parliament would have said as much when drafting  the  legislation.  It
    therefore follows that even where the  child's  best  interests  is  to
    remain, it may still be not unreasonable to require either the child or
    the appellant to leave.

47. The appellant has never been charged with any criminal offence and  has
    no criminal convictions. It  is  not  suggested  that  he  has  a  poor
    immigration history. Having arrived here on May 27, 2015  on  a  forged
    student card he claimed asylum. He has  been  here  legally  throughout
    albeit his immigration status has always  been  precarious.  I  do  not
    accept Mr McVeety's submission he sought to frustrate  the  immigration
    process by not mentioning the one-night stand at the appeal hearing  in
    December 2016. He did not apparently set out to have a child with  Miss
    [Z] but such events do happen.

48. Having established that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  require  the
    appellant's child to have to move to Zimbabwe the sole issue is whether
    applying section 117B factors, including the respondent's  own  policy,
    whether it would be disproportionate to require the appellant to leave.



49. It is clear from the evidence the appellant has a significant  role  to
    play in his daughter's life. Section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act  makes  it
    clear that the maintenance of immigration  control  is  in  the  public
    interest  but  the  respondent's   policy   undermines   Mr   McVeety's
    submissions to an extent because he accepts the appellant plays  a  key
    role in his daughter's life and that in the absence of certain negative
    factors (e.g. criminality, very poor immigration history or frustrating
    the immigration process) it  would  be  unreasonable  to  separate  the
    appellant from his daughter.

50. In those circumstances, I find the removal of the  appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom would be disproportionate  and  unreasonable  and  would
    breach article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION

51. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

52. I set aside the original decision and remake it as follows:

      a) I dismiss the appellant's protection and article 3 claims.

      b) I allow the appellant's appeal under article 8 ECHR.


Signed                              Date     06.02.2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as no fee was paid.


Signed                              Date     06.02.2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
