
                                    [pic]
IAC-BFD-MD-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02751/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 December 2016                           |On 13 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                Mr Chya usman
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, of Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellant  is  an  Iraqi  national  who  appealed   against   the
    Respondent's decision to refuse his application for asylum. His  appeal
    was heard at Bradford by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Spencer  who,
    in a decision promulgated on 31 August 2016, dismissed it.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was,  on  26  September
    2016 initially refused. However, a renewed application was made to  the
    Upper Tribunal and in a decision dated 7 November 2016  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Finch gave permission to appeal. Her reasons for so doing are:-

       "The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against  the  decision  of
        the First-tier Tribunal Judge Spencer to dismiss his appeal against
        the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  him  asylum  or
        Humanitarian Protection.

        The First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly  referred  to  the  country
        guidance contained in AA (Article 15 (c)) Iraq CG UKUT 00544 (IAC).
        As it is accepted that the Appellant is from Kirkuk, he is  from  a
        contested area and he would be at risk if he had to  return  there.
        He is not from Iraqi Kurdistan  and  cannot  automatically  presume
        that he would be able to return there. As a consequence, the  issue
        was whether if would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to return him
        to Baghdad. In order to reach a decision on this issue, the  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge had to make a number of findings  of  fact  but
        failed to do so.

        The proper course would have been to reconvene the hearing in order
        to make up for some of the evidential  deficits,  which  undermined
        the overall decision.

        Therefore, I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
        make arguable errors of law in his decision and that permission  to
        appeal should be granted."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4. Mr Hussain relied on the grounds seeking permission to  appeal  arguing
    that the Judge had erred in failing to adequately  assess  whether  the
    Appellant's return to Baghdad would  be  unduly  harsh/unreasonable  in
    light of the factual matrix of the  Appellant's  case  with  particular
    reference to  his  ability  to  speak  Arabic  and  that  he  would  be
    considered to be a minority community member in Baghdad. This being  an
    Appellant not in possession of a CISD Card. Mr Hussain also urged me to
    accept  that  there  had  been  insufficient  engagement  with  Country
    Guidance and that in failing to make findings on  material  matters  as
    asserted the Judge had material erred.

 5. Mr Diwnycz relied on the Respondent's response which in essence amounts
    to a submission that the Judge has made adequate findings  in  relation
    to all material issues.

 6. I find that not to be the case. Although the Judge  correctly  referred
    himself to the Country Guidance contained in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG
    [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC)  and  found  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is from Kirkuk, from a contested area and that he would be at
    risk if returned there. He is not from Iraqi Kurdistan  and  it  cannot
    automatically be presumed that  he  would  be  able  to  return  there.
    Consequently a question of whether or not it would be unreasonable  and
    unduly harsh to return him to Baghdad is in play. The Judge has  failed
    to make findings  in  relation  to  this  issue  and  has  consequently
    materially erred.

 7. I accept Mr Hussain's submission that that is the only  issue  in  this
    appeal and that the Judge's positive findings on other issues should be
    preserved.

 8. For all these reasons I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contains an error of law. I hoped to proceed to deal with  the
    hearing today. Unfortunately no interpreter  was  provided  to  me.  Mr
    Hussain urged me in the circumstances, given the need for further fact-
    finding, to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal. I agreed.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be dealt with afresh pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
before any Judge aside from Judge Spencer. The sole  issue  for  the  First-
tier Tribunal to consider is evidence and submissions  in  relation  to  the
issue of internal relocation. Beyond that  issue  Judge  Spencer's  findings
are all preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 12 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

