



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/02076/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport          | Decisions and Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 9 October 2017                         | On 15 November 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between


                                    f m r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paxton, instructed by Duncan Lewis, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The Appellant is  a  national  of  Algeria.   Her  protection  claim  was
   refused by the Respondent on 10 February 2017 and her appeal against this
   decision was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  I  D  Boyes  in  a
   decision promulgated on 29 March 2017. Permission to appeal to the  Upper
   Tribunal against that decision was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Pooler in a decision dated 8 August 2017. He found that all grounds  were
   arguable.


2. There are five grounds of appeal as drafted. At the  hearing,  Mr  Paxton
   sought permission to add another ground. The power to amend is  found  in
   rule 5(3)(c) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
   2008/2698  as  amended).   That  power  is  subject  to  the   overriding
   objectives set out in rule 2 of the 2008 Rules  to  deal  with  the  case
   "fairly and justly" including having regard to the  factors  set  out  in
   Rule 2(2). In view of the fact that the Respondent was on notice  of  the
   application, had no objection to the amendment and the grounds  had  been
   drafted without reference to the original appeal bundles  I  granted  the
   application to amend a document to add a sixth ground.


3. Ground one asserts that the Judge erred concluding that  the  Appellant's
   account of domestic violence at the hands of her husband's family did not
   give grounds for international protection. It is submitted that  domestic
   violence can amount to torture and  degrading  treatment  and  so  engage
   Article 3 ECHR (Opyz v Turkey (2009) Application No.33401/02). It was the
   Appellant's case that she was repeatedly beaten, threatened and  confined
   to the house and it is submitted that this treatment is serious enough to
   engage Article 3 ECHR. Ground two asserts that the Judge erred in failing
   to consider the element of her claim that she  would  be  at  risk  of  a
   criminal gang from whom her husband borrowed money and further in failing
   to given adequate reasons  for  dismissing  this  element.  Ground  three
   asserts that the Judge erred in concluding that she had  not  established
   in her claim a  Geneva  Convention  reason.  It  is  submitted  that  the
   Appellant qualifies as a member of a social group.  Ground  four  asserts
   that the Judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  his  findings  under
   Article 8 ECHR. In finding that there were no  exceptional  circumstances
   the Judge is said to have failed to take  into  account  her  history  of
   domestic violence; the fact that she would be returning as a  lone  woman
   and a single mother and the possibility of  her  losing  custody  of  her
   child. Ground five asserts that in  finding  that  she  could  internally
   relocate the Judge made no allowance for  the  fact  that  she  would  be
   returning as a single mother caring for two children and that  she  would
   face societal  discrimination  and  have  no  accommodation.  Ground  six
   asserts that the Appellant claimed that she  suffered  persecution  as  a
   result of entering into a marriage with a member of  a  different  ethnic
   group. It is submitted that this was  relevant  to  the  global  risk  of
   persecution on return and the viability of internal  relocation.   It  is
   submitted that the issue and the objective evidence appeared to have been
   ignored by the Judge.


4. At the hearing Mr Richards conceded that there was an  error  of  law  in
   the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  He  said  that  the  Appellant
   appeared unrepresented  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  those
   circumstances the Judge ought to have been alert to the issues before him
   and it was clear from the statement produced that  it  was  being  argued
   that there was an  ethnic  element  to  the  claim.  Whether  that  claim
   succeeded was immaterial but there was enough  to  bring  it  within  the
   Convention and in terms of the claim it was not dealt  with  at  all.  No
   regard was  had  to  the  statement  of  the  Appellant  and  indeed  the
   background evidence which she produced in support of that statement.  The
   other grounds had merit regarding the Judge's statement in  paragraph  22
   that the claim as to the Mafia risk did not impact on  her  claim.  There
   was no explanation as to that and it was clear that the Appellant thought
   that it was relevant to her claim. In terms of Article  8  there  was  no
   requirement for exceptional circumstances under the current case law  and
   given that she was not represented there was an element of unfairness. He
   was content for me to find an error of law.


   Discussion


5. I conclude that the Respondent's concession is  correctly  made  in  this
   case. With regard to Ground one, the Judge found at paragraph 19 that the
   danger from the Appellant's husband's family was not such as  to  require
   international protection. He concluded that her descriptions of  beatings
   were not sufficient to claim international  protection.  The  Appellant's
   description in her witness statement which she  drafted  herself  was  of
   being beaten, treated like a slave, never allowed out alone and  sexually
   assaulted by her husband's cousin. She says that she was told that if she
   told anyone she would be killed. On the authorities, this  treatment  was
   capable of amounting to the minimum level of severity required by Article
   3 (Opyz v Turkey (2009) Application No.33401/02).


6. The Appellant asserted in her witness  statement  that  her  husband  had
   problems with a criminal gang because he was unable to  give  money  back
   and they threatened to kill her daughter and kidnap her. The Judge  found
   at paragraph 22 that this did not impact on the Appellant. This does  not
   adequately deal with the Appellant's claim that  she  would  be  at  risk
   because her daughter would be killed and  she  would  be  kidnapped.  The
   Appellant also detailed in her witness statement an ethnic element to her
   claim as a result of her marriage and provided objective evidence in  her
   bundle of the inter-ethnic violence between Arabs and Berbers.  This  was
   not  addressed  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  the
   background to the Appellant's assertion of risk from her husband's family
   when it was clearly material to her case.  In the light of  these  errors
   the conclusions in relation to internal flight and Article  8  ECHR  also
   cannot stand.


7. In the light of the fact finding required taking account of Part 7.2  (a)
   of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of  the
   First-tier Tribunal and Upper-Tier Tribunal I remit  the  matter  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                             Date 14 November 2017

[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray













