
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02856/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 November 2017                           |On 23 November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [I I]
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Murphy, Counsel, instructed by Waran & Co
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (Appellant) against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
        Bart-Stewart (the judge), promulgated on 17 July 2017 in which  she
        allowed the appeal of [II] (the Respondent) against the Appellant's
        decision of 29 October 2015 (served on 2 November 2015)  to  refuse
        his human rights  claim  (a  deportation  order  having  been  made
        against the Respondent on 26 October 2015).

Relevant background

     2. The Respondent is a national of Somalia, date  of  birth  8  August
        1987. He entered the United Kingdom on 28  December  1991  and  was
        then granted exceptional leave to enter valid until November  1997.
        Although the Respondent claimed he made an  application  to  extend
        his leave this was not accepted  by  the  Appellant  and  a  travel
        document issued in June 2011  was  subsequently  cancelled.  On  19
        March 2012 the Respondent was convicted of  conspiracy  to  defraud
        and received a 14 month prison sentence. This  brought  him  within
        the automatic deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 and
        the Appellant duly informed the Respondent that she was considering
        making a deportation order.

     3. In addition to claiming that his deportation would breach article 8
        of the ECHR (based  on  his  family  life  relationships  with  his
        partner, who became a British citizen through  naturalisation,  and
        his 3 children  who  were  registered  as  British  citizens),  the
        Respondent made  an  asylum  claim.  The  Respondent  appealed  the
        refusal of his asylum and human rights  claims  and,  although  his
        appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, heard  in  March  2016,  was
        allowed, the Secretary of State obtained permission  to  appeal  to
        the Upper Tribunal. Having identified a material error in law in  a
        decision promulgated on 19 July 2016, the Upper  Tribunal  remitted
        the case back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 The First-tier Tribunal decision

     4. Following the fresh hearing on 23 June 2017 the judge dismissed the
        Respondent's protection claim.  There  has  been  no  cross  appeal
        against this aspect of the  judge's  decision.  The  judge  however
        allowed the article 8 human rights appeal on  the  basis  that  the
        Respondent's deportation would have an unduly harsh impact  on  his
        children. In reaching this  conclusion  the  judge  considered  the
        details  of  the  Respondent's  offending  (he  pleaded  guilty  to
        conspiracy to defraud Ryanair resulting in the  company  losing  in
        excess of �30,000; although not an instigator  of  the  conspiracy,
        and although he did not set it up and did  not  obtain  substantial
        sums for himself, the Respondent acted in  a  dishonest  manner  in
        driving people to the airport  knowing  what  was  happening),  but
        noted, with reference to paragraph 398(b) of the immigration rules,
        that the sentence was at the lower end of the scale, that he had no
        prior convictions,  and  that  he  had  not  come  to  the  adverse
        attention of the authorities since.


     5. The judge relied on a report by Errol Henry, an independent  social
        worker, dated 19 May 2017. This report reflected the evidence  from
        the Respondent and his partner  to  the  effect  that  his  partner
        worked part-time (23.5 hours a week), and the Respondent was a stay-
        at-home father  who,  because  of  the  high  amount  of  childcare
        responsibilities, had developed a close bond with his children. The
        judge considered the views of the children, who were  aged  13,  14
        and 16, as expressed in their handwritten letters and  through  the
        independent social worker's report. The judge noted  in  particular
        that, according to the independent social worker's assessment,  the
        youngest child showed mild anxiety to see his father after a school
        day and that this normative form of anxiety had the real  potential
        of becoming harmful to  his  development,  that  the  whole  family
        appeared  interdependent  on  each  other  in  ways  that  families
        surviving traumas can present, that the children saw the  potential
        deportation of their father to Somalia as  not  only  removing  him
        from their lives but simultaneously placing him at  risk  of  death
        and in a situation of uncertainty which created a level of  anxiety
        uncommon and extremely  mentally  disorientating  for  children  of
        their age.


     6. The judge directed herself as to the meaning of "unduly harsh" with
        reference to the cases of BM and Others (returnees -  criminal  and
        non-criminal) DRC CG [2015]  293  (IAC)  and  MAB  (paragraph  399;
        "unduly  harsh")  USA  [2015]  UKUT  435  (IAC),  acknowledged  the
        Secretary of State's acceptance that it would be unduly  harsh  for
        the Respondent's partner and children to  return  to  Somalia,  and
        noted,  as  the  partner  only  worked  part-time  as  a  lunchtime
        assistant and cleaner, that it was highly unlikely that  she  would
        be in a position to take the children to Somalia for a  visit  even
        if she wished to.


     7. At [62] the judge stated,


         Because of his wife's work his bond with his children is also
         unusually close and is a factor that must have significant weight
         in considering the impact on the children, particularly two
         teenage boys if their father being [sic] deported and the
         difficulties they [sic] would be in maintaining contact. He is the
         main carer on a day to day basis to fit around his wife's work. He
         is university educated and takes responsibility for the children's
         education. The social worker reports that there is already an
         emotional impact on the children from being aware of their father
         faces deportation. He explains the further psychological and
         emotional damage likely to be caused if the father is removed.
         Their fear is not unreasonable. It is a country from which both
         their parents fled and they know close family members lost their
         lives. There is a travel advisory warning British citizens not to
         go there. The prospects are indeed severe and bleak for three
         adolescent children going through a difficult time in their lives
         knowing their father is in a country that in their minds is
         unsafe. Whilst respect must be given to the pressing nature of the
         public interest in removal or deportation, I find that the best
         interests of the [Respondent's] children in this case should
         prevail. It would be unduly harsh on the children and their mother
         if the [Respondent] is deported and his wife and children remain
         in the UK.


     8. The judge consequently allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

The grounds of appeal, the grant of  permission,  and  the  'error  of  law'
hearing

     9. The grounds content  that  the  judge  was  not  entitled,  on  the
        evidence before her, and given the high threshold inherent  in  the
        'unduly harsh' test, to conclude that the impact  on  the  children
        and the Respondent's partner would be unduly harsh. The  judge,  it
        is argued, failed to identify factors that distinguished the appeal
        from the normal effect of deportation. Issue  was  taken  with  the
        objectivity of some aspects  of  the  independent  social  worker's
        report (although there this was not sufficiently particularised and
        there was no further expansion at the 'error of law' hearing).


    10. In granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  stated,  "all
        of the grounds are arguable but I am  particularly  concerned  that
        the judge's conclusion that the hardship inherent on removal  would
        be "undue" is not sustainable. "


    11. Mr Melvin relied on the Grounds and submitted that  the  judge  had
        not properly considered the high threshold that  marked  the  undue
        harshness test. He provided the  authority  of  AJ  (Zimbabwe)  and
        Another [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 and drew my  attention  to  paragraphs
        17, 31 and 46.


    12. Mr Murphy  submitted  that  the  issues  raised  by  the  Appellant
        amounted to a rationality challenge to the  judge's  decision,  and
        that this was a high  test  to  overcome.  He  submitted  that  the
        decision was well reasoned, that the judge properly considered  the
        nature of the criminal offence and  properly  directed  herself  in
        respect of the applicable legal provisions and legal principles. He
        submitted that there were three qualifying children  in  this  case
        which magnified the overall interests of  the  Respondent  and  his
        family and that this somewhat reduced the public interest  factors.
        It was submitted that the judge properly considered the  impact  on
        the children noting that the Respondent was their primary carer and
        had  a  close  relationship,  that  the   children   were   already
        emotionally unsettled at the  prospect  of  separation  from  their
        father, that they could experience a high level  of  anxiety  given
        their perception that  their  father  would  be  at  high  risk  if
        returned to Somalia, and the mother's concern as to her ability  to
        care for her  children  in  the  Respondent's  absence.  Mr  Murphy
        submitted that the  offence  was  towards  the  lower  end  of  the
        spectrum and that the Respondent had  not  been  convicted  of  any
        offence since his  release.  It  was  submitted  that  the  judge's
        decision was one she was  rationally  entitled  to  reach  for  the
        reasons given.

Discussion

    13. The issue that I  have  to  determine  is  whether  the  First-tier
        Tribunal judge properly applied the  'undue  harshness'  test,  and
        whether her conclusion was one she was rationally entitled to reach
        having regard to the evidence before her.


    14. No issue has been taken with the legal directions identified by the
        judge. She properly directed herself with respect to the applicable
        immigration rules, and in particular paragraph 399. The judge  also
        properly directed  herself  in  respect  of  the  statutory  public
        interest considerations that must be considered by a Tribunal  when
        assessing  proportionality,  and  in  particular  s.117C   of   the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The judge  accurately
        noted that the Respondent had a qualifying partner and 3 qualifying
        children for the purposes of s.117C. The  judge  properly  directed
        herself in respect of the best interests of the children,  and  was
        clearly aware of the  relevant  public  interest  factors  and  the
        weight to attach to those public  interest  factors.  Although  the
        judge refers to MAB (paragraph 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT
        435 (IAC),  there  was  no  suggestion  in  the  Grounds  that  she
        impermissibly considered the question of  undue  harshness  without
        reference to the relevant public interest factors, as determined in
        MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ  450  (which  held  that  wider  public
        interest considerations must be taken into  account  when  applying
        the "unduly harsh" criterion). Mr Melvin accepted as  much  at  the
        hearing. I am satisfied that the judge's  reference  to  MAB,  when
        considered in the context of paragraph 57 (which referenced BM  and
        Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC  CG  [2015]  293
        (IAC) in respect of the definition of "unduly harsh") and paragraph
        59 (where the judge considered the seriousness of  the  Appellant's
        criminality), indicate that she was only relying  on  MAB  for  its
        (unchallenged and un-overturned)  threshold  definition  of  unduly
        harsh.


    15. The Respondent relies on AJ (Zimbabwe), and the cases identified in
        that  decision,  in  challenging  the  lawfulness  of  the  judge's
        conclusion that the impact on the Respondent's  children  would  be
        unduly harsh. Having considered the relevant legal  principles  and
        relevant authorities the Court, at paragraph 17, indicated that  it
        will be rare for the best interests of the children to outweigh the
        strong public interest in deporting foreign criminals.


         Something more than a lengthy separation from a parent is required,
         even though such separation is  detrimental  to  the  child's  best
         interests. That is commonplace and not a  compelling  circumstance.
         Neither is it looking at the concept of  exceptional  circumstances
         through the lens of the Immigration Rules. It would  undermine  the
         specific exceptions in the Rules if the interests of  the  children
         in maintaining a close and immediate relationship with the deported
         parent were as a matter  of  course  to  trump  the  strong  public
         interest in deportation.  Rule  399(a)  identifies  the  particular
         circumstances where it is accepted that the interests of the  child
         will outweigh the public interest in  deportation.  The  conditions
         are onerous and will only rarely arise. ... In many, if  not  most,
         cases where this exception is potentially engaged there will be the
         normal relationship of love and affection between parent and  child
         and it is virtually always in the best interests of the  child  for
         that relationship to  continue.  If  that  were  enough  to  render
         deportation a disproportionate interference with  family  life,  it
         would drain the rule of any practical significance.


    16. At paragraph 31 the Court stated,


         It was not open to the FTT to  find  that  the  separation  of  the
         children from the father/step-father was  a  compelling  reason  to
         allow the Respondent to  remain.  Far  from  being  an  exceptional
         circumstance, this is an everyday situation as  the  authorities  I
         have set out demonstrate. They show that the separating parent  and
         child cannot, without more, be a good reason to outweigh  the  very
         powerful public interest in deportation. No doubt the FTT was right
         to say that these children  would  unfortunately  suffer  from  the
         separation but for reasons I have already explained, if the concept
         of exceptional circumstances can apply in such  a  case,  it  would
         undermine the application of the Immigration Rules.

    17. And at paragraph 46 the Court of Appeal indicated, on the facts  of
        that case, that  there  would  be  some  emotional  damage  to  the
        children but noted that this was not unusual whenever a  parent  is
        deported and the child is unable to live with that  parent  outside
        the UK.


    18. It is apparent from the above reference  that  the  "unduly  harsh"
        test in paragraph 399(a) of the  immigration  rules,  reflected  in
        s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  has  a
        very high threshold and that the separation of  parent  and  child,
        even where this may result in some emotional damage to  the  child,
        would not ordinarily meet the test.


    19.  With  this  in  mind  I  consider  the  judge's  approach  to  the
        relationship between the Appellant  and  his  3  children  and  the
        evidence of the impact of his deportation on the children. There is
        no criticism of the judge's factual findings that he enjoys a  very
        close relationship with his children. He has been living  with  the
        family since  2012  and  is  the  parent  who  has  the  day-to-day
        responsibility for  the  children.  The  judge  placed  significant
        reliance on the independent social worker's  report.  According  to
        the  report  all  3  children  were  meeting  their   developmental
        milestones and, in some areas, exceeding expectations. As noted  by
        the judge, the children had high levels of attendance at school and
        showed good  learning  attitudes.  The  independent  social  worker
        stated that the whole family appeared interdependent on each  other
        in ways that families surviving performers  can  present.  Although
        the independent social worker noted that the  Respondent's  partner
        had concerns as to how she would cope in his absence, he also found
        that she, as well as the Respondent, demonstrated  the  ability  to
        care for the  children,  and  that  both  she  and  the  Respondent
        demonstrated that they  were  capable  of  meeting  the  children's
        needs. I note that the Respondent's  partner  looked  after  the  3
        children when the Respondent was incarcerated.


    20. The independent  social  worker's  assessment  indicated  that  the
        youngest child showed mild anxiety to see his father after a school
        day and that this normative form of anxiety had the real  potential
        of becoming harmful to his development. This  observation  was  not
        however developed any further. The judge noted in  particular  that
        the  children  were  anxious  about   the   Respondent's   possible
        deportation to Somalia because they knew from their own  experience
        (with reference to their grandparents)  that  people  had  died  in
        Somalia, and they were aware of the security risk posed to ordinary
        citizens in that country. They saw the potential deportation of the
        Respondent  as  not  only  removing  him  from  their   lives   but
        simultaneously placing him at risk of death. The  judge  noted  the
        view of the independent social worker that carrying this  level  of
        anxiety for children their age was uncommon and extremely  mentally
        disorientating for young minds to make sense of.


    21. When assessing whether the impact on the children would  be  unduly
        harsh the judge  was  demonstrably  aware  of  the  high  threshold
        (paragraphs 57  and  58)  having  referred  to  Tribunal  decisions
        describing the consequences for an individual  as  being  harsh  if
        they are 'severe', or 'bleak', and that they will  be  'unduly'  if
        they are 'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into  account
        all of the circumstances of the individual.  At  paragraph  59  the
        judge considered the seriousness of the Respondent's offending  and
        the nature of his involvement in the fraud but was entitled to note
        that the sentence was  towards  the  lower  end  of  the  scale  in
        paragraph 398(b), that he had no prior convictions and that he  had
        not come to the adverse attention of the authorities since.  It  is
        clear that the  judge  took  these  public  interest  factors  into
        account when determining the issue of undue harshness.


    22. In paragraph 62 the judge found that the Respondent's usually close
        bond with his children was a  factor  that  must  have  significant
        weight and that there  was  already  an  emotional  impact  on  the
        children. Ordinarily this would  be  insufficient  to  entitle  the
        judge to find that the impact on  the  children  would  be  'unduly
        harsh'. The  judge  then  however  notes,  with  reference  to  the
        independent social worker's report,  that  the  children  may  face
        further  psychological  and  emotional  damage  because  of   their
        perception that  their  father  would  in  danger  if  returned  to
        Somalia. It is apparent that the judge placed significant weight on
        the children's genuinely held belief, even if that belief  was  not
        objectively justified, that the Respondent would be returned to  an
        unsafe country where he would face a risk of death. The  judge  was
        rationally entitled to rely  on  the  independent  social  worker's
        expert opinion that this would cause the children to carry a  level
        of anxiety uncommon to their  age  and  which  would  be  extremely
        mentally disorientating.  I  am  satisfied  that  this  significant
        additional element takes the present case outside the normal run of
        cases dealing with lengthy separation of  parent  and  child  in  a
        deportation context.


    23. On the particular facts of  this  case  the  judge  was  reasonably
        entitled to conclude that the impact  of  the  deportation  on  the
        children would be unduly harsh. The children would suffer not  just
        the emotional damage that  accompanies  any  forced  separation  of
        parent  and  child,  but  the  additional  significant  anxiety  of
        genuinely believing that their father's life would  be  in  danger,
        even if, objectively, there was  no  real  risk  of  ill-treatment.
        While the  assessment  of  undue  harshness  may  ultimately  be  a
        generous one, I am not persuaded that it was one the judge was  not
        rationally entitled to reach on the evidence before her and for the
        reasons given.


Notice of Decision

The decision discloses no error of law. The Secretary of State's  appeal  is
dismissed.


[pic]                               22 November 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


