
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02315/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 April 2018                               |On 19 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [A B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Albania, date of birth [ ] 1999,  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse a  protection  claim.   The
    appeal against the Respondent's decision, of  17  February  2017,  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge J Robertson (the Judge) whose decision
    [D], on 6 September 2017, dismissed the appeal.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on 18 January 2018  who  said
    as follows:

         "1.  The grounds concern the obligation on the respondent to verify
             a document produced on behalf of the appellant that is said to
             be central to the appellant's case.  Whilst the  grounds  make
             reference to PJ (Sri Lanka) there is more recent authority  in
             MA (Bangladesh)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  175  and  VT  (Article  22
             Procedure Directive) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT 318.


         2.   However in this case it appears that the  Secretary  of  State
             sought an adjournment in order to authenticate  the  document,
             which was granted.  There is no reference in the determination
             to the circumstances arising after the decision  was  made  to
             adjourn the hearing and why this was  not  undertaken.   Given
             the uncertainty in this respect I am persuaded that permission
             should be granted".

2.   The matter has to a degree moved on because examination of  the  Record
    of Proceedings, and indeed confirmed by  the  note  of  the  Presenting
    Officer, the Tribunal was told that there had been,  notwithstanding  a
    three month adjournment, no check yet produced verifying the  document,
    which was a certificate issued by the Administrative Unit of  Komsi  in
    the Municipality of Mat. The Certificate stated that there was a  blood
    feud because of the death of one [GD] at the hands of  the  Appellant's
    uncle [VB] in 2002. There were details confirming that [VB] had in fact
    been sentenced to 21 years in prison and the families are  in  conflict
    which  has  not  been  reconciled.  The  view  was  expressed  by   the
    certificate writer, the Administrator, [FK], that there was an  element
    of danger posed to the Appellant.  In addition, although  it  does  not
    form  part  of  the  grounds,  there  was  a  letter  produced  by  the
    Appellant's older sister [LB] which relates to some of the  history  of
    difficulties she and the Appellant and another child  had  faced  which
    did not exclude the possibility that the Appellant was not confined  to
    the home.  The Judge unfortunately makes no reference to that statement
    but does say this at D25:

         "I have a letter  obtained  by  the  Appellant's  sister  from  the
         Administrative Unit of  Komsi  which  certifies  the  Appellant  is
         involved in a blood feud and that his life is in  danger.   I  give
         this document little weight.  It is an unverified document. I  have
         no information as to the source of the information  in  it  or  any
         checks which may have been conducted to ascertain the  accuracy  of
         the content by its author".

3.   It was said in an essentially two-pronged attack that the Secretary  of
    State did, by seeking the adjournment to  obtain  verification  of  the
    document, somehow put herself under an obligation to do  so.   It  does
    not seem to me as a matter of law there is an obligation so much  as  a
    measure of responsibility and the difficulty that is  inevitably  faced
    if the Secretary of State does not pursue  the  enquiries.  If  so  the
    Secretary of State may be in difficulty in arguing that  it  is  not  a
    reliable document let alone that it is a forgery.  I do not accept that
    there is in law an obligation created but it does seem to me  it  is  a
    point that very much bears on the issue of fairness and  the  fair  and
    proper conduct of the decision making process.   I  conclude  that  the
    failure to do so does plainly create problems  for  the  Appellant  but
    perhaps at that stage of the hearing before the Judge the Appellant was
    in truth in a stronger position to argue that the documents  should  be
    taken to be reliable on a Tanveer Ahmed basis. Rather it seemed to  me,
    and this is no criticism of current representation, an  assumption  was
    made by the advocate on behalf of  the  Appellant  that  absent  of  an
    adverse verification check or any check then the  Appellant's  document
    should be accepted as genuine.  It seems to me that was  wrong  but  it
    certainly makes it harder to argue that the document is unreliable.

4.   Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Judge has  addressed  this  matter
    to some extent in the structure of the decision having reached  adverse
    views  in  other  respects  upon  the  child  Appellant  and  that  the
    conclusion, albeit with very little reasons in D25,  is  unreliable  in
    its own right and renders the decision unsafe.

5.   More importantly the grounds in the second prong of  attack  argue  the
    adverse credibility findings  as  being  unjustified.   Those  are  not
    particularised in the grounds but it was offered that I would be  taken
    through the decision to point those matters out.  It seemed to me  that
    the layout of the decision was such that trying to cherry pick  through
    the decision to save aspects of it at this stage renders re-making this
    decision extremely difficult and potentially  unreliable.   I  conclude
    that the appropriate course is that no findings of fact  should  stand.
    The matter will be returned to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined
    in accordance with the law.

DECISION
    The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand the appeal is returned to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  List for hearing 2 hours.  To be heard at Taylor House.

(2)  Not to be listed before First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson or Judge  L
    Murray.

(3)  Albanian interpreter required.

(4)  A fresh bundle to be  prepared  and  served  not  later  than  fourteen
    working days before the further hearing.

(5)  Any further response to the verification document dated  27  July  2017
    to be included in the additional statement produced by the Appellant.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 15 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
