

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/02593/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reason  Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2017                           |On 7 December 2017            |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     JAA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss Wilkins, Counsel - Direct Access (advocacy only).

For the Respondent: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 2 August 2017 the Upper Tribunal found an error  of  law  in  an
        earlier decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  promulgated  on  1
        February 2017, in which a judge  of  that  Tribunal  dismissed  the
        appellant's protection and human rights claims, for the reasons set
        out in the Error of Law finding, a copy of which is annexed to this
        decision at Appendix A.
     2. It was found that the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other
        than the conclusion the appellant faces no risk for any  reason  in
        Kirkuk  and  the  finding  he  can  reasonably  relocate  shall  be
        preserved findings.






Background


     3. The appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity  born  in
        1997 who is now 20 years  of  age.  The  core  of  the  appellant's
        account for international protection is that on 20 July 2007 he was
        playing with a school friend. The appellant ran  across  the  road,
        his friend followed him and was  hit  by  a  car  and  killed.  The
        appellant ran home in panic and told his parents what had happened.
        After the funeral, his friend's father telephoned  the  appellant's
        father threatening that he will kill the appellant as he had killed
        his son. The appellant  claims  this  man  is  an  influential  and
        powerful man working for the government. The appellant  claims  his
        father arranged for him to change schools and to take  him  to  and
        collect  him  from  school  each  day  which  continued  until  the
        appellant was 17 years of age.  He was not permitted to  leave  the
        house  on  his  own.  The  appellant  claims  his  friend's  father
        continued to contact the appellant's father to threaten  his  life.
        The appellant claims that on 6 August 2009, although not allowed to
        leave the house on his own, the appellant left secretly  to  go  to
        the shops. Close to the shops he was  hit  by  a  car  and  was  in
        hospital for several days with a badly broken leg as  a  result  of
        which he was on crutches for three years afterwards.  In 2012 shots
        were fired at the appellant's house which neighbours said came from
        a black car. The appellant believed the father of the boy  who  was
        killed was responsible and understands threats  continued  although
        his father did not inform him. On 16 December 2013, an attempt  was
        made to kidnap the appellant by two men by forcing him into a  car.
        The appellant states the boy's father was one of those  men.  There
        were many people around so the attempt was unsuccessful though  the
        men threw the appellant into a sandwich cart causing him to  hit  a
        glass wall and split open his forehead as a result of which he  was
        hospitalised for ten days. The  matter  was  not  reported  to  the
        police.  A decision was made that the appellant  should  leave  the
        place where he lived  which  he  did  on  23  September  2015.  The
        appellant's evidence was that since arriving in the United  Kingdom
        there was a kidnap attempt on his brother in late 2015 and also, on
        21 March 2016, his younger brother disappeared whilst out with  the
        family on a picnic and the family have been unable  to  locate  him
        since. The family have reported the disappearance  to  the  police.
        The  appellant  believes  the  incidents  are  connected  with  his
        friend's father's pursuit of him. The  appellant  fears  return  to
        Iraq because of this named person who he claims  will  continue  to
        try to kill him and that he cannot relocate within  the  county  as
        this man worked for the government and will be able to find him and
        he cannot relocate to Baghdad because there is a  large  Arab  Shia
        population there who would discriminate against him because he is a
        Sunni Muslim.
     4. The preserved findings can be summarised in the following terms:


                i. The evidence confirmed the appellant was in  hospital  in
                   August 2009 but did not confirm that he was there because
                   of a hit-and-run  incident  or  who  was  responsible  or
                   alleged to have been responsible for it. It confirms that
                   a  report  was  made  to  the  police  of  his  brother's
                   disappearance in March 2016, but not who  is  alleged  to
                   have been responsible [37].
               ii.  The  report  about  the  disappearance  of  his  brother
                   undermines  the  appellants  claim  because  his   father
                   specifically says that he has no enemies. The  Judge  did
                   not understand why, if the appellant was really at  risk,
                   and that his father would not wish to name the individual
                   the appellant fears if he feared his son might be  killed
                   as a result of doing so, why his father would report  the
                   matter to the police at all. The Judge did  not  find  it
                   credible that after nearly 10 years of his  family  being
                   pursued by the named individual and the appellants father
                   reporting his youngest son's life being in serious danger
                   due to the same man, he would not  say  that  he  had  no
                   enemies if that was not the case [38].
              iii. The Judge says other  questions  were  raised  about  the
                   appellant's account, for example why has this  named  man
                   pursued the appellant for all this time  and  if  he  was
                   intent on killing the appellant, as claimed,  why  is  he
                   had not done so before now.  The Judge did  not  find  it
                   credible that if the man is so determined to seek revenge
                   for the death of his son he did not  make  more  frequent
                   attempts or succeed before now particularly  when  it  is
                   alleged  he  is  so  powerful  and  influential  in   the
                   government.  The  appellant  failed   to   satisfactorily
                   explain these things which leads to a finding the account
                   lacked coherence which undermine the overall  credibility
                   of his claim [39].
               iv. The Judge identifies other aspects  which  it  was  found
                   undermined the appellant's credibility [40 - 43].
                v. The Judge accepted the appellant received injuries to his
                   face as these are shown in photographs however there  was
                   nothing save the appellant's own evidence to connect  the
                   injuries to the named individual and nothing to show they
                   were not caused by some other childhood incident [44].



The evidence


     5. The Upper Tribunal had available to it to the earlier appeal bundle
        together  with  an  updated  witness  statement  provided  by   the
        appellant. In accordance with the directions the witness statements
        stood as the evidence in chief of the maker.
     6. In his witness statement, the appellant claimed the  last  time  he
        had spoken to any of his family members was in August 2016 when  he
        spoke to his mother who  was  still  in  Kirkuk  with  his  father,
        brothers and sisters. The appellant claimed the next time he  tried
        to call them the number was not working and that he  did  not  know
        what had happened to them or any other family members.
     7. The appellant states he has never been to Baghdad and does not know
        anybody living there. He does not  speak  Arabic  and  is  a  Sunni
        Muslim and a Kurd without family or friends in Baghdad  to  support
        him.  He believes he would not be able to find  housing  or  a  job
        there and not be able to survive.
     8. The appellant states he has never been to Iraqi Kurdistan and  does
        not know anybody living there and was only aware that  two  of  his
        mother's relatives live there but did not know  where  exactly  and
        did not even know their names or what exact relation they are.  The
        appellant claims never to have met them and that he would not  have
        nobody in Baghdad to help him in  making  arrangements  to  get  to
        Erbil and that it is not safe to  travel  overland.  The  appellant
        claims in the Kurdish regions he has no one to help him find a  job
        or somewhere to live. He claims never to have lived in Iraq  having
        left aged 18 and is worried that the authorities or members of  the
        community would connect him to his father who worked for the  Baath
        regime under Saddam Hussain. The appellant claims  that  when  they
        previously tried to go to the Kurdish area he was  turned  back  at
        the  checkpoint  which  the  appellant  claims   would   make   the
        authorities very hostile and unhelpful to him.
     9. In cross-examination,  the  appellant  was  asked  whether  he  was
        maintaining his claim never to have  spoken  to  his  family  since
        August 2016, which he claimed he was. It was put to  the  appellant
        that when he last came to court in January 2017 he had completed  a
        statement in which he referred to the fact his brother was  missing
        and the fact he understood that his brother was still  missing  and
        that the  family  suspected  this  was  the  action  of  the  named
        individual.  The appellant was asked how he would know that  if  he
        had not been in touch with the family since August 2016 yet  claims
        that he knew the family were still  missing  5  months  later?  The
        appellant claimed that he had made a mistake as the date of  August
        2017 had been recorded incorrectly and that  the  latest  statement
        should say August 2017.



Discussion



    10. Mr McVeety posed the question whether,  in  light  of  the  current
        position in Kirkuk which has been  in  the  hands  of  the  Kurdish
        Peshmerga since they forced  out  ISIS  in  2014  until  the  Iraqi
        authorities regained control of the city  and  the  Kurdish  forces
        withdrew with minimal recorded conflict having occurred, it  is  an
        area in which it can be said a person living there would be subject
        to a grant of leave pursuant to Article 15 (c) of the Qualification
        Directive.
    11. Although in the country  guidance  case  of  AA  the  Secretary  of
        State's advocate conceded Kirkuk fell within a contested  area  the
        circumstances appertaining to that region of Iraq when it was  held
        by ISIS is no longer applicable.
    12. It was not disputed by Mr McVeety that there is reference in  parts
        of the country material to ISIS forces being  present  in  northern
        Iraq forming pockets of resistance, but that the majority of  their
        forces had been defeated and pushed back both in  the  area  around
        Kirkuk, Mosel, and other areas of the country where they  were  the
        previous dominant force. It is accepted  that  military  operations
        have not concluded in all of Iraq but Mr McVeety's submission  that
        what has occurred represents a fundamental change since the country
        guidance decision was promulgated has arguable merit.
    13. The Kurdish forces are not in control of Kirkuk as this area is now
        in the control of the Iraqi  army.  It  is  not  an  area  that  is
        potentially lawless although there  is  potential  volatility.   No
        country material has been provided of sufficient quality to  enable
        a finding that Kirkuk is a place where the level of violence is  at
        a level where a civilian, solely by reason of being in  that  area,
        is at real risk of suffering harm sufficient to entitle them  to  a
        grant of Humanitarian Protection.
    14. The country material refers to some points  of  conflict  when  the
        Iraqi forces entered Kirkuk but  these  appear  to  have  been  the
        exception with most of the Peshmerga  peacefully  withdrawing.  The
        country material was referring to a tense situation  at  that  time
        but does not show that attacks continued or caused other than minor
        casualties to the civilian population.  The country  material  also
        refers to the fact that the Kurdish police force remained  in  post
        in Kirkuk when the Iraqi army entered to maintain security for  the
        civilian population.
    15. A BBC News article dated 25 October 2017 refers to the offer by the
        Kurdish  government  to  freeze  the  independent  vote  to  enable
        dialogue to take place between the Kurdish and Baghdad  authorities
        to resolve any potential conflict. This mirrors statements  by  the
        Baghdad government of the desire  to  resolve  the  matter  through
        discussion/negotiation.
    16. My first finding of fact is that the evidence  does  not  establish
        that the level of  violence  in  Kirkuk  is  sufficient  to  engage
        Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive and that there  is  no
        evidence  of  ongoing  fighting  in  Kirkuk  itself  sufficient  to
        establish a real risk of ill-treatment or harm for those returning.
        The country  material  relied  upon  in  the  respondent's  country
        guidance note refers to many having fled Kirkuk as a result of  the
        advances by the Iraqi army returning to their homes once it  became
        clear that the situation was not one  that  created  a  real  risk.
        There is no evidence that they were not able  to  return  to  their
        homes and continue their lives in Kirkuk.
    17. It was submitted on the respondent's behalf that in  light  of  the
        fact the appellant has been found not to be credible caution should
        be exercised in relation to his claim to have no contact  with  his
        family members.
    18. I  find  it  is  not  made  out  that  Kirkuk  has  an  operational
        international airport at this time or that direct  return  to  this
        city is currently feasible. Mr McVeety  accepted  passage  by  road
        from Baghdad is not  possible  due  to  dangers  reflected  in  the
        country  information  and  that  is  therefore  necessary  for  the
        appellant to return to Baghdad from where he will be able to travel
        to the IKR by air.
    19. Material in the  public  domain  clearly  shows  that  flights  are
        available from Baghdad (BGW) International airport - Iraq and  have
        resumed to Erbil (EBL) International airport - Iraq or elsewhere in
        the IKR. It was not disputed that this is the case. In addition  to
        it being accepted that there are available flights it is  not  made
        out that the appellant will be unable to travel  by  car  from  his
        point of arrival in the IKR to  a  chosen  destination  within  the
        Kurdish areas or northern  Iraq.  The  appellant  did  not  provide
        sufficient  evidence  to  support  a  finding  that   travel   from
        Sulamaniyah or Irbil to Kirkuk are routes that are contested giving
        rise to a real risk for those seeking to use them.
    20. Mr McVeety submitted that the appellant had not  established  there
        was actually any need for him to leave the airport in Baghdad.  The
        country  material  clearly  shows  that  those  with  the  required
        documentation, as this appellant has, will  be  permitted  to  pass
        through the airport into Baghdad and no real risk of harm has  been
        made out at the point of return. Mr McVeety's submission  is  based
        upon the ability of the appellant to book a connecting flight  from
        Baghdad International Airport to an airport in the IKR online  even
        before he has left the United  Kingdom.  Mr  McVeety  refer  to  an
        Internet search revealing  a  number  of  carriers  and  achievable
        costs, especially in light of the  fact  the  package  provided  to
        returnees by the Home Office includes sufficient  funds  to  enable
        them to travel to their home area.
    21. The preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal  also  shows  the
        appellant has  family  in  Iraqi  including  two  of  his  mother's
        relatives in the IKR with no evidence of the appellant having  made
        any unsuccessful enquiries  to  try  and  contact  those  relations
        through the NGOs, such as UNHCR or the Red Crescent who  ordinarily
        are willing to assist with tracing displaced family members. It  is
        relevant at this point to note the discrepancy identified in cross-
        examination referred to above  relating  to  the  appellants  claim
        appertaining to when he asserted  he  last  had  contact  with  his
        family, which was in 2016, which was totally at odds with his claim
        to have known family were  still  missing  in  2017.  Although  the
        appellant sought to correct  the  date  when  the  discrepancy  was
        pointed out to him by  Mr  McVeety  he  had  prior  to  this  point
        maintained that his evidence given relating to last contact in 2016
        was true. I do not find the appellant has discharged the burden  of
        proof upon himself to the required standard to  establish  that  he
        does not have contact with family members in Iraq or  that  he  has
        not maintained contact in the interim.  It  is  not  made  out  the
        appellant will be unable to contact family members who can be  made
        aware of the arrangements for his travel to Iraq  and  be  able  to
        assist in his return home. As noted above, the country  information
        made available records many having fled Kirkuk in the face  of  the
        advancing  Iraqi  government  forces  having  returned  to   Kirkuk
        indicating that travel is an available option and that for those no
        real risk sufficient to warrant their staying outside the city  was
        made out.
    22. The appellant asserts the starting point in this appeal has  to  be
        findings in the country guidance case of AA (Article 15  (c))  Iraq
        CG [2015] UKUT 000544 (IAC). In addition, Miss Wilkins refers to  a
        number of other relevant authorities in her skeleton argument which
        have ben considered.
    23. Addressing the question of whether there is a real risk of  serious
        harm in the appellant's home area, the appellant  relies  upon  the
        finding in AA that Kirkuk is a contested area where there is a real
        risk of serious harm due to indiscriminate violence. It is asserted
        in addition to the  finding  in  AA  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
        BA(Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 and the  Court  of
        Appeal in AA (Iraq) v Secretary State the  Home  Department  [2017]
        EWCA Civ 944 have repeated this position. It is  submitted  on  the
        appellant's behalf that strong grounds supported by cogent evidence
        are required to depart from country guidance findings.
    24. It is not made out that the point relating  to  Kirkuk  was  argued
        before the Court of Appeal.  The question is  whether  evidence  is
        sufficient quality and cogency has been provided  at  the  date  of
        this hearing. As stated above, the concession by the  Secretary  of
        State in relation to Kirkuk was made in 2014 and is not  relied  on
        or repeated by  Mr  McVeety  at  the  date  of  this  hearing.  The
        submission by the Secretary State that  the  appellant  can  safely
        return to Kirkuk, in light of developments, is a  clear  indication
        that it is not accepted by the respondent that a real  risk  exists
        in the country sufficient to engage Article 15(c) at this time.  As
        stated above, I find the respondent's position to be established as
        indeed it has been found to be by the High Court. All the available
        evidence relating to this area does not support  the  finding  that
        Kirkuk is in a contested area where there is a real risk of serious
        harm due to indiscriminate violence.
    25. The appellant's submission in relation to Kirkuk, in addition, that
        it is a disputed area between the Iraqi government and the  Kurdish
        regional government has been addressed above. The  appellant  fails
        to make out any real risk on return,  as  in  Iraqi  Kurd  with  no
        adverse profile returning from the United Kingdom to Kirkuk, at the
        hands of the Iraqi government forces.
    26. It is not suggested by this Tribunal that ISIS has no  presence  in
        Kirkuk; in the same way it may be argued this group has a  presence
        in the UK and other European countries amongst its  supporters  and
        those committed to acts of terrorism. It is not disputed that as  a
        result of the Iraqi army taking control of Kirkuk ISIS launched  an
        attack on villages south of Kirkuk which is a clear indication of a
        terrorist organisation seeking to exploit what they perceived to be
        a weakness in the opposing forces.  It has not been made  out  that
        this represents a sustained campaign or one that will create a real
        risk for the appellant on return. It is similarly accepted that the
        respondent's own country policy information from March 2017 records
        that incidents in Kirkuk Governorate were  at  the  same  level  or
        slightly higher in November 2016 than they were when AA was  heard,
        but insufficient  evidence  has  been  provided  by  the  appellant
        demonstrating that  the  position  at  the  date  of  this  hearing
        warranted a finding on this point in the appellant's favour. It  is
        also relevant to consider that the  Kirkuk  Governorate  covers  an
        area of 3,737 square miles following the addition of Arab dominated
        areas as part of Saddam Hussein's 'Arabisation' policy of this oil-
        rich area. Within that area there may be flashpoints or  points  of
        great conflict  and  a  generalised  statement  does  not  arguably
        establish the appellant's point in relation to this issue.
    27. The appellant fails to establish a real risk of serious harm in his
        home area.
    28. In relation to the question of whether internal relocation is  safe
        and reasonable it is not made out that the ability of the appellant
        to return to Baghdad, to fly from Baghdad to  the  IKR,  or  travel
        from the IKR to Kirkuk is unsafe.
    29. The appellant argues that  it  will  be  unreasonable  for  him  to
        relocate to Baghdad as the  appellant  is  only  a  Kurdish  Sorani
        speaker of limited education,  he has no one he can  stay  with  in
        Baghdad, that it appears there is no  prospects  of  the  appellant
        obtaining a sponsor to access a hotel room or to rent accommodation
        as he has no connections to Baghdad, and he is Kurdish and a  Sunni
        Muslim and arguably from a minority  community  in  Arab  dominated
        Baghdad.
    30. In relation of the ability of the appellant to return to  the  IKR;
        it is submitted on his behalf that this is also unreasonable  as  a
        result of the practicality of travel from Baghdad  to  the  IKR  by
        air. The appellant claims he has no one to  help  him  arrange  his
        travel to Baghdad by air [skeleton 30(a)] but this will be arranged
        by the respondent as part of the return process. In relation to the
        submission by Mr McVeety that  the  appellant  can  arrange  onward
        flights to the IKR from within the United Kingdom online, the  only
        response on the appellant's behalf is that this is not possible  as
        he does not have a credit card. In relation to this point, it  does
        not appear the appellant has explored with the respondent or  those
        who  provide  the  resettlement  grant,  the  possibility  of  such
        arrangements being made. Neither has the appellant established that
        once his date and time of return to  Baghdad  is  known  he  cannot
        arrange a flight in transit from Baghdad airport. Even if there  is
        a delay in making the connection it may only require the  appellant
        to remain in Baghdad for days rather than a longer period where the
        points advanced in his favour, relating to the reality  facing  the
        appellant if he has to stay in Baghdad, maybe more applicable.  The
        country guidance case  does  not  highlight  such  a  risk  for  an
        individual who is only  required  to  undertake  a  short  stay  in
        Baghdad. The fact of the matter is that the appellant seeks to  run
        his case on the basis of the  findings  in  AA  which  envisages  a
        situation of internal relocation to Baghdad and problems  that  may
        be encountered rather than the prospect of only  having  to  remain
        there effectively as a visitor until the appellant  moves  on.  The
        appellant also fails to  establish  that  the  cost  of  connecting
        flight to the IKR is unsustainable, especially in  light  of  these
        statement by Mr McVeety at the resettlement grant paid to returning
        Iraqis includes the cost of onward travel to an  individual's  home
        area.
    31. In relation to  the  reasonableness  of  return  to  the  IKR;  the
        appellant asserts  he  will  face  stringent  entry  and  residency
        restrictions. It is accepted the appellant's home  area  is  Kirkuk
        but is also the case that the appellant  has  been  in  the  United
        Kingdom for a number of years and will be known to be returning  as
        a failed asylum seeker by the Iraqi authorities and therefore  able
        to establish that he has had no connection with the city or ISIS in
        that region, meaning it has not been  made  out  that  he  will  be
        thought of as being connected with ISIS.
    32. The appellant asserts that as a result of his lack  of  connections
        and huge influx of refugees and IDP's he will find it difficult  to
        secure employment. Underpinning this alleged need to function as an
        independent individual is the appellant's assertion that he has not
        been in touch with any family members in Iraq and does not know the
        name of his relatives in the IKR or whether they  could  help  him.
        The issue of the credibility of the appellants claim to  have  lost
        or not make contact with family is discussed above. It has not been
        made out that the appellant does not have family members  who  will
        be able to assist him  on  return.  If  the  appellant  returns  to
        Kirkuk, this is outside the boundaries of the IKR where  issues  of
        displaced persons and job opportunities in the Kurdish  region  not
        is arguably applicable.
    33. In relation to the appellant's assertion that his father worked for
        the Ba'ath party in Iraq; this is an issue that arose frequently at
        the time of Saddam Hussain and after his immediate downfall.  Cases
        relevant to this issue include BKA  v  Sweden  App  11161/11  ECtHR
        (Fifth Section) in which the court found that former members of the
        Ba'ath party and Fedayeen whose memberships dated back more than 10
        years were no longer systematically attacked. Individuals might  be
        at risk but only in certain parts of your Iraq and only if they had
        held on a prominent position in  these  organisations.   In  M  A-H
        (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
        445 the Court of Appeal upheld a first-tier tribunal decision  that
        an appellant who was the son of a former member of the Baath  party
        and who was targeted by members of a militia lead by Iraqi MP,  Al-
        Daini would be at risk in the KRG.  The  Court  held  that  HM  and
        others (Article 15(c)) Iraq (No longer  a  CG  case  since  October
        2015)  [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC) did not address the issue  of  whether
        relocation provided  security  for  an  individual  targeted  by  a
        specific terrorist group (paras 22 - 23).
    34. The appellant does not claim that  he  has  been  targeted  by  any
        militia as a result of his father's previous involvement,  even  if
        the claim is credible, or that his father held a prominent position
        in the Ba'ath party  sufficient  to  create  a  real  risk  to  the
        appellant on return in 2017. It must be remembered that during  the
        time of Saddam Hussain many joined the Baath party as  a  means  to
        get on with their careers and within society. It is also noted  the
        appellant does not claim that he himself is a member of  the  Baath
        party,  which  is  a  prescribed  organisation  within  Iraq.   The
        appellant fails to establish that his father's activities  in  Iraq
        were such as to create a real risk especially in the absence of any
        evidence that prior to the intervention of ISIS  the  family  faced
        any  difficulties  for  this  reason   alone.   Most   high-ranking
        Ba'athists have either fled the country or already been dealt  with
        by the new regime. While it is accepted there may be an element  of
        score-settling, random attacks and discriminatory treatment towards
        former Ba'ath Party members, relatives  of  former  Ba'athists,  or
        those accused of being Ba'athists, such treatment is not systematic
        and will not, in general, be sufficient to reach  a  real  risk  of
        serious harm or persecution. The appellant  fails  to  establish  a
        credible real risk arising from his father's activities or that the
        same would prevent his entry to the IKR.
    35. The appellant's submission that Shia militia have  been  active  in
        his home area which may cause difficulties if they man road  blocks
        and checkpoints is noted but the country material  clearly  records
        that a number who fled before the Iraqi forces into  the  IKR  have
        successfully returned. Is it reasonable to assume that a number  of
        these may, in  addition  to  being  Arabs,  be  ethnic  Kurds.  The
        appellant has provided inadequate country material to suggest  that
        those previously from Kirkuk of Kurdish ethnicity cannot return.
    36.  The  appellant  also  refers  to  the  fact  that   given   recent
        developments there may be  violence  in  the  IKR  against  warring
        factions and difficulties in light of the forthcoming elections  in
        the Kurdish  regions.   Whilst  in  Iraq  anything  appears  to  be
        possible  depending  upon  who  is  involved  and   the   situation
        prevailing at any particular point  in  relation  to  a  number  of
        issues, it is not made out that any such real risk  arises  at  the
        date of this hearing and the finding that the appellant is entitled
        to a grant of international protection based upon such issues would
        amount to no more than mere  speculation  which,  in  itself,  will
        amount to an arguable legal error.
    37. I find the appellant has failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof
        upon him to the required standard to make out that he  is  entitled
        to a grant of international protection or that it  is  unreasonable
        to expect him to return to his home area via Baghdad and  the  IKR.
        The appellant possesses all the necessary documents to  enable  his
        return and to facilitate onward transportation.


Decision

    38. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been  found  to  have  materially
        erred in law and that decision set aside. I remake the decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.




   Anonymity.


    39. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 7 December 2017


































                                   Annex A


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: PA/02593/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 2 August 2017                             |                              |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     JAA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

 Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss K Smith - Direct Access Barrister.
For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            ERROR OF LAW FINDING



1. This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Chapman promulgated on 1 February 2017 in which the Judge  dismissed  the
   appellant's protection and human rights claims.


Background

2. The appellant is a national of Iraq born on  18  February  1997.  It  was
   found by the Judge that the appellant is from Kirkuk.
3. It was conceded by Mr McVeety that the appellant is not  entitled  as  of
   right to return to the IKR.
4. The Judge noted at [45], having rejected the  appellant's  account  about
   his reasons why he claimed to be at risk  in  Iraq,  that  the  issue  of
   protection or relocation from the named individual  did  not  arise.  The
   Judge noted the appellant can return to Kirkuk [47]. This  statement  was
   expanded on in [49] where the Judge finds:


             49. I must assess the risk on  return  now.  On  the  evidence
                  available, there is nothing to suggest that the  Appellant
                  cannot return to his family in Kirkuk.  He has his parents
                  and siblings there, and other family members,  who  appear
                  to be living their lives as normally as is possible in the
                  very difficult situation which continues to exist in Iraq.
                  In the light of my findings, there is nothing  to  suggest
                  that the Appellant cannot return to live with his  family,
                  and thus any vulnerabilities which  might  be  exposed  by
                  having to relocate elsewhere will not be exposed.


5. At [52] the Judge finds "In the light of this objective information,  and
   given the Appellant's history and personal  circumstances,  I  find  that
   there is currently no risk if he is returned to Kirkuk.
6. Miss Smith asserted the appellant had  provided  country  information  of
   his own and that the Judge failed to address any other evidence contained
   within the respondent's guidance and explain why that evidence led to the
   Judge to depart from the country guidance in AA (Article 15 (c)) Iraq  CG
   [2015] UKUT 544 wherein it was decided that 'return  to  the  appellant's
   home area of Kirkuk is a contested area'.
7. An issue that has arisen in relation to Kirkuk is that  at  the  date  of
   the hearing of AA, and indeed from approximately October 2014 Kirkuk  had
   been captured by the Kurdish  Peshmerga  and  was  no  longer  under  the
   control of IS. It appears that in AA a general concession was made by the
   representative of the Secretary of State in relation to the extent of the
   contested areas.  Notwithstanding,  AA  is  a  current  country  guidance
   decision for which good reasons are required  to  be  given  if  a  judge
   intends to depart from the same. It is also argued that evidence provided
   to the Judge showed that since mid-2015 the number of security  incidents
   in Kirkuk had remained steady, and the number of civilian fatalities  and
   injuries either decreased or remained  steady,  but  did  not  suggest  a
   drastic improvement in country conditions in Kirkuk.
8. The main point of dispute and discussion at  the  error  of  law  hearing
   related to whether the Judge's conclusions in  relation  to  Kirkuk  were
   infected by arguable legal error. The case of AA  identified  regions  in
   Iraq where the extent of internal armed conflict was such that a civilian
   being returned to that area will be likely to face a real risk solely  as
   a result of being there, entitling such individual to protection pursuant
   to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.
9. The concerns this tribunal has is the Judge fails to  adequately  explain
   what is meant by the finding there was currently no risk if the appellant
   is returned to Kirkuk. The Judge  was  entitled  to  find  there  was  no
   individual risk as the finding the appellant faced a real risk  from  the
   named individuals had been dismissed by  the  Judge  and  found  to  lack
   credibility. It is not necessary, however, for an individual to establish
   a subjective risk to be entitled to succeed in a claim  for  humanitarian
   protection. The failure of the Judge to adequately deal with  the  issues
   identified in the grounds seeking permission to appeal, relating to AA as
   a country guidance decision, and to make a specific finding  in  relation
   to the humanitarian protection element does give rise to  arguable  legal
   error.
10. It is also the case, as identified by Miss Smith, that there appears  to
   be a contradiction in the decision in  that  although  having  found  the
   appellant faces no risk on return to Kirkuk, the Judge at [53] states:


             53. I  am,  however,  still  obliged  to  follow  the  country
                  guidance case of AA (Article 15 (c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT
                  544 (IAC), which deals with the security situation in Iraq
                  [sic] although this  has  now  been  revised,  so  far  as
                  Baghdad is concerned by BA (returns to  Baghdad)  Iraq  CG
                  [2017] UKUT 00018.  In AA it was decided to return to  the
                  Appellant's home area of Kirkuk would amount to  a  breach
                  of Article 15 (c) of the Qualifying Directive as it  is  a
                  contested area. It also decided that there is not  a  real
                  risk  of  serious  harm  to  civilians  from   levels   of
                  indiscriminate violence in other parts of Iraq.


11. There is an arguable contradiction in that the Judge finds  on  the  one
   hand the appellant faces no risk on return to Kirkuk, which appears to be
   a departure from the country guidance case, but then explains that he  is
   required to follow that case and refers to the fact  that  an  individual
   returning  to  Kirkuk  will  be  entitled  to  a  grant  of  humanitarian
   protection on the basis Kirkuk is a contested area, unless he or  she  is
   able to relocate.
12. In [54] the Judge purports to consider  the  position  if  he  is  wrong
   about there being no risk on return to Kirkuk and the  risks  that  arise
   solely on the basis of the guidance contained in  AA  and  BA.   Had  the
   Judge properly assessed the issue of internal relocation and  arrived  at
   sustainable finding it may have been that any error in  relation  to  the
   first ground concerning Kirkuk would not have been material.
13. As stated above, it was accepted the appellant cannot return to the  IKR
   and so the  issue  relates  to  whether  it  is  reasonable  for  him  to
   internally relocate to Baghdad and to consider how he  will  be  able  to
   travel from Baghdad to his home area of Kirkuk if  it  is  found  he  can
   safely return  there  to  be  with  his  family.   The  Judge's  findings
   regarding the existence of family have not been shown to be  affected  by
   any arguable legal error and are therefore preserved.
14. It was accepted by both advocates  that  in  relation  to  the  internal
   relocation option, which was raised by the respondent in the reasons  for
   refusal letter, the Judge failed  to  adequately  assess  this  issue  by
   reference to the prevailing country guidance caselaw and to give adequate
   reasons for why it  is  reasonable  in  all  the  circumstances  for  the
   appellant to be expected to internally relocate  on  the  facts  of  this
   case.
15. It is submitted on the appellant's behalf that particular  circumstances
   relevant to a proper assessment include:

         a. the appellant originates from Kirkuk, a contested area;
         b. the appellant has never been to Baghdad or the IKR;
         c. the appellant has no known family in Baghdad or the IKR;
         d. the appellant is a Kurd;
         e. the appellant is a Sunni Muslim;
         f. the appellant does not speak Arabic;
         g. the appellant did not complete his education;
         h. the appellant has no work experience;
         i. the appellant will be returned to Baghdad and to relocate to the
            IKR he would  have  to  make  that  onward  journey  alone  (AA,
            [150]).


16. I find the Judge has erred in law in a manner material to  the  decision
   to dismiss the appeal in relation to the assessment of the risk of return
   to the appellant in Kirkuk  and  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  to
   Baghdad if he cannot return directly to his home area.  I  therefore  set
   aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  although  the  findings
   other than the conclusion the appellant faces no risk for any  reason  in
   Kirkuk and the finding he can  reasonably  relocate  shall  be  preserved
   findings.
17. The following directions shall apply to  the  further  hearing  of  this
   appeal:


         a. List for a Resumed hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson on
            the first available date after 1  September  2017  with  a  time
            estimate of three hours, subject to  the  availability  of  both
            Miss Smith on behalf of the appellant and Mr McVeety  on  behalf
            of the Secretary of State for the Home Department. The advocates
            shall file with the listing office at Field House details of the
            dates when they shall not be available in the three-month period
            commencing 1 September 2017, no later than seven days  from  the
            date of these directions.
         b.  A  Kurdish  (Sorani)  interpreter  shall  be  provided  by  the
            Tribunal.
         c. The parties shall, no later than 14 days before the date of  the
            Resumed hearing, file with the Upper Tribunal and  send  to  the
            opposing  party  consolidated,  indexed  and  paginated  bundles
            containing all the evidence upon  which  they  intend  to  rely.
            Witness  statements  from  everybody  intending  to  give   oral
            evidence must be signed, dated, contain a declaration of  truth,
            and shall stand as the evidence of chief of the maker who  shall
            be tendered for cross examination and re-examination only.
         d. The findings other than the conclusion the  appellant  faces  no
            risk for any reason in Kirkuk and the finding he can  reasonably
            relocate shall be preserved findings.


Decision

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside  the
   decision of the original Judge. The appeal shall be listed for a  Resumed
   hearing in accordance with the directions set out  above  to  enable  the
   Upper Tribunal to remake the decision by either  allowing  or  dismissing
   the appeal.


    Anonymity.


19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
   of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 August 2017
