
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA022652016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2017                               |On 27 June 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    C H S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on [ ] 1964.   He  left
    Iran on 9 November 2015  and,  travelling  via  Turkey  and  Italy,  he
    entered the United Kingdom on 28 November 2015 using a false  passport.
    He claimed asylum on arrival.  The basis of the appellant's  claim  was
    that he had converted from Islam to Christianity and would be  at  risk
    on return to Iran as an apostate.

 3. On 19 February 2016, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Coaster
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The judge found  that
    the appellant  had  failed  to  establish  that  he  had  converted  to
    Christianity in Iran where he had attended a house church and  that  he
    had  been  detained  and  mistreated  before  being   released   by   a
    compassionate Iranian official.  In addition, Judge Coaster found  that
    the appellant had not converted to Christianity in the UK.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    three grounds:

    (1)  That the judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account  the  country
         evidence when finding the appellant's account implausible;

    (2)  That the judge had misstated and misunderstood the evidence; and

    (3)  That it was procedurally  unfair  that  the  judge  had  taken  an
         adverse point against the appellant which was  not  raised  at  the
         hearing.

 6. On 1 December 2016, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  M  J  Gillespie)
    granted the appellant permission on all grounds.

 7. On 26 January 2017, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  response
    opposing the appellant's appeal.

Discussion

 8. I heard oral submissions from Mr Neale in which he developed the  three
    grounds of appeal.  In response,  Mr  Diwnycz  sought  to  sustain  the
    judge's decision and reasoning.  In the result, I have  concluded  that
    Mr Neale correctly  identified  a  number  of  errors  in  the  judge's
    decision which were material to her adverse credibility finding.  It is
    necessary, therefore, only to deal with those points.

 9. First, Mr Neale submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the background  evidence  concerning  the  Iranian  authority's
    monitoring of house church meetings when concluding in para 64 that  it
    was implausible that the appellant would  have  been  detected  by  the
    authorities having attended a house church only seven or eight times on
    a weekly or fortnightly basis at different locations.  At para 64,  the
    judge said this:

         "I then assess the credibility of the Appellant's claim that he was
         taken away in hand cuffs by two unknown men at about 11am from  his
         shop on 25th October 2015.  By that time the Appellant had attended
         a house church seven or eight  times  when  the  house  church  met
         weekly or  fortnightly.   He  said  his  attendance  was  irregular
         because of work commitments.  It is  not  established  whether  the
         Appellant started attending the house church a week after the  meal
         with his Armenian friends in April/May 2015 or in  August  2015  as
         his evidence is not consistent.  The Appellant  describes  however,
         that the members of the house church were  given  short  notice  by
         mobile phone of the house church meeting a few hours later and that
         they took steps to avoid the house church meetings being discovered
         by going on foot, or parking in another street.   Nevertheless  the
         two men who accused the Appellant  of  converting  to  Christianity
         said they had seen him at a house church in Zarkesh and  that  they
         asked him about visiting [R].  Given  the  measures  taken  by  the
         Appellant  to  avoid  detection  it  begs  the  question  how   the
         authorities could have so quickly (after seven or eight visits to a
         house church in different locations) could have identified him."

10. Mr Neale submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  grapple  with  the
    evidence in the report "The Cost of Faith: Persecution  of  Christians,
    Protestants and  Converts  in  Iran"  published  by  the  International
    Campaign for Human Rights in Iran (2013) at pages 57  and  58  of  that
    report under  the  heading  "Monitoring  and  Harassment"  appears  the
    following.

         "Part  and  parcel  of  Iran's  persecution  of  Protestants  is  a
         systematic practice of  monitoring  and  harassment.   While  these
         government  acts  are  not  fully  distinct   from   other   rights
         violations, they  represent  the  violations  experienced  by  many
         Christians who  might  otherwise  never  face  a  jail  cell  or  a
         courtroom.

         Iran's Ministry of  Intelligence  and  other  government  agencies,
         including the Ministry of Culture  and  Islamic  Guidance,  closely
         monitor the activities of recognized churches  and  house  churches
         and  their  members.   Information  gathered  by  the  Ministry  of
         Intelligence then becomes the basis for arrests  and  prosecutions,
         as well as for the closures of churches.

         Government monitoring can take both open and  covert  forms.   Open
         monitoring usually  involves  Ministry  of  Intelligence  officials
         forcing church leaders from  both  recognized  churches  and  house
         churches to provide information about services, education programs,
         and  members,  including  names  and  biographical  data.    Eleven
         Christians, all from house churches, reported to the Campaign  that
         they had been summoned, often through their church  leaders,  in  a
         few cases through  their  employers,  to  either  the  Ministry  of
         Intelligence, police, or Revolutionary Courts for  questioning  and
         then released thereafter.  Some Christians reported being  summoned
         tens of times.

         Christians told  the  Campaign  that  during  these  summons  their
         interrogators would often try to convince them to return to  Islam.
         Interrogators would  also  insult  and  threaten  them,  repeatedly
         emphasizing they should  stop  their  participation  in  the  house
         church."

11. In my judgment, the judge erred in reaching her adverse  conclusion  in
    para 64 by failing to deal  with  this  evidence  which  provided  some
    support for the plausibility of his account that his involvement with a
    house church as he claimed could have brought him to the  attention  of
    the authorities who  monitor  not  only  official  churches  but  house
    churches also.

12. Secondly, Mr Neale contended that the judge  had  erred  in  concluding
    that a central aspect of the appellant's  claim  was  not,  in  effect,
    plausible.  That is that  he  was  approached  by  Protestant  Armenian
    Christians (in particular "R") who took him  to  a  house  church  were
    engaged in proselytising and that the house church was holding services
    in Farsi.  The judge dealt with this at paras 55-61 as follows:

         "55.     The Appellant's claim to have  been  approached  by  three
             Armenians who introduced him to  a  Christian  Armenian  house
             church is not in accordance with the background information on
             Armenian Christians in  Iran.   The  Country  Information  and
             Guidance Iran: Christians and  Christian  Converts  report  of
             December 2015 refers at Section 5 to Iran  Focus  reported  in
             September 2014 that:

                  'Iran's  traditional  Christian   communities,   such   as
                  Orthodox Armenians and Assyrians, are protected under  the
                  Islamic Republic's constitution as so-called People of the
                  Book.  Their daily lives  are  subject  to  various  legal
                  restrictions, however, their schools and church activities
                  are closely watched, and  they  cannot  lead  most  public
                  institutions.'

         56.  The Country Information and Guidance report also  states  that
             in May 2015 the thematic official report  of  the  Netherlands
             Ministry of Foreign Affairs states that:

                  'the Iranian authorities generally do not  interfere  with
                  the religious practices of  Christians  belonging  to  the
                  "old" recognized affiliations.  As long  as  these  groups
                  refrain from evangelizing, they are generally not targeted
                  by the authorities  solely  on  grounds  of  their  faith.
                  Christians of the "old churches"  usually  belong  to  the
                  same  ethnic  group  and  are  members  of  the  Orthodox,
                  Catholic and Protestant  church.   Armenian  and  Assyrian
                  Christians live in closed social communities  and  do  not
                  engage in proselytizing activities' (with reference  being
                  given to the Austrian Centre for  Country  of  Origin  and
                  Asylum Research and Documentation (ACCORD), Iran:  Freedom
                  of   Religion;   Treatment   of   Religious   and   Ethnic
                  Minorities).

         57.  The International Campaign for Human Rights in  Iran  2013  at
             pages 1 - 76 of the Appellant Supplementary bundle  refers  to
             Armenians "who belong to  an  Orthodox  church  enjoy  certain
             liberties within a framework that Iranian security forces have
             set: you speak in your own language, you preach  to  your  own
             community and you don't have anything to do with  the  Muslim,
             non Christian community".

         58.  The Appellant seeks to contradict the  background  information
             by telling of  an  Armenian  martyrs,  including  an  Armenian
             Christian, Hayk Supyat who ran a house  church;  and  his  son
             Edward Supyat,  who  now  lives  in  the  United  States.   In
             submissions a reference was made to an Armenian cleric who was
             persecuted for  proselytising  in  2012.   I  find  that  this
             evidence supports the Country Information and Guidance  report
             rather than contradicts it and therefore seriously  undermines
             the  Appellant's  credibility  that  he  was  introduced   and
             converted to Christianity by three evangelising Armenians.

         59.  The Appellant  also  submitted  that  his  Armenian  Christian
             friends would  have  had  no  choice  but  to  practice  their
             evangelist  faith  through  house  churches   if   they   were
             Protestant Armenians.  The other  participants  at  the  house
             church were five Farsi speaking people and three Armenians.

         60.  I note that reference is made in the Appellant's Supplementary
             bundle, International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran  2013,
             that Iranian Protestants could be found by the late  2000s  in
             nearly every  ethnicity  in  the  country  including  Persian,
             Armenian, Assyrian, Kurdish,  Turkmen  and  Azari  Turk.   The
             Appellant  said  that  his  friends  were  Armenian  Christian
             Protestants but he did not know which church they went to.  He
             did state that his first house church  meeting  was  in  [R's]
             home because he could not take the  Appellant  to  his  church
             which suggests [R] was an Orthodox Armenian, not a  Protestant
             Armenian.

         61.  In SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008]  UKAIT
             00082  it  states  that  it  was  estimated  that  there  were
             approximately 80,000-100,000 Orthodox Armenians  in  Iran  and
             about  500  Armenian  Catholics.   There  was  no  mention  of
             Protestant Armenians whose faith requires them  to  evangelise
             or where they worship.  At paragraph 26 of SZ it is clear that
             evangelising is not a practice in the Armenian Orthodox or the
             Roman Catholic Church.   The  weight  of  background  evidence
             suggests that there are very few Protestant Armenians in Iran.
              I find that the Appellant fails to establish that his friends
             were Protestant Armenians  in  the  light  of  the  background
             evidence."

13. Mr Neale submitted that the judge had misread SZ and JM.  He took me to
    the report of the case beginning at page E13 of the bundle  before  the
    judge.  Mr Neale submitted that the judge appeared to  only  take  into
    account paras 25 and 26 of the Tribunal's decision where  evidence  was
    set out concerning churches in Iran.  In those paragraphs no  reference
    is made to Protestant Armenian churches and, as a consequence, she  had
    concluded that there were "very  few  Protestant  Armenians  in  Iran".
    However, Mr Neale referred me to paras 27-28  where  the  existence  of
    Protestant Armenian churches is identified in the expert evidence of Ms
    Enayat.  At [27]-[28], the Tribunal set out the evidence as follows:

         "27.     Ms Enayat said that however difficult it is to assess  the
             current membership size of the ethnic Christian  churches,  it
             is even more difficult to assess the current  membership  size
             of the Protestant churches.  She concluded that on the eve  of
             the 1979 revolution  there  were  (not  counting  expatriates)
             around 7,000, broken down as to approximately 2,000 Anglicans,
             3,000 Presbyterians, 700 Pentecostalists and an  unknown,  but
             very  small,  number  of  Plymouth   Brethren,   Seventh   Day
             Adventists and Jehovah's Witnesses.

         28.  By the early 2000s she describes the figure as having declined
             precipitously by the early 2000s,  with  the  Anglican  Church
             congregation having fallen  to  between  60  and  80  and  the
             Presbyterian Church (Injili) to 1,000 including the  Armenian,
             Assyrian and Persian speaking branches.   She  concludes  that
             the figure, in the early 2000s, would  be  a  total  of  about
             3,000 to 3,500 people.  Although that is about half the figure
             given by Human Rights  Watch  in  1997,  she  noted  that  her
             calculation does not tally with the figures given by Operation
             World in 2000. ..."

14. Likewise, Mr Neale relied upon a passage in the  "The  Cost  of  Faith"
    report at page 20 of  that  report  again  identify  the  existence  of
    Protestant Armenian churches:

         "In the Protestant community,  government-recognized  churches  are
         mostly comprised of Protestants of Armenian and  Assyrian  descent,
         or long-time (pre-1979) converts from  Muslim  backgrounds.   After
         the 1979 Revolution, authorities allowed some government-recognized
         Protestant churches to remain open and hold  services  in  Persian,
         but imposed restrictions on  church  attendance  largely  aimed  at
         preventing  the  growth  of  Protestantism  among  Iranians.    For
         example,  they  tried  to  require  recognized  churches  to  limit
         attendance  to  pre-existing  church  members,   excluding   recent
         converts and non-Christians,  and  refused  to  recognize  any  new
         Protestant church organisations."

15. Mr Neale submitted that the judge had failed to take this into account,
    despite her reference to other background material, in  reasoning  that
    she did not accept that R, whom the appellant claimed was  an  Armenian
    Protestant  and  had  introduced  him  to  a  house  church  (therefore
    effectively proselytising) rather than taking him to his own church.

16. In his submissions, Mr Diwnycz accepted that if the judge had failed to
    consider the evidence relating to the existence of Armenian  Protestant
    churches and their evangelical nature, it would be difficult to sustain
    the judge's adverse finding.

17. In my judgment, Judge Coaster erred in law  by  failing  to  take  this
    background evidence into account in reaching her adverse conclusion  in
    para 61 on the core issue of whether the appellant's account was to  be
    believed that he had been approached by Protestant Armenian  Christians
    and taken to a house church and, in effect, had been the subject  of  a
    proselytising by them.

18. In support of his submission Mr Neale also  sought  to  rely  upon  new
    material which he  invited  me  to  admit  under  rule  15(2A)  of  the
    Procedure Rules on an E & R basis (E & R v SSHD [2004]  EWCA  Civ  429)
    which established that a mistake of fact could amount to  an  error  of
    law.  The material re-enforced the [points made  by  Mr  Neale  on  the
    material before the judge.  In the result, it is unnecessary for me  to
    decide whether the submission of new evidence would be proper  on  that
    basis, on which I have some doubts, because Mr Neale has made good  his
    argument on this ground on the basis of the evidence  that  was  before
    the judge.

19. Thirdly, Mr Neale contended  that  the  judge  had  acted  unfairly  in
    identifying an inconsistency in the appellant's account at para  53  of
    her determination.  This concerned an inconsistency in the dates of two
    events derived from the appellant's evidence and the conversion of  the
    dates from the Iranian to the Gregorian calendar.  In para 53 the judge
    stated that:

         "In or about April/May 2015 three Armenian customers invited him to
         a meal.  They disclosed that they were Armenian customers  and  the
         Appellant told them of the cross he had  been  given  when  he  was
         fifteen.  ... He was then asked if he would like to know more about
         Christianity and when he replied that he did, he was invited  to  a
         house church meeting by one of the three Armenian  customers,  [R].
         The Appellant states that he started to feel different as a  result
         of attending the church meetings in early June.  However  there  is
         an inconsistency in the Appellant's  evidence  he  claims  to  have
         attended a house church meeting for the first  time  about  a  week
         after the meal and alternatively  that  [R]  phoned  him  in  about
         August  2015  to  attend  a  house   church   meeting.    Such   an
         inconsistency undermines the Appellant's credibility.

20. Mr Neale helpfully set out in paras  12  and  30  of  the  grounds  the
    claimed inconsistency based upon conversion of the date  given  in  the
    appellant's evidence.  His evidence  was  that  R  telephoned  "at  the
    beginning of Shahrivar 1394".  Mr Neale sets out that "Shahrivar  1394"
    began on 23 August 2015.  The appellant's evidence was that he  started
    to feel different as a result  of  attending  a  house  church  on  "17
    Khordad 1394" which, when converted, is three months before  "Shahrivar
    1394", i.e. in June.

21. Mr Neale submitted that that  appears  to  be  the  derivation  of  the
    inconsistency in the timeline relied upon by the appellant.   Mr  Neale
    submitted that it is  not  clear  how  Judge  Coaster  arrived  at  the
    conversions from the Iranian to Gregorian calendar.  He submitted  that
    it was wrong in  law  for  her  to  draw  adverse  conclusions  without
    bringing the issue to the attention of the parties and he  relied  upon
    EG (post-hearing internet research) Nigeria  [2008]  UKAIT  00015.   He
    submitted that had  she  done  so  the  appellant  would  have  had  an
    opportunity to provide an  explanation  for  the  apparent  discrepancy
    which was "self-evidently" a mistake.

22. As the AIT recognised in EG as set out in the head note:

         "It is most unwise for a judge to conduct post-hearing research  on
         the internet or otherwise, into the factual issues which have to be
         decided in a case.  To derive evidence from  post-hearing  research
         on the internet and to base conclusions on  that  evidence  without
         giving the parties the opportunity to comment on it is wrong."

23. Here, it may be that the judge was entitled to take judicial notice  of
    the conversion from the Iranian to Gregorian calendars.   However,  the
    self-evident inconsistency once that conversion was made had  not  been
    an issue raised by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter  or  at
    the hearing.  The appellant was, as a consequence,  effectively  'taken
    by surprise' on the inconsistency being relied upon by  the  judge.   I
    accept Mr Neale's submission that he was  thereafter  deprived  of  the
    opportunity to provide an explanation,  if  he  wished,  including  the
    possibility  that  it  was  simply  a  mistake.   In  relying  on   the
    inconsistency, in my judgment, Judge Coaster erred  in  law  for  these
    reasons.

24. Taking these three points together,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law in reaching her  adverse  credibility  finding.
    Her decision cannot stand and is set aside.

25. Although the grounds of appeal do not directly  challenge  her  adverse
    finding in relation to whether the appellant had  established  that  he
    had converted to Christianity in  the  UK  that  issue  is,  obviously,
    contingent upon proper findings being made about events in  Iran  prior
    to his arrival in the UK.  For this reason, none of the judge's factual
    findings cannot stand and the appeal must be reheard de novo.

Decision

26. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  The decision is set aside.

27. Having regard to the nature and extent  of  fact-finding  required  and
    para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,   it   is
    appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and direct a
    rehearing of the appeal  de  novo  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Coaster.


                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  26 June 2017





