
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02953/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th November 2016                 |On 5 December 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mohammed [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Aslam, Fadiga & Co Solicitors, Stratford


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.   However
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 1st September  1980.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  9th  March  2016
    refusing his application for asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  on
    human rights grounds.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Metzer on 23rd August 2016.  He allowed the Appellant's appeal
    under Article 3 ECHR in a decision promulgated on 14th September  2016.



 3. An application for permission to appeal was  made  and  permission  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 10th October 2016.  The
    permission states that it is arguable that the  judge's  finding,  that
    returning the Appellant to Mogadishu would breach Article  3  of  ECHR,
    involves an error of law due to  the  judge's  failure  to  follow  the
    country guidance in MOJ and Others (CG) [2014]  UKUT  442  (IAC).   The
    permission states that headnotes (ix), (x) and (xi) of  this  case  are
    relevant. With reference to headnote (x) it is arguable that given  the
    Appellant is a healthy adult without dependants  the  judge  failed  to
    give reasons for finding that the Appellant would have no real prospect
    of securing access to a livelihood on return to Mogadishu.

 4. No Rule 24 response was lodged.

The Hearing

 5. The Presenting Officer asked to expand the grounds to take into account
    the question of risk in an IDP camp in Somalia with  reference  to  the
    case of Abdul Kadir Ahmed Said [2016]  EWCA  Civ  442.   He  also  made
    reference to the case of AAW Somalia [2015] UKUT 00673 (IAC).

 6. The Appellant's representative submitted that this is  a  major  change
    not a slight disagreement and should not be added to the reasons in the
    grant of permission.  I reserved my position.

 7. The  Presenting  Officer  made  his  submissions  submitting  that  the
    Appellant's brother has status in  the  United  Kingdom  based  on  his
    membership of the Benadiri clan.  He submitted that there was  evidence
    from him before the judge although he was not at the hearing in person.



 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph 10 of  the  decision
    the judge states that the only issue  of  credibility  is  whether  the
    Appellant lost contact with his family in  Somalia  after  he  went  to
    Yemen.  I was referred to paragraph 13 of the  decision  in  which  the
    judge states that the Appellant has no political presence and would  be
    returned to Mogadishu.  The judge notes that the  Appellant  has  never
    lived there.  He has not lived in Somalia  since  1987/88.   The  judge
    finds that the Appellant has  no  family  in  Mogadishu  and  there  is
    nothing to suggest that his clan (Ashraf) would be of any help  to  him
    and there would be limited assistance from his brother  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge finds it is likely that  on  return  the  Appellant
    will require to live in an IDP camp where there is a  real  possibility
    of having to live in conditions falling below  acceptable  humanitarian
    standards.  The Presenting Officer submitted that in spite of this,  at
    paragraph 15 of the  decision,  the  judge  refers  to  there  being  a
    substantial number of Benadiri tribe people living in Mogadishu but  he
    goes on to find that the Appellant does not have strong  clan  ties  to
    the Benadiri tribe, mainly because of the length of time he  has  lived
    outside Somalia.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that paragraph 14 of the  decision  is
    unlawful.  I was referred to the case of MOJ and Others Somalia  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 (IAC).   This  states  that  Somalian  citizens  can  go  to
    Mogadishu even if they are not from there and they will not be at  real
    risk of persecution or at real risk of harm.   He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant will not be at risk simply on account of having  lived  in  a
    European location for a period of time.  Paragraph 407  of  MOJ  states
    that Al Shabaab have now withdrawn from Mogadishu and the Appellant has
    not shown that he will be unable to work there as at present  there  is
    an economic  boom  in  Mogadishu  and  there  is  work  available.   At
    paragraph 408 it is stated that it will only be those with no  clan  or
    family support, those who will not be in receipt  of  remittances  from
    abroad and those who will have no real prospect of securing access to a
    livelihood  on  return,  who  will  face  the  prospect  of  living  in
    circumstances falling below that which is  acceptable  in  humanitarian
    protection terms.  He submitted that the Appellant has not  shown  that
    he will be unable to get work in Mogadishu in the present situation and
    the judge in his decision does not say why he  believes  the  Appellant
    will be unable to find work.

10. I was then referred the said case of AAW  and  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that this is a Benadiri case and reiterates what is stated in
    the said case of MOJ.  I was referred to paragraph 47 which  refers  to
    the prospects of an Appellant  securing  a  livelihood.   Paragraph  54
    refers to the Appellant in that case having  no  family  in  Mogadishu,
    being a member of a minority clan and not being able  to  resort  to  a
    well-established  and  predominant  Mogadishu  community  who  have  in
    general rebuilt their businesses in the aftermath of the initial period
    of the civil war.  At paragraph 55 of AAW it is stated that even though
    some minority clans have little  to  offer  to  those  of  its  members
    looking for assistance, the Benadiri are not in  such  a  position  and
    there are employment opportunities.  The Presenting  Officer  submitted
    that the case of AAW was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  its
    analysis has to be taken into account and it supports the said case  of
    MOJ.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Appellant has not  shown  why
    he will be unable to  find  work  if  he  returns  to  Mogadishu.   The
    Benadiri will help him and there is therefore a material error  of  law
    in the judge's decision.

12. I was then referred to the said  case  of  Said  which  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted is binding on  the  Tribunal  and  should  have  been
    applied by the judge.   He  submitted  that  based  on  this  case  the
    conditions in the IDP camps do not  reach  the  threshold  required  by
    Article 3.  I was referred to the case of N v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home  Department  [2005]  2  AC  296  and  he  submitted  that  the
    conditions in the IDP camps do not meet the threshold  required  by  N.
    What would be required would be the risk of direct violence against the
    Appellant on return to an IDP camp in Somalia and  this  has  not  been
    shown.  He submitted that there is no evidence from  the  Appellant  to
    show that he would suffer mistreatment from, for example,  militias  on
    return to an IDP camp.  He submitted that paragraph 14 of the  decision
    is inconsistent with the said case of N.

13. I was asked to find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.

14. The Appellant's representative submitted  that  based  on  the  grounds
    pleaded which rely on the  country  guidance  case  of  MOJ,  not  only
    headnote (x) has to be considered but also headnotes (ix) and (xi).  He
    submitted that the  Respondent  refers  to  economic  opportunities  in
    Mogadishu but he submitted this has to be read with headnote  (vii)  to
    (xii) in MOJ.  He submitted that (x) cannot be read in isolation.

15. The representative submitted that there may be employment available  if
    the Appellant has assistance in obtaining a livelihood but he submitted
    that this Appellant has no assistance.  He  submitted  that  the  judge
    deals with this at paragraph 12 onwards of his decision.   This  is  an
    Appellant who left Somalia when he was aged 11 and lived in Yemen until
    he came to the United Kingdom.  He submitted  that  he  has  no-one  in
    Somalia and no assistance there.  The judge refers to this at paragraph
    13 and the judge at this paragraph refers to  the  appellant's  brother
    having his own family in the United Kingdom and being  unable  to  give
    the Appellant financial assistance.

16. At paragraph 14 of the decision the judge refers to paragraph  (xi)  of
    MOJ.  He states that the Appellant would be returning as  someone  with
    no clan or family support who would not be in  receipt  of  remittances
    from abroad.  The judge finds that because of this he  would   have  no
    real prospect of  securing  access  to  a  livelihood  on  return.   He
    submitted that the Appellant would need an element of support if he was
    removed to Somalia now.  He submitted that at paragraph  14  the  judge
    builds up to the real possibility of the Appellant having  to  live  in
    conditions falling below acceptable humanitarian standards  in  an  IDP
    camp.  He sets out other reasons for the Appellant being unable to  get
    a livelihood on return and all these reasons are in line with the  case
    of MOJ.  I was referred to paragraph 31 of  the  case  of  Said.   This
    states that there is a distinction between  humanitarian protection and
    Article 3 and the individual circumstances of the person concerned must
    be considered.  Reference is made in this paragraph to paragraph 43  of
    MOJ.

         "The fact that we have rejected the view that there is a real  risk
         of persecution or serious harm or  ill-treatment  to  civilians  or
         returnees in Mogadishu does not mean that no  Somali  national  can
         succeed in a refugee or humanitarian protection or Article 3 claim.
          Each case will fall to be decided on its own  facts.   There  will
         need to be a careful assessment  of  all  the  circumstances  of  a
         particular individual."

    The representative submitted that when all the facts in this  case  are
    considered this Appellant's claim should succeed under Article  3.   He
    submitted that the judge's decision is in line with the  said  case  of
    MOJ and the particular circumstances of the case are described  in  the
    judge's decision at paragraphs 7 to 12.  He submitted that there is  no
    material error of law in the judge's decision.

17. I asked about the Appellant being able to get help  from  the  Benadiri
    clansmen in Mogadishu.  The representative referred to paragraph 15  of
    the decision in which the judge  states  he  does  not  find  that  the
    Appellant has strong clan ties to the Benadiri  tribe  given  where  he
    previously lived and his length of time outside Somalia and the absence
    of any family connections and the fact that he left Mogadishu  when  he
    was a child.  He submitted that the judge's decision was open to him on
    the specific facts of this case.

18. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Appellant's circumstances  do
    not show that the Appellant is  someone  who  cannot  get  family  clan
    assistance.  He submitted that there is no reason  for  this  Appellant
    having to go to live in an IDP camp.  It is only those who cannot  work
    who have to live there.

19. I was again referred to the said case of MOJ at paragraphs 407 and  408
    which state that the Appellant has to show why he cannot get work  even
    if he has no support and he submitted that this Appellant has not  done
    so.  I was referred to paragraph 407(g) of MOJ which states:

         "The significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
         Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
         assistance  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
         protection function than previously.  There are no clan militias in
         Mogadishu, no clan  violence,  and  no  clan  based  discriminatory
         treatment, even for minority clan members."


    He submitted that work is available for  everyone  unless  there  is  a
    reason an individual cannot work and there is nothing to indicate  that
    in this case the Appellant is unable to work.  He submitted that  there
    is no material difference between the case of MOJ and  this  case.   He
    submitted that people in the  Appellant's  position  are  in  a  better
    situation than those who have remained in Somalia.  He  submitted  that
    there has to be a connection between work and clan and I  was  referred
    to paragraph 28 of the said case of Said which refers to paragraph  408
    of MOJ and states that there would be no breach of Article 3 on return.



20. He submitted that if the Appellant is removed from the  United  Kingdom
    he can apply for funds to assist him, so on arrival in Somalia he  will
    be able to support himself until he gets work.  He submitted  that  the
    judge has used the wrong starting point in this claim.  This  Appellant
    on return will be able to get work and he has not discharged the burden
    of proof showing that he will be unable to do this.

21. The Appellant's representative submitted that the Presenting Officer is
    expanding on what the case of MOJ states.  He submitted that  paragraph
    407(h) of MOJ states:

         "It will be for the person facing return to  Mogadishu  to  explain
         why he would not be able to access the economic opportunities  that
         have been produced by the 'economic boom', especially as  there  is
         evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are  taking  jobs  at  the
         expense of those who have never been away."

    He submitted that this cannot be read in isolation.  He submitted  that
    the rest of paragraph 407 makes it  clear  that  everything  hinges  on
    assistance  and  support.   Someone  returning  to  Mogadishu  requires
    assistance so that they can re-establish themselves and this  Appellant
    has no-one there and he submitted that there is no  material  error  of
    law in the judge's decision based on the  case  law  and  the  evidence
    before him.

Decision and Reasons

22. The Presenting Officer's claim is based on headnote  (x)  in  the  said
    case of MOJ and Others (x):

         "It will be for the person facing return to explain  why  he  would
         not be able to access the economic  opportunities  that  have  been
         produced by the economic boom, especially as there is  evidence  to
         the effect that returnees are taking jobs at the expense  of  those
         who have never been away."


    The Respondent however has not taken this in context.  This has  to  be
    considered along with the other headnotes in the said case of  MOJ  and
    Others.  Headnote (vii)  states  that  help  for  people  returning  to
    Mogadishu from their clan members who are not close relatives, is  only
    likely to be forthcoming for majority clan members, as  minority  clans
    may have little to offer.  The case goes on to state that there are  no
    clan militias in Mogadishu and no clan violence and  no  discriminatory
    treatment for minority clan members but if a returnee  has  no  nuclear
    family or close relatives to assist him in re-establishing  himself  on
    return all these circumstances have to be taken into account.

23. This is an Appellant who left Somalia when he was  11  years  old.   He
    lived in Yemen before he came to the  United  Kingdom.   He  has  never
    lived in Mogadishu.  He has no family there although it is  clear  that
    there are Benadiri clan members living in Mogadishu.  He has no  access
    to financial resources and because of these circumstances the prospects
    of him securing a livelihood would seem to be almost impossible.  There
    are no remittances from abroad available to him and  although  headnote
    (x) states that the Appellant has to explain why he would not  be  able
    to  access  the  economic   opportunities   in   Mogadishu   when   the
    circumstances of this case are considered it is unlikely that he  would
    be able to access these economic opportunities.   It  seems  that  this
    Appellant is likely to be one of the people described in  (xi)  of  MOJ
    and Others.  He would have no real prospect of  securing  access  to  a
    livelihood  on  return  and  will  face  the  prospect  of  living   in
    circumstances falling below that which is  acceptable  in  humanitarian
    protection terms.  (xii) states that people  who  have  never  been  to
    Mogadishu can return to live there and are not subjected to an  Article
    15(c) risk but it goes on to state that it is not realistic for someone
    of a minority clan with no former links to the city  having  any  other
    alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation in an IDP camp.

24. The case of Said should have been taken into account by the  First-tier
    Judge and this case makes reference to IDP camps.  At paragraph  31  it
    states that if the returning Somali national can show that he is likely
    to end up having to establish himself in an  IDP  camp  that  would  be
    sufficient to engage the protection of Article 3.  It goes on to  state
    that the individual circumstances of the person concerned  have  to  be
    considered and makes reference to the test in the said case  of  N.   I
    have considered the objective evidence on IDP camps  which  was  before
    the judge.  I find this particular Appellant is likely to be unable  to
    establish himself in Mogadishu for the same reasons as  the  judge  has
    found this.

25. The burden is on the Appellant to show that he will have  no  prospects
    of securing a livelihood whether that be employment or  self-employment
    and when this Appellant's circumstances are  considered  he  has  shown
    this and for him to be removed to Mogadishu would engage Article  3  of
    ECHR based on his circumstances.  He may well end up as  a  person  who
    has no option but to live in an IDP camp.   The case of MOJ and  Others
    makes findings on these camps which  have  to  be  considered  and  the
    objective  evidence  refers  to   thousands   of   people   living   in
    circumstances of destitution.  Each case falls to be decided on its own
    facts and I find that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  Judge
    Metzer's decision promulgated on 14th September 2016.

26. His decision must stand and the Appellant's appeal on Article  3  human
    rights grounds is allowed.

27. Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray     5 December 2016
