
                                    [pic]
St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02150/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
| on 23rd December 2016             |On 06th January 2017               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR. M.T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    and Co, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Egypt born in 2011. He entered the
      United Kingdom on a visit visa in 2011 and overstayed. In October 2015
      he made a claim to protection. This was on the basis he was at risk on
      return to Egypt for imputed political opinions and was on a list of
      wanted people. He said that in 2007 he was involved with the Ultra
      Ahlawy football supporters club. That club was perceived to be in
      opposition to the government and this brought him to adverse
      attention. He said that on a number of occasions he was detained by
      the police who planted drugs on him.


   2. The respondent refused his claim in February 2016. It was not accepted
      he was a member of this football supporters group and reference was
      made to the lack of corroborative evidence. Reference was also made to
      his delay in claiming asylum.

   3. His appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Moxon in August 2016 and was
      dismissed. At hearing the appellant had produced various screenshots
      from a Facebook wherein he was identified by the name of his
      grandparents. He also produced various photographs of him wearing a
      team football shirt. The appellant said the material related to events
      after he arrived in the United Kingdom. He said he could not access
      the Facebook account he had in Egypt. He also produced letters from
      his parents stating that he had taken part in demonstrations in Egypt
      and they advised him to remain in the United Kingdom for his safety.
      The appellant provided a report from Mr Miles who gave background
      material on the supporters club.

   4. The judge referred to the absence of any corroboration, particularly
      of his involvement with the supporters club save for the letters from
      his parents. He described these as not being from an independent
      source and therefore he gave them little weight. The judge said it was
      unclear why he could not access his old Facebook account or obtain
      photographs or other evidence of his claimed involvement in Egypt. The
      judge referred to a failure to mention the supporters club during
      screening and described this as a significant omission.

   5. The judge also described his evidence having a supporter's membership
      card as being inconsistent. The judge said at interview he said he was
      a cardholder and then change this later to stating it was an
      identification card. The judge also referred to his account of being
      released by the police after a short period and found this to be
      inconsistent with the claim they planted evidence upon him so he could
      be imprisoned.

   6. The judge concluded by finding the appellant was not a member of the
      football supporters group and what he knew about it was something he
      could have learnt.


The Upper Tribunal

   7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      First-tier Tribunal erred in law by, amongst other things, requiring
      corroboration of his involvement with the supporters club and in
      dismissing the evidence produced from his parents.


   8. At hearing, Mr Sellwood advised that he had appeared for the appellant
      in the First-tier Tribunal. He expanded upon the reasons set out in
      the leave application. He applied under rule 15 (2)(A) of the
      Procedural Rules to introduce evidence to support the appellant's
      claim that his Facebook account was blocked and so he could not access
      the earlier material. Mr Walker did not object.

   9. Mr Sellwood referred me to paragraphs 42 and 43 of the decision and
      said that the appellant had not been invited to comment. Furthermore,
      there was no requirement for corroboration. The appellant had also
      produced photographs of him wearing a club T-shirt from when he
      arrived in 2011 and submitted it was wrong to the judge to dismiss
      this evidence as having developed over time to bolster his claim.
      There also were two photographs of him in Egypt wearing the football
      team T-shirt.

  10. It was argued that the judge was wrong to dismiss his parent's letters
      outright because of the source and that no consideration had been
      given to the content.

  11.  He also argued that it was unfair to comment adversely on the fact
      the appellant at screening did not mention the supporters club given
      that screening is to establish travel and personal details rather than
      the substantive claim.

  12. He pointed out that the appellant's evidence was he secured his
      release within a short period through the payment of bribes. The
      shortness of his detention was not a factor to be held against him.

  13. The appellant had given an explanation for not claiming asylum
      earlier, namely, he had hoped to return to his home country and did
      not want to be seen as having claimed asylum. It was submitted that
      the judge dismissed this out of hand.

  14. In response, Mr Walker referred to paragraph 48 where the judge dealt
      with the appellant's delay in claiming protection. Part of the
      appellant's explanation for not claiming was that he was homeless and
      had no financial support from his parents. I was referred to the
      letter from the appellant's father where it was stated he had been
      caring for his wife who became unwell in August 2015 and so stopped
      sending the appellant money. It was therefore factually inaccurate for
      the judge to state this claim was not corroborated in the letters from
      his parents.

  15. Mr Walker conceded there was some merit in the submission that the
      judge had not properly considered the letters provided by the
      appellant's parents. He also accepted the evidence introduced about
      the difficulties for the appellant in gaining access to his old
      Facebook account. However, this evidence was not before the First-tier
      Tribunal judge. He also accepted that screening is not meant to
      involve in-depth questioning about the underlying claim.

   Error of law.

  16. I find the judge fell into error in suggesting a need for
      corroborative evidence beyond the considerations in paragraph 339L.


  17. The judge also failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting the
      evidence the appellant did submit and his explanation for not
      producing evidence. This included his account of his Facebook account
      being locked and the way the photographs of him wearing a supporter's
      shirt shortly after arrival in the United Kingdom where dealt with.

  18. The consideration of the letters from the appellant's parents is
      inadequate; with the impression given that they were dismissed out of
      hand solely because of the relationship.

  19. The judge also fell into error in paragraph 45 in describing as a
      significant omission the appellant's failure to refer to the support
      group at his screening. Part 4 of the screening requires an applicant
      to briefly explain all the reasons why they cannot return, which the
      appellant gave, without going into detail. In summary, it was open to
      the judge to decide what weight to give to the evidence and the delay
      but adequate reasons had to be given.


Decision

The decision of First tier Judge Moxon dismissing the appellant's appeal
materially errs in law. Consequently it cannot stand.

All parties are in agreement that if an error of law is found the
matter should be remitted for a de novo hearing before the first-tier
Tribunal which I so direct.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

Fee Order

No fee order is applicable

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.


Directions

   1. Relist before the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing, excluding
      First-tier Judge Moxon.The appellant should appreciate the fact that
      the adverse decision has been set aside does not imply he will succeed
      at the rehearing. It remains for him to establish his claim.


   2. The appellant's representatives are to provide an appeal bundle
      containing an index of the evidence relied upon immediately.
      Translations of all documents to be used that are not in English are
      to be provided.

   3. The appellant's representatives are to advise of any interpreter
      required.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

