
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/02107/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decisions & Reasons sent out on      |
|On 11th June 2020                    |On 18th June 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Optimus Law
For the Respondent:    Home Office Presenting Officers Unit


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"),
    and although no application is made, as this a protection claim  it  is
    appropriate that a direction is made. Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or
    Court directs otherwise, SK is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of
    his family.  This direction applies  amongst  others  to  all  parties.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


 2. On 29th April 2020 I issued directions to the parties  setting  out  my
    provisional view that in this case it would be appropriate to determine
    whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  involved  the
    making of an error of law, and if so, whether that decision  should  be
    set aside, on the papers.  I set out directions giving the appellant an
    opportunity to submit further submissions in  writing  to  support  the
    assertion that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  vitiated  by
    an error of law.  The directions also provided an opportunity  for  the
    respondent to respond in writing, and, for the appellant  to  file  and
    serve any further reply.


 3.  In  response  to  the  directions  issued  by  me,   the   appellant's
    representatives have provided written submissions dated 12th  May  2020
    settled by Mr Tony Muman.  The respondent provided a  written  skeleton
    argument in response, dated 19th May 2020.


 4. Neither the appellant nor the respondent has expressed any view  as  to
    whether the Tribunal should make its decision  without  a  hearing  and
    neither party identifies any procedural unfairness that arises  in  the
    event that a decision is made without a hearing.  I am  satisfied  that
    it is in accordance with the overriding objective and the interests  of
    justice for there to be a timely determination of the question  whether
    there is an error of law in the decision of the FtT,  and  that  it  is
    entirely appropriate for the error of law decision to be determined  on
    the papers, to secure the proper administration of  justice.   For  the
    avoidance of doubt, in reaching my decision I have taken  into  account
    the matters set out in  the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    written  representations  made  by  the  parties  in  response  to  the
    directions.  I am grateful to the parties for their positive engagement
    with the directions issued.


 5. The appellant, a national of Iran, appealed the  respondent's  decision
    of 6th February 2019 to refuse to grant  him  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection. His appeal  was  dismissed  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
    decision of Judge N M K Lawrence promulgated on 29th August 2019.


 6. The background to the claim for international protection is  summarised
    at paragraph [8] of the decision of the FtT.  The appellant fears  that
    he would be at risk upon return because  of  his  relationship  with  a
    girl, who I shall refer to as S, because of his  perceived  association
    with the KDPI and because of his sur place activities in the UK.


 7. Judge Lawrence accepted the appellant is an Iranian  national.   Beyond
    that, the judge found that the core elements of the appellant's case do
    not stand up to scrutiny even to the lower standard.  The  judge  found
    the appellant was never  politically  active  in  Iran  and  found  the
    appellant has  no  profile  in  Iran.  The  judge  noted  that  in  the
    'Preliminary Information Questionnaire' the appellant had claimed  that
    his girlfriend's brother is an Ettelaat agent, but now claims  that  he
    had never  said  that  to  his  previous  representatives.   The  judge
    considered the appellant's sur place activities in the UK  and  whether
    the sur place activities expose the appellant to a  risk  upon  return.
    The judge noted, at  [29],  that  the  appellant  has  participated  in
    demonstrations and has posted photographs on the  internet.  The  judge
    states "... It appears they have been reviewed but cannot be  shown  to
    have been viewed by the authorities in  Iran".   The  judge  found  the
    appellant does not have a significant profile in Iran and that being  a
    Kurd in itself, would not lead to  adverse  attention  on  return.  The
    judge found there is  unlikely  to  be  any  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant after he has  left  the  airport.  The  judge  concluded  the
    appellant has not demonstrated he is likely to be of  adverse  interest
    upon his return to Iran.   The judge found that the appellant  has  not
    established to the lower standard that there are  other  factors  which
    taken together with the appellants Kurdish  ethnicity,  create  a  real
    risk of persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3.


 8. The appellant advanced six grounds of appeal, and permission to  appeal
    was granted by FtT Judge Holmes on 28th October 2019.  In doing so,  he
    noted that it is arguable that the judge misdirected himself as to  the
    correct  approach  to  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  sur   place
    activities in the light of the current country guidance,  and  although
    the other grounds have less merit, they are nevertheless arguable.  The
    focus of the appellant's written submissions is threefold.  First,  the
    judge erred in his assessment of the risk upon return as  a  result  of
    the appellant's sur place activities.  Second, the judge erred  in  his
    assessment of the claim advanced by the appellant and third, the  judge
    applied the wrong standard of proof in reaching his decision.


 9. The  respondent  accepts  the  judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
    appellant's sur place activity and how the appellant is  likely  to  be
    treated at the airport on return.  The respondent also  accepts  it  is
    also unclear whether the  judge  regarded  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities to be opportunistic or the result of a  genuine  conviction.
    The respondent however submits it was open to  the  judge  to  make  an
    adverse credibility finding against the applicant  and  to  reject  the
    core account of the events that lead to the appellant's departure  from
    Iran.


10. Having considered  the  decision  of  the  judge  for  myself  and  the
    concessions made by the respondent, rightly in my view, I am  satisfied
    that the decision of the FtT is vitiated by a material error of law and
    must be set aside.  It is therefore unnecessary for me to deal with the
    remaining grounds of appeal at any length.


11. I have some sympathy with the respondent's submission that it was  open
    to the Judge to reject the core account of the events that led  to  the
    appellant's departure from Iran.  There appear to have been a number of
    inconsistencies in the evidence of the appellant  and  aspects  of  his
    account for which he provides an insufficient explanation.  However,  I
    am persuaded that the judge erred in his  assessment  of  the  evidence
    overall such that it appears appropriate to set aside the decision with
    no findings preserved.


12. The appellant claims the judge  erroneously  rejected  the  appellant's
    claim that he did not refer to his relationship with S  or  the  threat
    from her family during the screening  interview  because  he  had  been
    asked to be brief and therefore did not feel compelled to mention S and
    the threat from her family. The appellant refers  to  the  judgment  of
    Lord Justice Moore-Bick in JA (Afghanistan) -v- SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    450 in which the Court of Appeal held that the common law principle  of
    fairness requires that a First-tier Tribunal has to consider with  care
    the significance to be attached to answers given by an asylum seeker in
    screening or asylum interviews, that were recorded only by  the  person
    asking  questions  on  behalf  of  the  SSHD,  particularly  where   an
    interpreter was required, or the asylum seeker was vulnerable by reason
    of age or infirmity.  When he was asked during the screening  interview
    to briefly explain all of the reasons why he could not return to  Iran,
    the appellant had mentioned that  he  fears  the  Iranian  Intelligence
    Service because they had found out that he was "joining the KDPI".  The
    appellant claims the interview was completed whilst he was detained  at
    Yarlswood IRC and having been forcefully fingerprinted  and  threatened
    in another European country, he was fearful of the UK  authorities.  He
    claims the screening interview did not  give  an  opportunity  for  the
    appellant  to  expand  his  answers.   The  appellant  refers  to   the
    observation made by Lord Justice Green  in  SB  (Sri  Lanka)  -v-  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 160, at [12], that the Screening Interview is a cursory
    exercise   designed   to   collect   basic   information   mainly   for
    administrative purposes. The interviewing  officer  asks  the  scripted
    questions and therefore does not engage  in  significant  supplementary
    questioning.  That is undoubtedly correct but it is notable that  there
    was no reference by the appellant to his relationship with  S,  or  any
    threat from her family.   Equally however, the appellant claims that it
    was his relationship with S that was the catalyst  for  his  having  to
    flee his home village and seek sanctuary at the KDPI headquarters.  The
    appellant appears to claim  that  it  was  his  presence  at  the  KDPI
    headquarters that has led to the authorities to perceive him as  having
    joined the KDPI,  a  matter  that  he  did  mention  in  his  screening
    interview.


13. At paragraph [16], the judge considered the appellant's claim that  S's
    family had found  out  that  the  appellant  was  hiding  in  the  KDPI
    headquarters, but he could not explain how her family  had  found  out.
    The judge states "In short, the appellant's evidence is  that  Ettalaat
    knows the whereabouts of KDPI headquarters".  The judge considered  the
    background material and concluded that it is not credible that  knowing
    the whereabouts  of  the  KDPI,  the  Iranian  authorities  raided  the
    appellant's home but have not raided the headquarters of the  KDPI.   I
    accept, as  submitted  by  the  appellant  that  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant was not, as the judge summarised, that  the  "Ettalaat  knows
    the whereabouts of KDPI  headquarters".   The  evidence  was  that  S's
    family had found  out  that  the  appellant  was  hiding  in  the  KDPI
    headquarters.  The fact that they may have found out that the appellant
    was hiding in the KDPI headquarters is not to  say  that  they  or  the
    authorities were aware of the whereabouts of those headquarters.


14. The appellant also claims the judge failed to set out in  his  decision
    whether  he  accepts  or  rejects  the  appellant's  account  that  the
    appellant had  approached  his  girlfriend's  family  with  a  marriage
    proposal on five occasions.  He claims the background material confirms
    that the topic of marriage  is  discussed  and  could  lead  to  mutual
    acceptance or rejection.  The judge addresses this aspect of the  claim
    at paragraphs [17] to [19] of his decision.  The judge  refers  to  the
    answers given by the appellant in cross-examination and  it  seems,  he
    accepted the submission made by the Presenting Officer  that  it  is  a
    question of 'family honour' to respect marriage  arrangements  made  by
    families concerning females.  Without determining  whether  he  accepts
    the appellant's claim regarding the repeated  approaches  made  by  his
    family, accompanied by prominent members in the village to  the  family
    of S, the judge concludes at paragraph [29] that this does  not  go  to
    the core of the claim.  The appellant's relationship with S, is in fact
    at the heart of the claim advanced by the appellant. As the  judge  set
    out at paragraph [8] of the decision,  the  appellant  claims  that  he
    continued to meet S secretly and he was discovered by her  brother  and
    cousin.  It was that the appellant claims, that caused the appellant to
    run away to his maternal uncle's house and subsequently seek  sanctuary
    at the KDPI headquarters.  The  appellant's  relationship  with  S  was
    therefore an  important  part  of  the  claim  being  advanced  by  the
    appellant.


15. I reject the  appellant's  claim  that  the  judge  adopted  the  wrong
    standard  of  proof  in  considering  the   claim   for   international
    protection. The appellant points to paragraph [37] of the  decision  of
    the FtT in which the  judge  concludes  that  the  appellant  has  "not
    proved, on balance,  that  he  is  likely  to  face  "very  significant
    obstacles" in integrating in Iran.  At paragraphs [5] and  [6]  of  his
    decision the Judge correctly identifies  the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof relevant to the claim for international protection. In addressing
    the claim for international protection, at paragraph  [15],  the  judge
    plainly notes that the core elements of the appellant's  claim  do  not
    stand up to scrutiny "to the lower  standard".  This  all  demonstrates
    that in considering the claim for international protection,  the  judge
    did have in mind the correct standard of proof. At paragraphs  [31]  to
    [38] of his decision, the judge is clearly addressing  whether  removal
    of the appellant would be in  breach  of  Article  8.   The  judge  had
    concluded that the appellant is of no adverse interest to  the  Iranian
    authorities and at paragraph [37]  was  addressing  the  question  that
    arises when considering the appellant's private life and whether  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into
    Iran.  In a human rights appeal the appellant must satisfy the FtT, the
    balance of probabilities that removal would be in breach of Article  8.




16. Finally, the appellant claims the judge erred  in  failing  to  make  a
    finding regarding the appellant's failure to claim asylum in France  or
    Bulgaria and the extent to which that was relevant to the assessment of
    credibility. There is not merit whatsoever to this  ground.  In  giving
    its reasons, the FtT is entitled to focus on the  principal  issues  in
    dispute between the parties.  In JT (Cameroon) -v- SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ
    878, the Court of Appeal confirmed  that  The  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 s.8 was no more than a reminder
    to fact-finding Tribunals that conduct  coming  within  the  categories
    stated therein, had to be considered when assessing the credibility  of
    an asylum seeker. Although it was open to the judge to have  regard  to
    the conduct of the appellant and any explanation provided, the Court of
    Appeal confirmed that s8 did not dictate  that  damage  to  credibility
    inevitably resulted.


17. In the end, the FtT's decision is to be read looking at  the  substance
    of the judge's reasoning and I am satisfied that the judge  has  failed
    to properly address the claim advanced by the appellant such that it is
    appropriate to set aside the decision with no findings preserved.  I am
    satisfied the judge rejected the core of the account  without  properly
    addressing the claim being advanced and the appellant's evidence.


18. As to disposal, the assessment of a claim for asylum such  as  this  is
    always a highly fact sensitive task, and in all  the  circumstances,  I
    have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal  back  to  the
    FtT for hearing afresh, having considered paragraph 7.2 of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  The nature  and
    extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will  be  extensive.  The
    parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
    in due course.


Notice of Decision


19. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge Lawrence  promulgated
    on 29th August 2019 is set aside, and I remit the matter for re-hearing
    de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings preserved.



    V. Mandalia
    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


    11th June 2020




