
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02533/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 31 May 2019                       |on 8 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     N Z
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Adejumobi, of Immigration Advice Centre, Oldham
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 6 February 2018.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of Designated FtT Judge  McClure,  promulgated  on  10
         October 2018.

     iv) The appellant's proposed grounds of appeal to the UT, stated in the
         application for permission to appeal filed with the FtT.

      v) The refusal of permission by the FtT, dated 6 November 2018.

     vi) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed with the UT.

    vii) The grant of permission by UT Judge Gill, dated 16 January 2019.

   viii) The further directions by UT Judge Gill, dated 12  February  and  8
         April 2019.

 2. Mr Adejumobi firstly directed attention to the factual issue identified
    in the grant of permission, "... whether or not  the  judge  asked  the
    appellant whether he was content to proceed and whether  the  appellant
    either failed to indicate that he was unwilling to do so  or  confirmed
    ... that he was content to proceed ...".  The further directions of the
    UT indicate that it would "... consider the respondent's record and the
    judge's record in order to decide  whether  there  was  an  outstanding
    application to adjourn the hearing or whether the  appellant  confirmed
    that he was content to proceed ...".

 3. There had been a hearing  in  the  FtT  on   11  September  2018.   The
    appellant was represented.  The hearing was aborted because the judge's
    computer record had become corrupted.  By  letter  dated  14  September
    2018 the appellant's representatives sought adjournment of the  hearing
    fixed for 17 September 2018, so that the  appellant  could  gather  the
    fees required for further representation, a problem not of his  making.
    That written request was not decided prior to the hearing before  Judge
    McClure on 17 September 2018.  It is not  referred  to  either  in  his
    record of proceedings or in his decision.

 4. The judge's handwritten record of proceedings contains a brief  summary
    of the claim, and then proceeds to a note of the evidence.   The  first
    line is, "Mr Z"; the second is, "content to proceed"; and there is then
    a note of evidence-in-chief, apparently elicited by the judge.

 5. In a statement dated 25 October 2018, submitted  with  his  grounds  of
    appeal, the appellant says that at the hearing on 17 September 2018 the
    judge:

         "... mentioned he received an adjournment request although  he  was
         inclined  to  proceed  seeing  I  was  present.   The  Home  Office
         representative explained ... the events of 17  September  2018.   I
         highlighted to the judge I was unable to  bring  back  one  of  the
         witnesses who had been present on 11  September  due  to  childcare
         issues.  The hearing proceeded."

 6. The judge's record of proceedings, and his decision, do not mention the
    absence of a witness.

 7. The record kept by the Home Office representative narrates:

         'Judge said legal representatives are not coming as at  the  moment
         he [the appellant] hasn't put them in funds ...

         [The appellant] advised  that  due  to  short  listing  his  sister
         couldn't attend.  Judge made no comment.'

 8. The Home Office record goes on immediately to a note of  the  evidence.
    It says nothing further about whether an adjournment was considered, or
    the appellant's position about proceeding.

 9. Mr Adejumobi submitted that there was a written application before  the
    FtT for adjournment, on strong grounds, which  the  FtT  was  bound  to
    resolve, and to give reasons, but there was nothing to be found in  the
    decision, or even  in  the  record.   He  further  submitted  that  the
    appellant's statement that he raised the absence  of  a  witness  as  a
    further basis for adjournment was supported by the record kept  by  the
    Home Office representative, and that to proceed without resolving  that
    issue, and without recording any reason, showed further unfairness.  He
    said that a fresh hearing was required.

10. Mr Govan said that some sympathy was due  to  the  appellant  over  the
    collapse of the initial hearing, and agreed  that  if  there  had  been
    unfairness, there should be a remit to the FtT.  On whether  unfairness
    had occurred, he said that all relevant materials had been  identified,
    and the question was for the UT.

11. I indicated that the decision fell to be set aside.

12. The application for adjournment based on the  abortive  nature  of  the
    previous hearing, only shortly before, and  the  shortage  of  time  to
    gather funds, was quite strong.  The  appellant  had  no  part  of  the
    responsibility.  The application, if not bound to be granted, at  least
    required  an  explanation  for  refusal,  or  a  clear  record  of  its
    withdrawal.  Without a fuller record, there is scope for an  oversight,
    or a misunderstanding, having taken place.

13. The principle of justice being seen to be done tends in favour  of  the
    appellant.

14. The absence of a witness was a weaker basis for an adjournment.  It  is
    not shown that her attendance to speak  to  her  statement  might  have
    added much to the case.  However, it is another matter which needed  to
    be decided, and an explanation given, if it  was  not  abandoned.   The
    Home Office record supports the appellant's position that the point was
    glossed over.

15. It was of course open to the appellant to abandon any  application  for
    adjournment and to elect to proceed.   However,  the  records  and  the
    decision are too abbreviated for the UT to be satisfied  that  is  what
    happened.

16. Procedural unfairness is established.  The consequence  is  agreed,  as
    follows.

17. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

18. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for an entirely fresh hearing.

19. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge McClure.

20. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT, so anonymity has been maintained herein.

21. The file will be sent to the FtT at Glasgow  for  relisting  there,  in
    accordance with usual practice of listing  according  to  residence  of
    appellants and not according  to  the  whereabouts  or  convenience  of
    representatives.  Additionally, "cross border" hearings are  liable  to
    give rise to unnecessary complications  administratively,  and  in  the
    event of onward appeals.

      [pic]

      30 May 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




