

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02658/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 22 November 2017                           |On 27 November 2017          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                     T D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms U Miszkiel, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Ghana  who  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse her protection and human rights claims.
     The appeal against that decision was dismissed by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Bowler ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated  on  5  May
    2017.

 2. I maintain the anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on 5 September 2017. Hence the  matter
    came before me.



Submissions

 4. For the appellant, Ms Miszkiel relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  In
    summary, the grounds relate only to the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds: first, that the FTTJ misdirected herself at  [52]
    and [53] when assessing whether there were insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life between the appellant and her partner continuing in  Ghana.
    It was submitted that "insurmountable obstacles", within the meaning of
    EX.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules meant hardship  which  the
    applicant or her partner were not reasonably expected to overcome.  The
    FTTJ had accepted the evidence of the partner's  health  condition.  It
    was not reasonable to expect the appellant's partner,  who  had  had  a
    brain haemorrhage and who had not  been  to  Ghana  for  24  years,  to
    overcome the hardship of relocation and trying to find work at the  age
    of 65. If no money were available he would not be able to pay for life-
    sustaining medication.  The FTTJ made findings with regard  to  contact
    with the appellant's partner's brother which were not open  to  her  on
    the evidence. These were errors of law  in  the  FTTJ's  assessment  of
    whether there were insurmountable obstacles.

 5. The appellant's second ground was that the FTTJ had misdirected herself
    at [75] by applying the insurmountable obstacles  test  when  assessing
    Article 8 outside the Rules. According  to  Izuazu  (Article  8  -  new
    rules) [2013] UKUT 00393 (IAC) there could be no presumption  that  the
    rules would determine an assessment under Article 8. It  was  submitted
    that the insurmountable obstacles test had no bearing on the Article  8
    assessment. The correct test was whether it was reasonable to expect  a
    family member to leave the UK: Huang [2007] UKHL 11, EB (Kosovo) [2008]
    UKHL 41. It was not reasonable to expect the appellant's partner, given
    his poor health, to relocate to Ghana; the  respondent's  position  was
    reflected in the requirement for 20 years' residence when  assessing  a
    person's private life in the UK. The FTTJ also misdirected  herself  as
    regards  the  risk  of  further  brain  haemorrhage:  her  finding  was
    irrational. The proportionality assessment amounted to an error of  law
    which was material to the outcome.

 6. For the respondent, Ms Ahmad submitted the FTTJ  had  directed  herself
    appropriately.  The  appellant's  family  life  had  been   precarious;
    according to Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 , in such circumstances there would
    have to be unjustifiably harsh consequences as a result of refusal.  No
    such potential consequences existed. The risk  of  another  haemorrhage
    had been considered. The appellant's  challenge  concerned  the  weight
    given to the evidence; that was a matter for the  FTTJ.  The  challenge
    was a mere disagreement with the findings.

Discussion

 7. Ms Miszkiel confirmed that the grounds of appeal before me  arose  from
    the FTTJ's  findings  with  regards  to  EX.2  and  her  assessment  of
    proportionality outside  the  Rules  and  pursuant  to  the  Article  8
    jurisprudence.

 8. I deal first with the submission that the FTTJ misdirected  herself  in
    law in assessing whether there were insurmountable obstacles to  family
    life continuing in Ghana.

 9. It  was  held  in  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11  that  the  definition  of
    "insurmountable  obstacles"  at  EX.2  as  meaning  "very   significant
    difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their partner  in
    continuing their family life together outside the UK  and  which  could
    not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
    or their partner" was consistent with Strasbourg case  law.    This  in
    turn was consistent with Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) in which it was held  that    the  term
    "insurmountable obstacles" in provisions such as Section EX.1  are  not
    obstacles which are impossible to surmount: MF (Article 8 - new  rules)
    Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC); Izuazu (Article 8 -  new  rules)  [2013]
    UKUT 45 (IAC); they concern the practical possibilities of relocation.

10. In VW and MO (Article 8-insurmountable obstacles) Uganda  [2008]  UKAIT
    00021 the Tribunal held that the test or criterion  of  "insurmountable
    obstacles" remains part of UK and Strasbourg jurisprudence  on  Article
    8, albeit that decisions sometimes formulate  this  test  in  terms  of
    "reasonableness" or "seriousness", which indicates that  it  is  not  a
    test subject to strict definition. The Tribunal went on  to  say  that,
    whichever of these formulations is used,  however,  an  applicant  must
    show more than a degree of hardship.   The  Tribunal  made  the  point,
    however,  that  it  is  a  guiding  principle  rather  than  a   strict
    precondition.

11. There is no challenge to the FTTJ's  record  of  the  evidence  or  her
    findings at [49].  She correctly  noted  the  appellant's  partner  had
    suffered from a brain haemorrhage in the past but that this  was  under
    control, through medication, and he was working at the date of hearing;
    she noted his age.  She noted the  appellant's  partner  was  born  and
    brought up in Ghana and came to the UK at the age of 40;  he  had  dual
    British and Ghanaian nationality albeit he had not been back  to  Ghana
    since 1993. She noted the couple were familiar  with  the  culture  and
    society in Ghana. They had transferable  skills  [53].  She  found  the
    appellant's partner may faces challenges  seeking  work  but  that  the
    "evidence does not show that [the  appellant]  would  face  significant
    problems in seeking work". The FTTJ's finding that the appellant  would
    be able to work to pay for the couple's accommodation, maintenance  and
    any medication required by her partner is one which was open to her  on
    the evidence.

12. The FTTJ noted, on the  evidence,  the  appellant's  partner's  current
    health. She did not accept the assertions  of  the  appellant  and  her
    partner that they could not afford medication in Ghana.  She  gave  her
    reasons for this adverse finding: no evidence had been adduced to "show
    the extent of that problem". She noted the appellant's partner  was  in
    full-time work  and  was  "not  having  other  treatment  [than  taking
    medication]".   She  concluded,  on  reasonable   grounds,   that   the
    appellant's partner's "medical needs have  not  been  shown  to  be  an
    insurmountable obstacle". This was a finding which was open to  her  on
    the evidence.

13. I do not accept the submission that the FTTJ drew  conclusions  on  the
    evidence which were not open to her; it was a matter for her the weight
    she gave to the evidence and she attributed appropriate weight. She did
    not misdirect herself as to the meaning of "insurmountable  obstacles".
    As she noted at [52], "while a high test, insurmountable obstacles  are
    not ones which are impossible to surmount".  There is  no  misdirection
    in law.

14. I turn to the FTTJ's assessment of proportionality outside the Rules.

15. The  FTTJ  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  factual  matrix
    identified as part of her consideration of the evidence with regard  to
    the criteria in EX.2. This was set out in her preceding paragraphs  and
    has not been challenged.

16. In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 it was held that a court or tribunal  had  to
    decide whether the refusal to grant leave to remain  was  proportionate
    in the particular case before it, balancing the strength of the  public
    interest in the removal of the person in question against the impact on
    private and family life.  In  doing  so,  it  should  give  appropriate
    weight to the Secretary of State's policy, expressed in the  rules  and
    instructions, that the public interest in immigration  control  can  be
    outweighed, when considering an application for leave to remain brought
    by a person in the UK in breach of immigration laws, only  where  there
    are  "insurmountable  obstacles"  or  "exceptional  circumstances"   as
    defined. "The critical issue will  generally  be  whether,  giving  due
    weight to the strength of the public interest in  the  removal  of  the
    person in the case before it,  the  article  8  claim  is  sufficiently
    strong to outweigh it.  In general, in cases concerned with  precarious
    family life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to  outweigh
    the public interest in immigration control".

17. In Gulshan it was held that the Secretary of State  had  addressed  the
    Article 8 family aspects of the claimant's position through the  Rules,
    in particular EX1, and  the  private  life  aspects  through  paragraph
    276ADE; the judge should have done likewise. In  the  absence  of  such
    insurmountable obstacles, it is necessary to  show  other  non-standard
    and  particular   features   demonstrating   that   removal   will   be
    unjustifiably harsh: R (on the application of Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC
    720 (Admin).

18. In the present case, the  FTTJ  appropriately  took  into  account  the
    various public interest factors in s117B of the 2002 Act at  [68]-[72].
     It was not an error of law to take into account the appellant did  not
    fulfil the criteria in the Immigration Rules for the grant of leave  to
    remain on the grounds of her family or private life [75] (Agyarko).  In
    any event, I do not accept the submission that  the  FTTJ  applied  the
    insurmountable obstacles test when  assessing  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules: the FTTJ considered whether it would  be  "reasonable"  for  the
    couple to continue their family life in Ghana at  [75].  She  made  her
    finding on that issue on the basis of "her findings about the extent to
    which they would face obstacles in Ghana". It was submitted to me  that
    the FTTJ had taken into account the absence of insurmountable obstacles
    as part of her proportionality assessment. This is not the case; as  is
    clear from [75], the FTTJ took into account  her  findings  as  to  the
    obstacles they would face, not that she had already found  them  to  be
    insurmountable.

19. This  appeal  arises  largely  from  a  disagreement  with  the  weight
    attributed by the FTTJ to the evidence before  her.   Contrary  to  the
    grounds, she noted the appellant's partner "did not often speak to [his
    brother] as [he] was often asking for money".  Her  subsequent  finding
    at [54] was that the appellant's partner "has a brother living in Accra
    and while they may have limited contact presently, I find  it  has  not
    been shown that they have no contact.  [The  appellant's  partner]  and
    the  appellant  could  seek  social  support  and  advice   from   [the
    appellant's  partner's]  brother  while  settling,  to   assist   their
    adjustment given they have been away for 24 and 18 years".  This is not
    a finding that the appellant  and  her  partner  could  seek  financial
    assistance, but that  they  could  seek  other  assistance.  Given  the
    evidence of contact, it was a finding which was open to the FTTJ.

20. The challenges to the FTTJ's findings are no more than  a  disagreement
    with the weight she gave to the evidence before her. Her  findings  are
    cogent and sustainable on the evidence. She has given adequate  reasons
    for them.

21. For these reasons, there is no material error  of  law  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision and reasons.

Decision

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

23. I do not set aside the decision.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  24 November 2017


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  24 November 2017

