


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/02897/2015
     PA/02899/2015
     pa/02900/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 September 2016                      |On 28 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     k s
                                     l k
                             r---p--- s--- s---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Sharma, instructed by S & S Immigration Law
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       respondent. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order because one of the respondents is a minor.

    2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of   the   present
       respondents (hereinafter the claimants) against the decision of  the
       Secretary of State to deport them  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
       first claimant has been sent to prison for fifteen months  and  this
       sentence of imprisonment is sufficient to  invoke  procedures  often
       called "automatic deportation".  The family members of people due to
       be deported are themselves due to deportation not because they  have
       behaved discreditably but because their right to be  in  the  United
       Kingdom depends upon the right of the person who is to be deported.

    3. The Rules are very strict but they are  not  completely  inflexible.
       There  are  certain  caveats  which  can  be  invoked   to   prevent
       deportation but they do not apply in this case.   I  say  that  with
       some confidence because the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  thought
       about them and said in terms that they do  not  apply.   The  appeal
       cannot succeed under the Rules.  The biggest  problem  is  that  the
       third claimant, a young person who  appears  to  be  doing  well  at
       school and is settled in the United Kingdom  had  not  been  in  the
       United Kingdom for seven years at the time when the application  was
       made  and  he  was  therefore  excluded  from  most  of  the  saving
       provisions. It must not be assumed that he would have been permitted
       to remain if he had accumulated seven years' residence. It is my  no
       means the case that young  people  who  have  lived  in  the  United
       Kingdom for seven years cannot be removed or, if  they  can't,  that
       their close relatives who have committed offences should be  allowed
       to remain.  The possibility of any of the claimants  satisfying  the
       Rules does not apply in this case. The First-tier Tribunal was quite
       clear that the appeal could not be allowed under the Rules.

    4. I asked Ms Sharma to confirm that she accepted  that  the  claimants
       could not be permitted to remain  under  the  Rules.  There  was  no
       challenge to that finding and Ms Sharma confirmed that she could not
       bring an argument on that basis.  That is not in any way because she
       is not able to present cases properly but because she recognises the
       effect of the Rules and knows  that  she  would  assist  no  one  by
       advancing hopeless cases.

    5. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal outside the  Rules  being
       particularly  concerned  about  the  rights  of  the   child.    The
       difficulty with that is that deportation appeals generally cannot be
       allowed outside the Rules, indeed  it  is  properly  the  case  that
       deportation appeals cannot be allowed outside the Rules at  all  but
       if there are circumstances when they can be they do not exist  here.
       The deportation Rules are  intended  to  be  strict  and  they  have
       safeguards to prevent outrageous decisions.  The case does not  come
       within those safeguards,  quite  simply  it  should  not  have  been
       allowed.

    6. It follows therefore that I have to set aside the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal and substitute a decision dismissing the appeals
       against the Secretary of State's decision in all cases and  that  is
       what I do.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. I set aside the decision of  the
First-tier Tribunal and I substitute a decision in each case dismissing  the
claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 October 2016                |

