
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02997/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30th October 2017                          |On 28th September 2018       |
|& 30th July 2018                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     DO
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy on 30th October 2017
     Ms R Petterson on 30th July 2018
                                      Senior Home Office Presenting Officers
For the Respondent:    Ms B Smith, instructed by IR Immigration Law LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant  in
this determination identified as DO.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. For the reasons given in a decision  promulgated  on  7th  November
         2017, Upper Tribunal Judge King TD set aside the decision of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on the grounds that there was  a  lack
         of  structured  consideration  of  Article  3  in  the   light   of
         established jurisprudence such as to amount to a material error  of
         law. The findings on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  made  by
         Judge Grimmett were preserved. A transfer order was made,  and  the
         hearing listed before me on 1st  March  2018.  Unfortunately,  that
         hearing had to  be  adjourned;  I  made  the  following  order  and
         directions:

               1. The First-tier Tribunal decision in so far as  it  relates
                  to Article 3 and Article 8 findings having been set  aside
                  by UTJ King for reasons in a decision sent on 7th November
                  2017, the resumed hearing was set down for hearing  before
                  me today.  Directions  made  by  UTJ  King  had  not  been
                  complied with and  counsel  for  the  appellant  had  been
                  instructed that the hearing was an "error of law" hearing.
                  UTJ King found no error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal
                  judge  who  had  dismissed  the  appeal  on  international
                  protection  and  humanitarian  protection   grounds.   The
                  resumed hearing is on Article3/8 grounds only.

               2. The most recent medical evidence available was that  which
                  was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  was  a  report
                  prepared by Professor Hale in October 2016 after  a  visit
                  to the appellant when she was detained in  July  2016.  No
                  further medical evidence has been filed.

               3. As a consequence of the lack of compliance with directions
                  and the lack of instructions  given  to  counsel  for  the
                  appellant, I  had  no  alternative  but  to  adjourn  this
                  hearing.

               4. I make the following directions:

                   i. No oral evidence but updated witness statement of
                      appellant to be filed and served, if so advised, by
                      4pm on 30th March 2018. The appellant is on notice
                      that any evidence to be relied upon before the Upper
                      Tribunal is to be served in an indexed and paginated
                      bundle, even if previously before the First-tier
                      Tribunal, no later than 4pm on 16th May 2018.

                  ii. Any NHS medical evidence sought to be relied upon to
                      be filed and served (separately to the bundle
                      referred to above) by 4pm on 30th March 2018.

                 iii. Appellant's solicitors to notify the UT and the
                      respondent by 4pm on 30th March 2018 whether they
                      intend to instruct any other medical professional and
                      if so whom together with confirmation that
                      instructions have been given.

                  iv. If any medical evidence is relied upon other than NHS
                      records, such evidence to be filed and served by 4pm
                      on 30th April 2018.

             ...

      2. Although the directions regarding medical and other  evidence  were
         not complied with in terms of  time,  an  up  to  date  psychiatric
         report was filed on behalf of DO and Amnesty International provided
         a report taking that report into account. I record my gratitude  to
         them for enabling the hearing on 30th July to proceed.

      3. On conclusion of the hearing on 30th July  2018  and  prior  to  my
         reaching a decision in this appeal, SL (St Lucia) [2018]  EWCA  Civ
         1894 was handed  down.  I  invited  the  parties  to  make  written
         submissions  on  the  relevance  of  that  judgment  which  I  duly
         received.







         Background

      4. DO entered the UK in 2000 with a valid spouse visa. She was granted
           indefinite leave to remain on 28th March 2002. On  12th  February
         2013, she was  stopped  at  Gatwick  airport,  charged  with  drugs
         offences, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 6 years and 6 months'
         imprisonment. A deportation order was  signed.  DO's  human  rights
         claim and claim for  international  protection  were  refused.  Her
         appeal against the rejection of those claims was  heard  by  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 31st January 2017. He dismissed her
         international protection claim appeal but found  that  her  medical
         condition was such that to remove her would be a breach of  Article
         3. Her Article 8 appeal was also allowed.

      5. The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal
         the Article 3 and Article 8 decision. That appeal was  allowed  and
         the appeal was retained in the Upper Tribunal for  findings  to  be
         made on Article 3 and Article 8.

      6. Although the First-tier Tribunal judge had not been satisfied  that
         DO's family had been killed as she claimed, the  judge  did  accept
         that it was likely that DO had little or no contact with her family
         - whether in Togo or Ghana or Nigeria - and that  she  had  had  no
         contact since her detention. The focus of  DO's  challenge  to  the
         rejection of her human rights claim is her mental health.

      7. DO was released from detention in the  summer  of  2016  and  since
         October 2016 has been living with a friend in North London.

      8. DO's claim is:

               i) She is at real risk of harm because of her  mental  health
                  and/or as a woman with her characteristics;

              ii) There is a real risk  that  she  will  commit  suicide  if
                  removed;

             iii) Her living circumstances in Nigeria would fall below  that
                  which is acceptable; and/or

              iv) There are compelling circumstances such  that  she  should
                  not be deported.

      9. The appellant was released from detention  in  October  2016  since
         when she has been staying with her friend [A F] and his  wife.  She
         has been living there since her release from detention  in  October
         2016, both of whom are British Citizens.  In his statement prepared
         for the First-tier Tribunal hearing he said that he  was  happy  to
         accommodate her and "help her  financially  if  necessary".  He  is
         providing her with accommodation and, it seems, maintaining her day
         to day needs over and above the minimal support she is given by the
         state. There is no indication in the evidence before  me  that  any
         financial  assistance  currently  provided  by  Mr  [F]  would  not
         continue to be given to DO after removal.  There is  no  indication
         that he would not provide her with financial assistance, as  stated
         in his witness statement.




         Medical evidence

     10.  Professor  Anthony  Hale,  fellow  of   the   Royal   College   of
         Psychiatrists  and  Emeritus  Professor  of   Psychiatry   at   the
         University of Kent, examined DO on 14th July 2016 whilst she was in
         Peterborough Prison and then again on 18th May 2018. He produced  a
         report following both examinations. He had not had sight of DO's GP
         reports for either examination, but he had seen 370 pages of prison
         medical notes when he prepared his first report.

     11. The medical diagnosis was not disputed by the  respondent.  DO  has
         been diagnosed with severe major depressive episode with  psychosis
         and accompanying suicidal ideation,  generalised  anxiety  disorder
         with  panic  attacks,  social  phobia  and  post-traumatic   stress
         disorder. In his most recent report, Professor Hale states that her
         mental state has not changed significantly since he examined her in
         2016:

             "...  She  continues  to  be   substantially   psychiatrically
             handicapped by chronic severe major depressive  disorder  with
             psychotic and panic symptom, which  is  not  responding  to  a
             combination of two antidepressants which I believe her GP  has
             been prescribing for her since she left HMP Peterborough,  and
             when I reassessed her, she had  not  been  assessed  by  local
             services  for  cognitive  behaviour  therapy  (CBT)  or  other
             evidence -based psychological therapy."

     12. His report refers to a lightly reduced HDRS-17 score following  her
         release from prison but concludes that allowing for a slightly less
         intrusive environment with slightly  better  resulting  sleep,  the
         severity of her depression is essentially unchanged. He  refers  to
         her reporting that she self-harms every few days, cutting, shouting
         and slapping herself. He does not record any suicide attempts since
         her release from detention.

     13. In his 2018 report, Professor Hale concludes that if DO  is  forced
         to return to an environment which she regards  as  full  of  threat
         with  the  prospect   of   homelessness,   social   isolation   and
         destitution, then her symptoms would likely worsen her fear of  the
         risk of murder by Muslim extremists in Nigeria, a country to  which
         she believes she is a foreigner, and where, she believes,  she  was
         raped, her father was murdered and four siblings died  as  well  as
         having been in an abusive marriage. Professor Hale  concludes  that
         whether these fears are real or imagined, the consequences are such
         that she is at heightened risk of suicide.

     14. Professor Hale  considers  the  medication  that  DO  is  currently
         prescribed. He refers to two of the drugs in her current regime  as
         "quite old drugs" and that given her high suicide risk

             "... it would be advisable to find an adequate substitute  for
             amitriptyline as soon as possible. Such  a  process  may  take
             several months under expert supervision. Mirtazapine has  some
             evidence of efficacy in PTSD...but there is more evidence  for
             other classes  of  antidepressants  which  she  has  not  been
             offered."

         He goes on to say

             "The likely effect on her mental health should she  be  unable
             to access the treatment she requires following deportation  to
             Nigeria  are,  in  the  short  term,  that   withdrawing   the
             antidepressant medication is likely to be a rapid relapse over
             several weeks  of  the  worst  depressive  symptoms,  probably
             exacerbating suicidal ideas and putting her at increased  risk
             of taking her own life.

             ... continuing  on  amitriptyline  is  not  a  safe  long-term
             treatment because of potential cardiac toxicity  in  overdose,
             so substitution of a less toxic alternative before removal  is
             desirable".

     15. In addition to a change in  this  medication  Professor  Hale  also
         recommends, as he did in 2016, trauma focussed CBT EMDR and  trials
         of more potent and potentially combined or augmented antidepressant
         treatment. I have taken my decision on the basis of the  medication
         and treatment she is presently receiving. Professor  Hale  lists  a
         total of 14 drugs presently taken by DO.

     16. DO has attempted suicide  previously.  Whilst  in  prison  she  was
         considered a person at risk  of  self-harm  or  suicide;  her  last
         suicide attempt was whilst in prison. Professor Hale  records  that
         DO informed him that she had been treated for an incident of  self-
         harm (overdose) in Lewisham hospital in 2005 and  that  she  thinks
         she was an inpatient for 1 or 2 months. No other  details  of  this
         were before me. This appears to have been at the time she separated
         from her husband. The evidence before me discloses no report of any
         other attempt at suicide prior to imprisonment.

     17. Professor Hale records that the appellant says she would like to be
         able to work

             "... but [she] feels that her illness would  prevent  this  at
             present even were she allowed to do so".

         According to his report she would like to return to hairdressing

             "... for which she has qualifications  and  she  was  able  to
             pursue this to a limited extent whilst in prison".

     18. He concludes that

             102. ... she continues  to  be  substantially  psychiatrically
             handicapped by chronic severe major depressive  disorder  with
             psychotic and panic symptoms, which is  not  responding  to  a
             combination of two antidepressants which I believe her GP  has
             been prescribing for her since she left HMP Peterborough....

             103.  Her  only  psychological  'support'  is  some  form   of
             'counselling' which she says she attends at  her  GP  surgery.
             Counselling is not an effective intervention for severe  major
             depression.

             ...

             105. Given the nature of her  psychotic  symptoms,  it  is  my
             clinical opinion that these are more likely to relate to  PTSD
             than depression.....

             106. Apart from the two longstanding antidepressants, she  has
             received no evidence-based psychological treatments  for  PTSD
             (CBT and/or Eye  Movement  Desensitisation  and  Reprocessing,
             EMDR) since 2016. Her  treatment  needs  are  thus  unmet  for
             immediate  treatment  and  it  is  premature  to  predict  her
             treatment needs in the medium and long-term.

             107. It is also premature to comment upon her treatment  needs
             and access to services should she be deported to  Nigeria,  as
             such treatment needs would be determined by  her  response  to
             and toleration of expert assessment and treatment in the short
             term in the UK.

             ...

             123. The likely effect on her  mental  health  should  she  be
             unable  to  access  the  treatment  she   requires   following
             deportation are, in  the  short  term,  that  withdrawing  the
             antidepressant medication is likely to  be  a  rapid  relapse,
             over several weeks, of her worst depressive symptoms, probably
             exacerbating suicidal ideas and putting her at increased  risk
             of taking her own life.

             ...

             124. ... It would be important  to  know  whether  [DO]  could
             obtain medication in Nigeria and  the  extent  to  which  that
             would be determined by whether she has money to pay. It  would
             also be important for a suitably  qualified  expert  to  opine
             upon whether or not there is a danger that the  medication  on
             sale in Nigeria may be counterfeit copies and  be  ineffective
             or less potent.

             125. Specifically it will be important  to  know  whether  she
             would be able  to  acquire  antidepressants  in  Nigeria,  for
             example,  amitriptyline,  whether  this   would   be   private
             prescriptions and, if so at what cost, and whether this  would
             require private medical consultations (and at  what  cost)  to
             obtain  an  initial  prescription.   However   continuing   on
             amitriptyline is  not  a  safe  long  term  treatment  because
             potential cardiac toxicity in overdose, so substitution  of  a
             less toxic alternative before removal is desirable.

             ...

             132. At interview [DO] did not mention specifically  fears  of
             harm from the Nigerian  authorities  or  others  were  she  to
             return to Nigeria, but she says her depression is worsened  by
             her fear of being deported....

             133. I thus conclude that risk of her attempting suicide would
             be considerably heightened were a decision made to deport  her
             to Nigeria, during the process of removal, during  any  period
             of pre-removal detention, and on arrival in Nigeria  following
             removal.

             134. ...  in  my  clinical  opinion  [DO]  would  be  at  high
             increased risk of suicide, both in the period  leading  up  to
             deportation, and after arrival in Nigeria.

     19. The Amnesty International  report  describes  the  availability  of
         mental health care facilities. It draws attention  to  there  being
         (as of 2015) 130 qualified psychiatrists in Nigeria,  7  specialist
         neuro-psychiatric hospitals and 12  teaching  hospital  psychiatric
         departments. Nigeria's population is in the region of 186  million;
         Lagos has an estimated population of over 20 million.  Of  the  two
         anti-depressant  drugs  and  the  psychotropic  drug  that  DO   is
         prescribed, Amnesty reports that Mirtazapine and Amitriptyline  are
         approved  for  use  in  Nigeria.  Mirtazapine   is   available   on
         prescription  for  N2500  for  28  tabs.  Amnesty  were  unable  to
         establish the price or availability of  Amitriptyline.  The  third,
         psychotropic, drug, Aripiprazole, is not listed as approved for use
         in Nigeria.  Amnesty comments

             "While principles of  psychiatric  good  practice  are  widely
             promoted within the modern  Nigerian  psychiatric  profession,
             the   reality   of   under-resourced,   overstretched   staff,
             responding to great demand in difficult  conditions  leads  to
             serious limitations on the  level  and  availability  of  care
             provided. For a person  suffering  from  serious  mental  ill-
             health,  there  may  in  principle  be  treatment   available,
             particularly in Lagos which as  a  major  city  is  relatively
             better served with psychiatric care that other  parts  of  the
             country, but the range and suitability of treatments  will  be
             limited, a lack of  outreach  work  means  that  the  onus  is
             entirely on the sufferer and their family  to  find  treatment
             and competition for treatment places is fierce."

     20. The two anti-depressants that  [DO]  is  currently  prescribed  are
         available in Nigeria, albeit at  a  cost.  Despite  the  report  by
         Professor Hale in 2016, there has  been  no  change  in  her  anti-
         depressant and anti-psychotic  medication  and  she  has  not  been
         provided with trauma based CBT or EMDR. There has been no challenge
         to the nature of the care that she is being provided  with  in  the
         UK. I have taken the view that although it may  be  that  the  best
         treatment the appellant can have is as described by Professor Hale,
         she  is  not  getting  that  treatment  here  in  the  UK  and  the
         availability of her current treatment in Nigeria is  based  on  her
         ability to fund and access it through the Nigerian health  service,
         such as it is. Aripiprazole is not licensed for use in Nigeria  and
         it therefore seems reasonable to assume that she would not be  able
         to access it. Professor Hale's report concentrates on the effect of
         the withdrawing of the anti-depressant treatment and the  potential
         rapid decline in her mental health and increase  in  suicide  risk.
         Although he considers that long term reliance upon  the  two  anti-
         depressants is not in her best interests, the fact is that the anti-
         depressant treatment she is currently receiving is available to her
         in Nigeria if she can pay for it.

     21. The report does not indicate  the  possible  or  likely  effect  of
         stopping Aripiprazole or whether alternative  drugs  are  available
         save to say that

             "Without her antipsychotic her sleep would be further impaired
             and her hallucinations are likely to worsen causing long  term
             damage and considerable anxiety."

         Professor  Hale  does  not  state  that  there   are   not   viable
         alternatives to that  antipsychotic  drug;  nor  does  the  Amnesty
         International report. Professor Hale does not say that Aripiprazole
         is the only suitable one, or that a change  could  not  take  place
         easily and over a short period of time.

     22. In terms of assessment of  Article  3  and  her  health,  the  core
         matters I  have  taken  into  account  are  the  treatment  she  is
         currently  receiving,  whether  that  treatment  is  available   in
         Nigeria, the consequences of withdrawal of that treatment  and  the
         actual process of removal and its consequences. That there  may  be
         other, better treatments or medication for her is not a matter that
         I am required to reach a conclusion upon in order to determine this
         appeal.  The  issue  is  her  return  to  Nigeria  on  her  current
         prescribed medication. I have placed little weight on  whether  she
         would be able to access  counselling  in  the  light  of  Professor
         Hale's opinion that it is of little or  no  effectiveness.  I  have
         taken fully into account, and accept, that there is a  shortage  of
         psychiatric facilities, that competition is fierce and to the  cost
         of such treatment, as evidenced by Amnesty International.

     23. As referred to in AM (Zimbabwe)  &  Anr  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  64,  as
         "pithily" summarised in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 at  [66]  the
         exceptional circumstances in which Article 3 will  prevent  removal
         to another country with lesser standards of care  "is  confined  to
         deathbed cases". A person whose risk of suicide  is  judged  to  be
         imminent and real because of the state of  his/her  mental  illness
         might also be described as  a  "deathbed"  case.  On  the  evidence
         before me, DO does not reach that high threshold.

     24.   [175]  of  Paposhvili  v  Belgium  (Application   no.   41738/10)
         summarises the two scenarios  in  which  Article  3  could  prevent
         removal:

             The Court further observes that it has held that the suffering
             which flows from naturally occurring illness may be covered by
             Article  3,  where  it  is,  or  risks  being  exacerbated  by
             treatment,  whether  flowing  from  conditions  of   detention
             expulsion or other measures, for which the authorities can  be
             held responsible (see Pretty...). However, it is not prevented
             from scrutinising an applicant's claim under Article  3  where
             the  source  of  the  risk  of  proscribed  treatment  in  the
             receiving country  stems  from  factors  which  cannot  engage
             either directly or indirectly the responsibility of the public
             authorities of that country.

     25. The court in Paposhvili continued:

             183. The Court  considers  that  the  "other  very  exceptional
                  cases" within the meaning of the judgment in  N  v  United
                  Kingdom ([43]) which may raise an issue  under  Article  3
                  should be understood to refer to situations involving  the
                  removal of a seriously ill  person  in  which  substantial
                  grounds have been shown for  believing  that  he  or  she,
                  although not at imminent risk of dying, would face a  real
                  risk , on account of the absence of appropriate  treatment
                  in the receiving country or the lack  of  access  to  such
                  treatment, of  being  exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid  and
                  irreversible  decline  in  his  or  her  state  of  health
                  resulting  in  intense  suffering  or  to  a   significant
                  reduction in life expectancy....

     26. The court in Paposhvili said

               a) It is for the applicant  to  adduce  evidence  capable  of
                  demonstrating  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
                  believing that, if removed, she would be exposed to a real
                  risk of being subjected to treatment contrary  to  Article
                  3;

               b) Where such evidence is adduced, it is for the  authorities
                  of  the  returning  state  in  the  context  of   domestic
                  procedures, to dispel any doubts raised by  it.  The  risk
                  alleged must be subjected to close scrutiny in the  course
                  of which the  authorities  in  the  returning  state  must
                  consider the foreseeable consequences of removal  for  the
                  individual concerned in the receiving state in  the  light
                  of the general situation  and  the  individual's  personal
                  circumstances.

               c) The impact of removal on  the  person  concerned  must  be
                  assessed by comparing her state of health prior to removal
                  and how it would evolve after removal.

     27. For DO it can be concluded  that,  the  SSHD  being  aware  of  her
         fragile mental health, would place adequate safeguards in place  on
         the making of the removal decision, her travel to the  airport  and
         her journey to Nigeria. Her health care has been managed whilst she
         has been in the UK; in prison she was specifically cared for  as  a
         suicide risk and she continues to receive  treatment  from  her  GP
         since  her  release  from  detention.   The  SSHD  has   seen   the
         comprehensive report provided by Professor Hale and can be expected
         to take careful note of  his  diagnosis  and  the  potential  risks
         identified. It is reasonable  to  conclude  that  adequate  medical
         provision will be made by the SSHD during those periods of time.

     28. The question arises of whether the receiving  state,  Nigeria,  has
         effective mechanisms  for  reducing  risk,  such  mechanisms  being
         available and accessible to DO.

     29. According to Professor Hale, DO spends time alone and becomes  more
         anxious when with others. Amnesty International draws attention  to
         the possible detention in police cells of those with mental  health
         problems who have adverse contact with the  police  or  because  of
         adverse family intervention.  The appellant's only previous adverse
         contact with the police arose from her drug offence.  There  is  no
         assertion of a risk of reoffending and so no evidence based  reason
         to suppose that this appellant, given her propensity to spend  time
         alone would find herself in the future having adverse contact  with
         the police. There is no family in Nigeria who  would  cause  police
         intervention.  Professor  Hale's  report  does  not  indicate   any
         behaviour by DO that would result in  adverse  attention  from  the
         police.

     30. It is possible that in the future DO may be able to work again  but
         I have disregarded that possibility in reaching my  decision  given
         that she last worked in  the  relative  safety  of  confinement  in
         prison and her lack of work since her release from detention,  even
         on an unpaid or voluntary basis, despite the lack  of  evidence  of
         any attempts made by her to get back into work. She is  capable  of
         undertaking some tasks because the evidence is that she helps  with
         chores around the house. I have concluded, in reaching my decision,
         that DO would be unlikely to be able to work and would be returning
         to a country where, albeit not objectively well-founded, she has  a
         genuine subjective fear of mistreatment. That fear is, according to
         Professor Hale, likely to be exacerbated on return to Nigeria.

     31. There is no direct evidence available to me of her ability to  find
         accommodation but, taking into account her expressed  consideration
         of moving out from her friend's home but lack  of  action  in  that
         regard, her increased confusion  and  tenseness  and  anxiety  when
         having to deal with people generally, her lack  of  motivation  and
         energy and  her  lack  of  knowledge  of  Nigerian  society,  I  am
         satisfied that she would be unable to find accommodation  with  any
         great ease and I have reached my decision  acknowledging  that  she
         does not know anyone in Nigeria.  Her  friend  has  been  providing
         assistance on a daily basis since her  release  from  detention  in
         October 2016. I do not know whether he has friends or relatives  in
         Nigeria who might be able to assist her. I do not know  whether  he
         would be prepared to travel to Nigeria with her for a few weeks  to
         assist  her  in  getting  established.  I  do  not   know   whether
         accommodation can be found in advance of her removal.  The  Amnesty
         International report provides evidence that studio accommodation is
         available albeit at a cost of around the  equivalent  of  �500  per
         year and two year's deposit has to be paid. But in the  absence  of
         adverse evidence of assistance and  given  her  friend's  expressed
         confirmation  that  he  would  provide  financial   assistance   if
         necessary and, given her indication that she is considering  moving
         out from her friend's despite it being difficult for  her  to  find
         accommodation, I am satisfied that although she may experience some
         short term difficulties, there is suitable accommodation  available
         and she would find some.

     32. I am satisfied that  if  DO  were  able  to  maintain  her  current
         medication of Mirtazapine and Amitriptyline, her  risk  of  suicide
         would not be elevated to the slightly relaxed threshold outlined in
         AM. She would be alone in  Nigeria,  but  she  spends  considerable
         periods of time alone here in the UK. Although she has  been  self-
         harming, she has not  attempted  suicide  since  her  release  from
         detention despite the continuing deportation proceedings.

     33. Her friend, Mr [F], has said he will provide  financial  assistance
         if necessary. There is no evidence that he would not  provide  such
         assistance if DO were deported; he is already providing  assistance
         sufficient to meet  the  appellant's  accommodation  and  nutrition
         needs. Although there is competition for  psychiatric  services  in
         Nigeria, the treatment she is getting  here  in  the  UK  does  not
         include  frequent  monitoring  of  her  drugs;   other   than   the
         counselling to which I have already  referred,  she  is  on  repeat
         prescriptions and has been  since  she  was  in  prison.  Professor
         Hale's conclusions on elevated  risk  of  suicide  in  Nigeria  are
         predicated upon her not being able to access medication. He records
         that she has continuing suicidal ideation but has  not  acted  upon
         this since her release from  prison.  Professor  Hale  records  his
         opinion that her risk of attempting suicide would  be  considerably
         heightened were a decision to deport her made, during  removal  and
         on arrival in Nigeria ([133] of his report - see above).  The  fact
         is that a decision to deport  her  has  been  made,  she  has  been
         undergoing an appeal process since 2016 and lost her appeal  before
         the First-tier Tribunal and yet there  has  not  been  an  apparent
         heightened risk. As stated above, it can be expected that the  SSHD
         will ensure adequate safeguards on actual removal and there  is  no
         reason at all to doubt that the appellant's friend,  Mr  [F],  will
         continue  to  provide  the  financial  support  that  he  has  done
         previously or that he will  do  all  that  he  can  to  assist  the
         appellant in establishing herself in Nigeria.

     34. In terms of her arrival in Nigeria, again the SSHD can be  expected
         to provide adequate medical provision until she has at least passed
         through immigration control. Whether further assistance is provided
         for a period of time thereafter is a matter for the SSHD but on the
         evidence before me, given that she will continue to have access  to
         her medication and given my findings in relation to  accommodation,
         I am satisfied that she will not be at risk of Article 3 breach  on
         arrival in Nigeria after passing through immigration control.

     35. In terms of being in Nigeria, if her  current  medication  were  to
         continue, as it is in the UK with such  low-level  monitoring,  the
         evidence does not point to a heightened risk of attempted  suicide.
         She is recorded as being self-aware.

     36. Taking all these matters into account I find  that  removal  of  DO
         from the UK to Nigeria pursuant to the deportation order would  not
         result in a breach of Article 3.







         Article 8

     37. DO entered the UK in 2000  and  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
         remain on 28th March 2002. She remained lawfully in the UK.  On  12
         February 2013, on returning to the UK from Grenada, she  was  found
         in possession of class A drugs. She was charged with,  and  pleaded
         guilty to, being knowingly concerned in the fraudulent  evasion  of
         the prohibition or restriction on importation of class A drugs.  On
         11th April  2013  she  was  sentenced  to  6  years  and  6  months
         imprisonment. It was her first and only criminal  offence.  It  was
         submitted on her behalf that the sentencing judge acknowledged that
         she was a carrier but that despite "clear  evidence  that  she  had
         suffered from  mental  health  problems  prior  to  committing  the
         offence", that did not  appear  to  have  been  considered  by  the
         sentencing judge. The sentencing judge states that she has no doubt
         at all but that DO did the crime  for  the  "purpose  of  financial
         gain; in short greed". The judge says  she  has  taken  account  of
         mitigating  factors.  DO  was  legally  represented.  There  is  no
         evidence that her counsel did not place all appropriate  mitigation
         before the judge and  that  such  mitigation  was  not  taken  into
         account by the judge. There was  no  evidence  before  me  that  DO
         sought permission to appeal her sentence. The fact is that  DO  was
         sentenced for a first, very serious, offence to which  she  pleaded
         guilty and she was sentenced to a period of imprisonment in  excess
         of 6 years. There is no basis upon which to attempt to minimise her
         offence or to attempt to re-mitigate the sentence.

     38.  Her  psychiatric  problems  seem  to  have  worsened   since   her
         conviction. Nevertheless, for the same reasons as I  have  set  out
         above in relation to Article 3 I am satisfied  that  she  would  be
         able  to  re-establish  herself  in  Nigeria,  albeit   with   some
         difficulty.

     39. Although it was submitted that DO  has  formed  significant  social
         cultural and family ties in the UK, that is not  supported  by  the
         evidence. She does have one good friend but she does not go out and
         spends  much  of  her  time  alone.  This  is  not  indicative   of
         significant social or cultural ties. She does not  have  family  in
         the UK.

     40. Although submitted that DO would have significant  difficulties  in
         integrating into Nigeria, there was little evidence to support that
         contention other than referred to above. It has  to  be  remembered
         that to successfully plead Article 8 in a  deportation  case  where
         the sentence is over 4 years, there  have  to  be  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above those set out in the  exceptions.  The
         evidence before me was that  DO  is  not  socially  and  culturally
         integrated into the UK. She stays with her  friend  and  his  wife,
         does not go out, spends a considerable amount of  time  lying  down
         and expresses a desire  to  learn  to  speak  better  English.  The
         evidence before me does not point to there being  very  significant
         obstacles to her social and cultural integration  in  Nigeria.  The
         Amnesty International report refers to the discrimination faced  by
         individuals with mental health problems and the difficulties  faced
         by lone women and that the combination of  both  of  these  factors
         will place DO at risk. Whilst there may be  a  generality  of  such
         issues in Nigeria, in this case DO will have the financial  support
         of her friend; there was a paucity of evidence that  DO  will  have
         particular difficulties.

     41. Although DO clearly  has  serious  and  debilitating  physical  and
         mental health problems, these do not, given she would  be  able  to
         retain some financial assistance from her friend,  amount  to  very
         compelling circumstances. Despite the fact that DO is  assessed  as
         at low risk of  re-offending,  the  public  interest  requires  her
         deportation.

     42. Her removal would not result in a breach of Article 8.

         Conclusions:

         The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law.

         I set aside the decision

         I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it

         Anonymity

         The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

         I continue  that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 25th September 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
