
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/02836/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 18th March 2019     On 21st March 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    [S R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp (Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's application for asylum on the basis of his political
    activities for the BNP in both Bangladesh and the UK was rejected by
    the Secretary of State. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart at Taylor House on the 7th of September
    2018 and dismissed for the reasons given in the decision promulgated on
    the 2nd of October 2018.

 2. The Judge rejected the credibility of the Appellant's account and
    thereby dismissed the appeal. The reasons are set out in paragraphs 77
    to 112. Having summarised the legal requirements and the Appellant's
    case in relation to Bangladesh and sur place activities in the UK the
    Judge referred to the medical reports and documentation before
    considering Tanveer Ahmed. In paragraphs 82 to 86 the focus of the
    discussion was on the scarring reports with inconsistencies and
    omissions identified in the text. The discussion of the psychiatric
    evidence is in paragraph 94.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
    grounds of application of the 7th of January 2019 permission having
    previously been refused by the First-tier Tribunal. The grounds argued
    that the Judge erred in the approach to corroborative evidence
    criticised the Judge's terminology including the use of the word
    "conclusive" the evidence was not placed in the context of the expert
    evidence. Secondly the Judge had not considered the Appellant's
    political activities in Bangladesh. Thirdly the approach to the
    documentation was criticised as the expert's view had not been taken
    into account in assessing genuineness. The fourth ground was that the
    Judge had not treated the Appellant has a vulnerable witness and/or to
    consider the evidence of his vulnerability. The fifth ground concerned
    his sur place activities and finally internal relocation was raised.

 4. Burnett LJ in EA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 10 at paragraph 10 made the
    following observations: "Decisions of tribunals should not become
    formulaic and rarely benefit from copious citation of authority.
    Arguments that reduce to the proposition that the F-tT has failed to
    mention dicta from a series of cases in the Court of Appeal or
    elsewhere will rarely prosper.  Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said in
    Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be read
    on the assumption that, unless he has demonstrated the contrary, the
    judge knew how he should perform his functions and which matters he
    should take into account". He added that an "appellate court should
    resist the temptation to subvert the principle that they should not
    substitute their own discretion for that of the judge by a narrow
    textual analysis which enables them to claim that he misdirected
    himself".  Moreover, some principles are so firmly embedded in judicial
    thinking that they do not need to be recited.  For example, it would be
    surprising to see in every civil judgment a paragraph dealing with the
    burden and standard of proof; or in every running down action a
    treatise, however short, on the law of negligence. That said, the
    reader of any judicial decision must be reassured from its content that
    the court or tribunal has applied the correct legal test to any
    question it is deciding."

 5. In submissions Mr Fripp took the fourth ground first and then developed
    the other submissions. Some, such as the concentration on the use of
    words as "conclusive" have less merit as they tended towards narrow
    textual analysis of the sort deprecated by the Court of Appeal. However
    on analysis the first ground advanced by Mr Fripp appeared to have more
    merit. The Home Office accepted that the Judge had not mentioned the
    relevant guidance from case law or the Joint Presidential Guidance and
    that there were difficulties with the treatment of the psychiatric
    evidence. I indicated at the hearing that I was satisfied that the
    decision was materially flawed and would be set-aside, the reasons for
    that decision follow below.

 6. The issue is one of substance not form. It is not an error for the
    Judge not to have mentioned AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 and
    neither is an error for the Judge not to refer to the Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note no 2 of 2010 with regard to the treatment of
    vulnerable witnesses. However, having regard to the above guidance it
    is an error if the Judge did not apply the relevant guidance and/or the
    decision cannot be read as showing that that was the case.

 7. Therein lies the problem with the decision in this appeal. Although
    there is no set order in which matters have to be considered the
    decision must show that the medical evidence has been considered and
    evaluated and that any diagnosis or recommendations have been put in
    context. Regrettably in what is clearly a lengthy and detailed decision
    it cannot be said that the Judge considered the psychiatric evidence
    appropriately or that she placed the discussions of the Appellant's
    case and the analysis of the various credibility issues in the context
    of the psychiatric report's findings. Dr Wootton's report at page B37,
    g2, contained information that indicated that the Appellant ought to
    have been treated as a vulnerable witness but the decision cannot be
    read that he was, either in the decision itself or the hearing.

 8. The discussion of the psychiatric evidence at paragraph 94 is brief and
    comparatively late in the decision. There is nothing the other parts of
    the decision that suggest that the discussions of the Appellant's
    accounts and other evidence had been placed in that context and that
    cannot be inferred from the way it is drafted. Having regard to the
    guidance of Burnett LJ I find that the decision cannot be read in a way
    that makes it sustainable. It does not show that the Judge had the
    guidance in mind or placed the main findings in the context of the
    Appellant's psychiatric issues.

 9. Simply because the Appellant is to be treated as vulnerable and the
    findings of Dr Wootton put in context it does not follow that his
    account is to be accepted without more. What is required is that the
    discussion of the various strands of the evidence, including the
    Appellant's evidence, witness statements and interviews, are to be
    assessed in the light of that evidence and evaluated accordingly.

10. Given the discussion above it follows that the decision of Judge Bart-
    Stewart cannot stand and so has to be set aside. The appeal is remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House to be heard by a Judge other
    than Judge Bart-Stewart de novo with no findings preserved.

CONCLUSIONS

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law.

I set aside the decision which is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
re-hearing de novo with no findings preserved. The case is to be heard by a
Judge other than Judge Bart-Stewart.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In setting aside the decision I make no fee award which remains a matter
for the First-tier Tribunal dependent on the findings made following the
remitted hearing.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 19th March 2019













