
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02926/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th September 2016               |On 29th September 2016               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     O A
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms O Taiwo, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant applies with permission to appeal against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Miller who dismissed his appeal on the  basis
    that he would be at no risk on return to Ethiopia.  The  appellant  was
    born on 11th February 1998 and was just 18 at the date of  the  hearing
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Miller.   The  appellant  had  claimed
    that his father was a member of the Oromo Liberation Front although  in
    his asylum interview he stated  "I  speculate  he  supports  the  Oromo
    Liberation Front".

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by UT  Judge  Plimmer.   She  extended
    time and stated that it  was  arguable  that  although  the  judge  had
    directed herself to the applicable lower standard of proof, nonetheless
    failed to apply it properly and failed to consider the country guidance
    case law and OGN, the most up-to-date one  found  on  the  Home  Office
    website was November 2013 on Ethiopia.

         2.   ...It is arguable that although  it  directed  itself  to  the
             applicable lower standard of proof,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             (FTT) failed to properly apply it and also failed to  consider
             the country guidance case-law and OGN (the most up to date one
             I can find on the HO website is Nov 2013) on  Ethiopia.   This
             states:

                  '3.15.14 Conclusion: The Tribunal in MB (Ethiopia)  [2007]
                           (CG) UKAIT 000300  found  that  OLF  members  and
                           sympathisers and those specifically perceived  by
                           the   authorities   to   be   such   members   or
                           sympathisers, will in general be at real risk  if
                           they have been previously arrested or detained on
                           suspicion of OLF involvement.  So too will  those
                           who have a  significant  history,  known  to  the
                           authorities, of OLF membership or sympathy.

                  3.15.15  Consequently if it is accepted  that  a  claimant
                           has  been  involved  in  or   is   suspected   of
                           membership or sympathising with the OLF  or  ONLF
                           and has previously come to the adverse  attention
                           of the authorities, then they are likely to be at
                           risk of persecution and a grant of asylum will be
                           appropriate".

 3. In a previous application to the First-tier Tribunal for permission  to
    appeal it was submitted that the judge's findings were at odds with the
    objective material to which the judge was  specifically  referred.   It
    was submitted that  the  judge  made  no  reference  to  the  objective
    material contained therein, and failed to give any consideration to the
    appellant's knowledge  of  Oromo  and  Ethiopian  politics  so  it  was
    submitted  that  there  was  a  substantial   resonance   between   the
    appellant's account and the objective material.

 4. That application was rejected by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Landes  on
    the basis that the judge had made a finding at 28(vii)  and  (viii)  of
    the determination that the authorities had no interest in the appellant
    or his father as the appellant was released so quickly and that  it  is
    not  clear  whether  the  appellant's  father  escaped  or  was  simply
    released.  On the basis that they were released it was  concluded  that
    the authorities had no serious interest in them.  Indeed the background
    material indicated that thousands of people were reported to have  been
    arrested in the wake of the 2014 protests and many of  those  who  were
    arrested  were  released  after  varying  periods  and  the  background
    material indicated that the authorities did indeed discriminate between
    those who were of continuing interest to them and those who were not.

 5. In his application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  the
    appellant merely stated that the judge 'did not look properly  into  my
    case for example my father's active support  of  the  Oromo  Liberation
    Front OLF' and did not fully  appreciate  the  appellant's  own  active
    support of his father in his OLF activities, for example not  revealing
    to the Ethiopian authorities when they arrested him that his father had
    hidden some of the university students who were protesting or  that  he
    was running secret errands.  He submitted that the judge was  not  fair
    to him in the way he looked at his participation in the OLF activities.
     By the time of the hearing the  appellant's  representative  Ms  Taiwo
    submitted that there had been an error of fact in relation to  how  the
    appellant knew about his father's activities and that in  fact  he  had
    been told by his mother.

 6. I confine myself to the grant  of  permission  and  in  particular  the
    application of the lower standard of proof and the consideration of the
    country guidance case law and OGN.

 7. Ms Taiwo submitted at the hearing before me that  the  judge  had  made
    errors.  It was submitted that the appellant had stated his mother  had
    told him of his father's involvement.  It is clear from  his  statement
    that the appellant was told by his mother that his father was an  Oromo
    supporter but even if that were a matter subject to the  permission  of
    the grant I do not find that is  material.   The  judge  made  a  clear
    finding at paragraph 28(i) that the appellant's claim was based on  the
    political profile of his father in Ethiopia and that he himself was not
    involved in any way with the OLF and only went  on  one  demonstration.
    At the outset it should be  noted  that  the  judge  specifically  took
    account of the appellants young age when making findings.

 8. The judge specifically considered the individual evidence regarding the
    father's involvement in the OLF and made a series of  adverse  findings
    regarding the evidence [28] (i) -(vi). The judge also made a series  of
    clear findings as to why he rejected  the  case  that  the  appellant's
    father was a famous Oromo nationalist and stated cogently that he found
    it very unlikely that if the father had been  well-known  as  being  an
    opponent of the government on behalf of the Oromo  people,  this  would
    not have been known to the chairman of the OLF Committee in the UK.  He
    found it further significant that although  the  appellant  stated  his
    father spoke at two meetings organised by the government, one being  no
    less than one and a half years before his arrest, no action  was  taken
    against him by the authorities.

 9. At 28(vi) the judge found that 'if the appellant's  father  really  had
    been involved in political activities, leading to his arrest,  and  his
    concluding that the situation was so  serious  that  both  he  and  the
    appellant should leave Ethiopia I would have expected the  evidence  to
    be much clearer'.  The judge made a specific finding that the appellant
    was with his father for a month after he left Ethiopia  but  was  still
    extremely vague, 'not knowing what his father actually did'.

10. The judge addressed the evidence of the OLF letter and also  took  into
    account the fact that the letter referred to  the  appellant  being  an
    "active young OLF activist", but  no-one  from  the  OLF  attended  the
    hearing on his behalf.  The judge found the appellant's evidence to  be
    extremely vague not knowing what his father  did  and  simply  assuming
    that he had escaped from detention.  As  such,  the  judge  gave  clear
    reasoning as to why he rejected the appellant's account in relation  to
    his father and gave cogent reasons at paragraph  28(viii)  for  finding
    that  the  father  would  not  have  been  allowed  to  escape  if  the
    authorities had any serious interest in him.

11.  MB (OLF and MTA, risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030 confirms that at
    paragraph 2 of the head note

         "OLF members and sympathisers and those specifically  perceived  by
         the authorities to be such members or sympathisers will in  general
         be at real risk if they have been previously arrested  or  detained
         on suspicion of OLF involvement.  So too  will  those  who  have  a
         significant history known to the authorities of OLF membership  and
         sympathy.  Whether  any  such  persons  are  to  be  excluded  from
         recognition  as  refugees  or  from  the  grant   of   humanitarian
         protection by reason of armed activities may need to  be  addressed
         in particular cases".

12. That is echoed in the OGN November 2013 on Ethiopia issued by the  Home
    Office. The judge, at the very least, needed to assess if the appellant
    would be considered to be a sympathiser even by  association  with  the
    father. The fact is that the judge found that  the  appellant's  father
    was released quickly and that is in line  with  the  country  objective
    material.  As the judge stated, if  the  authorities  had  any  serious
    interest in him they  would  not  have  released  him.  The  background
    evidence did indicate that the authorities discriminated between  those
    who are of continuing interest to them and those who are not  and  this
    was background material from Amnesty International dated  28th  October
    2014 and which postdates the OGN 2013.  In other words it was  open  to
    the judge to find  that  neither  the  appellant  nor  his  father  was
    perceived as being sympathisers or supporters of  the  OLF.  The  judge
    clearly did not consider, even against the  background  material,  that
    the father was of interest to the authorities and thus the appellant.

13. There was a criticism that the judge had given no consideration to  the
    appellant's knowledge of politics but I find this is not material as in
    fact it was the appellant's case that he had not been involved with the
    OLF in Ethiopia apart from attending one demonstration and he  did  not
    know what his father had actually done for them.

14. I am not persuaded that the judge has applied  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof.

15. The judge at paragraph 3 clearly sets out  the  standard  of  proof  as
    regards the likelihood of  persecution  as  a  "reasonable  chance"  or
    "serious possibility".  The use of phrases such as "in all probability"
    and "highly probable" come after a detailed analysis of the evidence on
    the basis of and in light of the direction to himself to  approach  the
    evidence on the basis of a reasonable likelihood.  At [28x]  the  judge
    was considering whether the appellant had been in touch with his family
    and despite that this is not central to the assessment or risk  to  the
    appellant, 'all probability' does not  denote  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof.  The judge considered the activities of the appellant sur  place
    and again made a critical analysis  of  the  letter  from  the  OLF  at
    [28(xiv)].  At [29] the judge was clear that the authorities would  not
    have interest in him either as a supporter or OLF sympathiser.

16. It is clear that up-to-date Country of Origin Information needs  to  be
    considered but the judge found that the appellant himself confirmed  he
    was not in any  way  involved  with  the  OLF  and  gave  reasoning  at
    paragraph 28(i) to (viii) as to why he rejected  his  father's  claimed
    involvement.  Although Ms Taiwo states  that  it  was  the  mother  who
    informed the  appellant,  the  application  for  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal clearly states "the judge did  not  fully  appreciate  my  own
    active support of my father in OLF activities".  If that is  the  case,
    this contradicts and contrasts with  the  appellant's  case  even  more
    sharply with that presented by Ms Taiwo.

17. I find no error of law in the decision and the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 27th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

