
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02564/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st December 2017                          |On 22nd February 2018         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                  SRWA [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Alam (instructed by The Law Partnership
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision and Reasons  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Geraint  Jones
    promulgated on 25th April 2017 following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on
    11th April 2017.  The case was a protection claim by an Iraqi  citizen,
    a woman born in 1991.  She arrived in the  UK  in  September  2016  and
    claimed asylum upon  arrival.   The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    application in a decision of  February  2017  and  it  was  the  appeal
    against that decision which came before the judge.

 2. The claim was based on a fear of ISIS or Daesh on the  basis  that  her
    father, who had been a doctor working  with  the  Peshmerga,  had  been
    kidnapped and, it was believed, killed in February 2015  and  that  her
    brother was also killed.  She claimed that threats had been received by
    her mother threatening her and her mother and that she would be at risk
    from ISIS upon return.  Additionally, she has a husband in the  UK  who
    is now a British citizen and she wanted to remain  with  him.   By  the
    time of the hearing before the judge in the First-tier Tribunal she was
    pregnant.

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds and permission to  appeal
    was granted by a judge of the Upper Tribunal on the basis that arguably
    the judge failed to make reasoned findings relating to credibility  and
    the facts based on the evidence before him  in  the  round  but  rather
    started from a position that the Appellant  had  sought  to  flout  the
    Immigration Rules  of  the  country.   The  judge  granting  permission
    referred also to unfortunate wording in the Decision  and  Reasons  and
    found it arguable that  the  judge  had  made  irrational  and  unclear
    findings as to the nature of the marriage.  Further it is said  in  the
    grant of permission that the Tribunal failed to attach  any  weight  to
    the fact that the Secretary of  State  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    father had been kidnapped by Daesh.

 4. I have read the Decision and Reasons with care and I agree that  it  is
    tainted by material errors of law.   A  reading  of  the  Decision  and
    Reasons gives the distinct impression that the judge had prejudged  the
    case and used most unfortunate wording including that the Appellant had
    decided to flout the immigration laws.   Throughout  the  judgment  the
    wording used by the judge is unfortunate and  ill-advised  such  as  at
    paragraph 9 where he says that "the Appellant did not  then  condescend
    to say, even approximately, when that phone call took place".  He  also
    says at paragraph 13:

         "I am in no doubt that this  appellant  has  sought  to  flout  the
         immigration laws of this country in circumstances  where  she  well
         knows that she could not gain lawful entry  under  the  Immigration
         Rules and so has decided to  take  the  law  into  her  own  hands,
         dressed up as a claim for asylum so that as she said  at  the  very
         outset  when  interviewed  at  Luton  airport,  she  can  join  her
         husband."

 5. The judge later in the decision makes another ill-advised comment about
    the Appellant's husband when he says at paragraph 28: "I do not  accept
    that any man worthy of calling himself a lady's  husband  would  desist
    from accompanying her if she had to return to Iraq through Baghdad".

 6. He says at paragraph 23(i) that the Appellant married her husband in an
    arranged marriage  or  a  marriage  of  convenience.   That  particular
    finding is purely speculative and not based on  any  evidence  and  the
    judge gives no reason for it.   The  judge  has  failed  to  take  into
    account a great deal of documentary evidence supporting  the  marriage,
    including the original marriage certificate  with  a  translation,  the
    evidence of cohabitation in the United Kingdom and of course  the  fact
    that the Appellant was pregnant.  There is no analysis of  any  of  the
    documentary evidence.

 7. Furthermore, in relation to the protection claim in relation  to  Daesh
    the judge has made no mention whatsoever of the fact that the Secretary
    of State accepts that her father was kidnapped by Daesh  nor  does  the
    judge  consider  or  make  any  findings  in  relation  to  the   death
    certificate of the Appellant's brother which is also  included  in  the
    file.

 8. In short this decision reads as though the  judge  has  decided  before
    hearing the case and without consideration of the documentary  evidence
    that he is going to dismiss it.  His decision cannot stand and must  be
    set aside in its entirety.  It is appropriate given the  findings  that
    need to be made that it should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a full rehearing.  The appropriate hearing centre is Hatton  Cross.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the First-tier Tribunal's  Decision
and Reasons is set aside and the case remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a full rehearing.

No anonymity direction was requested and none is made.


Signed                              Date 19th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
