
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/02318/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2019                 |On 3 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                     DR
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Anderson, Counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania. On  1  August  2014  he  claimed
    international protection as a refugee upon arrival clandestinely on  30
    July 2014. On 27 February 2019  a  decision  was  made  to  refuse  the
    application and to remove him from the United  Kingdom.  The  Appellant
    appealed and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Coutts (hereafter "the judge"). In a decision promulgated on  29  April
    2019 the judge dismissed the appeal.

 2. The basis upon which the Appellant pursued his appeal is set out in the
    Decision and Reasons of the judge at [19]  to  [43].  Essentially,  the
    primary focus of the Appellant's claim was that there  was  an  ongoing
    blood feud between his family and the D family and further that he  was
    a victim of modern slavery.

 3. The Respondent accepted the Appellant's account that there was a  blood
    feud between the Appellant's family and the D family and, that he was a
    former victim of modern slavery, but did not accept the  Appellant  had
    been targeted as part of that blood feud and concluded that he could be
    safely returned to Albania and would be sufficiently protected  by  the
    State.

 4. The judge agreed with the Respondent. The judge was satisfied that  the
    Appellant was not a target of this blood feud.  In  essence  the  judge
    found that following the death of a member of the Appellant's family of
    "equal blood", the blood feud had ended [56]. The judge considered that
    this conclusion was reinforced by the fact that the Appellant's  father
    returned to Albania having previously fled in consequence of the  blood
    feud. In view of the judge's conclusion that the blood feud had come to
    an end, he did not find it credible that the D  family  would  seek  to
    target the Appellant (rejecting the account of an  attempted  abduction
    by the D family) and his older brother or, that there was any  credible
    justification for the continuance of the blood feud.

 5. Further, the judge found that while the Appellant  was  targeted  by  a
    criminal gang in Italy, there was no  evidence  to  suggest  that  they
    would be able to identify him on return, or that the authorities  would
    be unable or unwilling to provide protection.

 6. Not content with the judge's decision, by Notice dated 10 May 2019, the
    Appellant made an application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds submit that the premise  upon  which  the  judge
    found that the Appellant was not a target of the  blood  feud  involved
    the application of  too  high  a  standard  of  proof,  the  making  of
    speculative findings, a failure to  consider  background  evidence  and
    apply applicable country guidance.

7.      On 22 July 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Martin  granted  permission  on
all grounds.

Was there a material error of law?

8.    The Appellant's case as set out in the grounds  is  that  the  judge's
    adverse credibility findings were insufficient to support a  conclusion
    that there was no extant blood feud, particularly so, in view that  the
    Respondent conceded that one in fact did exist. It was argued that this
    conclusion was contrary to the background evidence which supported  the
    Appellant's account which  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account.
    Insufficient regard therefore was said to have been  given  overall  to
    the risk to the Appellant on return to Albania.

9.    Further still, reliance was placed in the grounds  on  the  fact  that
    the judge failed to consider the issue of sufficiency of protection  in
    accordance with country guidance namely EH  (Blood  feuds)  Albania  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00348.



10.   Mr Anderson relied on the grounds as pleaded in respect of  the  first
    and second ground, and briefly amplified ground three and  referred  to
    headnote (6) & (7) of EH (op.cit) which he submitted the judge did  not
    apply.

11.   Mr Singh in  brief  submissions  drew  my  attention  to  the  judge's
    citation of EH  at  [12]  and  submitted  the  grounds  amounted  to  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings.

12.   I remind myself of the guiding principles that affect my  approach  to
    this appeal.  These are well-known and are helpfully summarised in  the
    case of R (Iran) -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 982:

         "... it may be convenient to give a brief summary of the points  of
         law that will most frequently be encountered in practice:

         (i)      making perverse or irrational  findings  on  a  matter  or
             matters  that  were  material  to   the   outcome   ("material
             matters");

         (ii)     failure to  give  reasons  or  any  adequate  reasons  for
             findings on material matters;

         (iii)    failure to take into account and/or resolve  conflicts  of
             fact or opinion or material matters;

         (iv)     giving weight to immaterial matters;

         (v)      making a material misdirection  of  law  on  any  material
             matter;

         (vi)      committing  or   permitting   a   procedural   or   other
             irregularity capable of making a material  difference  to  the
             outcome or the fairness of the proceedings;

         (vii)    making a mistake as to a  material  fact  which  could  be
             established by objective and uncontentious evidence, where the
             Appellant and/or his advisers were  not  responsible  for  the
             mistake, and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a
             mistake was made".

13.   The Court of Appeal went on to emphasise that any error needed  to  be
      material.

14.   In this case  the  judge  stated  that  he  had  directed  himself  by
      reference to the country  guidance  case  of  EH  and  the  background
      evidence at [12] but did not set out those parts which  were  material
      to the issues which he had to resolve. Whilst that in itself is not  a
      material error of law it does make it difficult to discern whether the
      judge considered the substance of the country guidance and  background
      evidence relied upon by the Appellant in reaching his adverse findings
      or when considering risk on return.

15.   The central plank  to  the  Appellant's  grounds  is  that  the  judge
    reached findings that were not open to him on the evidence. I have been
    mindful of the fact that in McGraddie (Appellant) v McGraddie (AP)  and
    another (AP) (Respondents) (Scotland) [2013] UKSC 58 the Supreme  Court
    reminded all appellate jurisdictions of the care that is  to  be  taken
    when looking to reverse findings of fact made  at  first  instance  and
    that they should do so only  when  satisfied  that  the  findings  were
    plainly wrong and not supported by the evidence.

16.   The  question  for  me  is  whether  despite  the  apparently  careful
    consideration given  to  the  evidence,  the  judge  nevertheless  made
    findings that were not sufficiently reasoned in light of  all  evidence
    or were not open to him.

17.   I do not consider that it was open to  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    blood feud had ended or that there was a sufficiency of protection  for
    the reasons that he gave without specific consideration being given  to
    the background evidence and country guidance with  reasons  as  to  why
    this did not assist the Appellant's case.  The  judge's  attention  was
    drawn to the Country Policy and Information Note "Albania: Blood  feuds
    v.3.0 October 2018"  that  indicates  a  blood  feud  can  require  the
    extinction of all male family members and can be characterised  by  the
    occurrence or recurrence of threats. The same  background  evidence  is
    also supportive of the Appellant's case  that  the  practice  of  self-
    confinement enabled his father to  return  to  Albania  despite  of  an
    ongoing blood feud. There is  force  in  the  argument  that  all  this
    evidence is supportive of the Appellant's case and without any specific
    reference to it  by  the  judge,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  adequate
    consideration was  given  to  it  before  reaching  conclusions  as  to
    credibility or otherwise.

18.   Similarly, I also do not find  that  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that the Appellant's account was undermined by the  fact  that
    there was "no reason why  the  police  could  not  investigate..."  the
    attempted abduction  against  the  Appellant.  This  runs  contrary  to
    guidance in EH that there is not a sufficiency of protection  in  areas
    where Kanun law predominates,  which  was  applicable  here.  Whilst  I
    observe that the Tribunal in EH at [74] were referring to circumstances
    where there was an active blood feud, I  find  for  the  reasons  given
    above that the judge's consideration was insufficient in this regard in
    any event and that these conclusions cannot be compartmentalised.

19.   Having found that  the  basis  upon  which  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant's account is not credible or that he is not at risk  are  not
    sustainable and amount to a material error of law,  I  have  to  decide
    whether the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
    re-heard or whether it is possible from the findings already  made  and
    the evidence received to re-make  the  decision  myself.   The  parties
    invited the Tribunal to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal and
    I come to the view that it is appropriate to do so. There will have  to
    be an assessment of the Appellant's account and a consideration of risk
    on return in light  of  the  accepted  facts  by  the  Respondent  with
    sufficient reasons being given as to why that account  is  accepted  or
    rejected in view of all the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing de novo on contested facts  by  a  judge
other than Judge Coutts.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                       Date 24 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


