
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/02242/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 July 2017                           |  On 7 July 2017                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     M Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran of Alex Moran Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
herein is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's
family.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of
court proceedings.





                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant, a national of Libya, entered the United Kingdom in  July
    2015 and claimed asylum shortly thereafter.

 2. That application was refused by the Secretary of State  on  15  October
    2015,  a  decision  that  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Handley, in a decision promulgated on 3 October 2016.  In so concluding
    Judge Handley found  the  core  of  the  appellant's  account  to  lack
    credibility and thereafter  relied  upon  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AT and Others (Article 15(c);  risk  categories)  Libya  CG
    [2014] UKUT 318 to found a conclusion that there was no  real  risk  of
    the appellant suffering from persecutory or  other  ill-treatment  upon
    return to Libya.

Error of Law

 3. By way of a decision signed on 8 February 2017  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Holmes set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  for  the
    following reasons.

         "5.  It is common ground before me that  although  the  appellant's
             evidence concerning the events that had supposedly led to  his
             leaving Libya had been rejected as untrue, he had always  held
             four undisputed innate characteristics that were  relevant  to
             any assessment of the risk he faced as a result of any ongoing
             armed conflict in Libya. His identity was not in dispute,  and
             thus (as his passport confirmed) he was  a  male  of  fighting
             age.   His  visa  application  disclosed  that  he  was   from
             Benghazi, and his name  disclosed  his  membership  of  the  Z
             tribe.  He would readily be visually  perceived  as  of  Black
             African rather than Arabic ethnicity.   Although  not  one  of
             those innate characteristics, it was also relevant to consider
             that he is a qualified archaeologist, whose  immediate  family
             (consisting of his parents, siblings, wife and children)  have
             remained throughout living in a family home in Benghazi.

         6.   It is also common ground before me  that  the  FTT  failed  to
             undertake an adequate assessment  of  the  evidence  available
             when considering the appellant's case in relation  to  Article
             15(c),  whether  that  be  the  evidence   of   those   innate
             characteristics, or, the evidence  of  the  current  situation
             within Libya.  Indeed it is  difficult  to  discern  from  the
             decision any assessment of that ground of  appeal  beyond  its
             bold dismissal.  Last, it is common ground  that  there  is  a
             clear  error  of  law  that   requires   the   decision   upon
             humanitarian protection claim to  be  set  aside  and  remade.
             There is however no  complaint  about  the  findings  made  in
             relation to the disputed issues of primary fact and no  reason
             therefore why they should not be disturbed."

Re-making of Decision

 4. In the period between the promulgation of Judge  Holmes'  decision  and
    the hearing before me, the Upper Tribunal issued a new country guidance
    decision relating to Libya, ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya  CG  [2017]  UKUT
    00263 (IAC) - the headnote to which reads:

         "The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person."

 5. In remaking the decision in the instant appeal, I must take account  of
    the  recent  country  guidance  decision  and  only  depart  from   its
    conclusions if there is sufficient evidence  requiring  me  to  do  so.
    There is no additional evidence  before  me  relating  to  the  current
    situation in Libya that was not before the Tribunal that determined the
    appeal in ZMM.

 6. The consequence of this, as both parties accept, is that I  must  apply
    the findings in ZMM to this appellant's circumstances. Inevitably,  and
    uncontroversially, that leads me to  conclude  that  the  appellant  is
    entitled to humanitarian protection and that his removal "would  breach
    the United Kingdom's obligations in relation to [a person] eligible for
    a grant of humanitarian protection". I allow this appeal accordingly.

 7. Mr Moran invited the Tribunal to conclude, in addition to that set  out
    above, that the  innate  characteristics  personal  to  this  appellant
    (identified in paragraph 5 of Judge Holmes' decision) would lead  to  a
    level of risk for the  instant  appellant  over  and  above  the  risks
    identified in ZMM.  I agree that this is so but need  make  no  further
    findings in this regard.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for the  reasons  given
by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes.

Upon remaking the appellant's appeal is allowed.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Dated: 6 July 2017


