
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02701/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 December 2016                  |On 19 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                  Mutaz [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth, Counsel instructed by Bedfords
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    made on 9 March 2016 refusing his application for asylum.



Background

2.   The background to this appeal can briefly  be  summarised  as  follows.
    The appellant is of  Palestinian  origin  but  has  been  lawfully  and
    habitually resident in Jordan.  A number of  his  family  members  have
    been accepted as refugees and the  appellant  travels  on  a  Jordanian
    temporary passport.  He entered the UK as a  visitor  on  12  September
    2015 and claimed asylum on 9 October 2015.

3.   His claim was based on  his  involvement  with  his  father's  business
    selling food to agents who would transport it to refugee  camps.   Some
    time in 2011 his father entered into a business partnership  with  four
    other businessmen who were all from the same influential  and  powerful
    tribe.  In respect of one of the transactions the agent  in  charge  of
    selling the goods to the refugee camps fled to Egypt with the  proceeds
    of the sale.  When the appellant's father told  his  business  partners
    about the agent, they then started to put pressure on him to make  good
    their losses.

4.   The appellant's father sought to dispose  of  land  which  he  held  in
    order to raise funds but this move was blocked by the brother of one of
    those demanding payment, who seized the property and used his  position
    as an MP to frustrate lawful recourse by the appellant and his  father.
    Subsequently, there were a number of incidents, firstly  on  17  August
    2014 when the appellant's  family  home  was  broken  into  and  money,
    documents and other property was taken or destroyed.  The  police  were
    informed but filed the report as an offence by unknown persons.

5.   Later the same week, on 21 August 2014 the appellant was driving  along
    the highway towards Amman.  A group of men  from  the  Abu  Zaid  tribe
    followed the appellant for some 30 minutes and then rammed his car from
    behind.  He lost control of his vehicle and collided with the car ahead
    before leaving the road.  The appellant was taken to hospital  and  the
    accident was filed as one caused by driver  error  on  the  appellant's
    part.

6.   On 1 September 2014 a group of seven people  attacked  the  appellant's
    home by night.  They were all from the Al-Aramta tribe.  The  appellant
    and his elder brother were not there  at  the  time.   His  father  and
    grandfather were both assaulted.  His grandfather was taken to hospital
    where they encountered the attackers who had harmed themselves and gone
    to hospital to fabricate a complaint against  the  appellant's  family.
    There was later an attempt at mediation through a tribal elder but  the
    agreement broke down.

7.   On 5 April 2015 the appellant was leaving his  home  when  he  was  set
    upon by three men and severely assaulted, such that he was hospitalised
    for three nights.  After this incident he moved to the home of an uncle
    outside Amman hoping to be safe from further attack.  On 17 June 2015 a
    number of men attacked the appellant's home  in  Amman  causing  damage
    with an axe to parts of the house and to the appellant's van.  They set
    fire to the house, causing damage.

8.   The appellant's grandfather suffered during the attack  and  was  taken
    to hospital where  he  died  on  24  June  2015.   There  were  further
    incidents on 9 July 2015 where people broke into the warehouse  of  the
    appellant and his father, stealing cigarettes.  Finally, on  28  August
    2015 the appellant was kidnapped, taken to a remote area where  he  was
    beaten and threatened and told that this was his  last  opportunity  to
    pay the outstanding sums and avoid  death.   He  was  then  allowed  to
    leave.  It was decided that he should leave Jordan  forthwith  for  his
    own safety and he did so on 12 September 2015 when he travelled to  the
    UK.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

9.   The respondent refused the appellant's application and he  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Having reviewed the evidence the judge  found
    that the appellant's credibility was so seriously  impaired  on  points
    material to the central core of his claim that  no  reliance  could  be
    placed on it unless reliably supported.  He found  that  the  appellant
    had failed to prove even to the lower standard the central core of  his
    account,  describing  his  evidence  as   a   mendacious   construction
    comprising some events that might have occurred such as a personal  car
    accident, petty damage to his van and  the  death  of  his  grandfather
    which had been transparently embellished.  He presented these  together
    with other wholly imagined events such as his  alleged  kidnapping  and
    the alleged self-harming of malicious persecutors in order to  found  a
    false claim against him.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

10.  The grounds  seek  to  challenge  the  judge's  findings  raising  five
    issues.  The first ground deals with the evidence relating to the death
    of  the  appellant's  grandfather.   At  [37]  the   judge   found   it
    inconsistent that the certificate made no  mention  of  the  subsequent
    death of his grandfather which had occurred well before the date of the
    issue of certificate.  The grounds argue that this  misunderstands  the
    appellant's evidence which was to the effect that the attack was on  17
    June 2015 when the matter was reported to the police,  his  grandfather
    died on 24 June 2015 and the report was issued on 15 July 2015.   There
    was no evidence to suggest that the appellant had  requested  that  the
    report be updated.  If the report related to events reported on 17 June
    2015, it could not reasonably be expected that  it  would  mention  the
    death of the grandfather or any trauma he had suffered  when  that  had
    not been reported.

11.  The second ground argues that the judge made a mistake  of  fact  about
    the photographs when he commented  at  [35]  that  in  the  photographs
    submitted of the house no damage  was  visible  and  in  particular  no
    depiction of fire damage.  However, the  appellant  had  not  suggested
    that the photographs did show such damage and the judge  had  therefore
    erred by commenting on the lack of damage shown.

12.   The  third  ground  seeks  to  challenge  the  judge's   reliance   on
    plausibility without having taken  proper  account  of  the  background
    evidence and in particular at [40] when he described  the  evidence  of
    the appellant being abducted but then released which on its face was so
    unlikely as to be lacking in credibility.   The  judge  commented  that
    despite on the  appellant's  account  repeated  attempts  at  harm  and
    violent recovery they did  not  seek  to  ransom  him  for  payment  or
    otherwise to extort payment  but  rather  showed  unexpected  clemency,
    giving him a further two months to raise the money.

13.  The fourth ground argues that the judge erred on the issue of the  land
    owned by the appellant's mother.  Documentary evidence showed  that  it
    was owned jointly with other persons and the judge found  that  it  was
    incredible that the very fact that the appellant's home  was  owned  in
    part by members of the Abu Zaid clan tended  to  militate  against  any
    allegation of an attack by the same clan.  However the  land  deed  did
    not state that the home was jointly owned, rather that the plot of land
    was jointly owned and on this basis the Abu Zaid clan did not attack  a
    home which they jointly owned but the home of another person located on
    a plot of land they jointly owned.

14.  The fifth ground argues that the judge erred  in  suggesting  that  the
    intervention of a tribal leader following the 1 September 2014 incident
    detracted from the claim that the appellant's  persecutors  had  tribal
    backing but this is contrary to the country evidence  relied  on  which
    showed that tribal leaders regularly  mediated  between  other  tribes.
    The judge had failed to take account of the appellant's  evidence  that
    the tribes were unable to harm  them  in  Jarash  as  the  local  tribe
    members there prevented it.  In summary, Mr Butterworth submitted  that
    the judge's findings on credibility were unsafe in the light  of  these
    various factors.

15.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that whilst the judge had  identified  a
    large number of inconsistencies, the factors set out in the grounds did
    raise concerns about the judge's findings and in  particular  the  fact
    that the judge  attached  weight  to  the  fact  that  the  photographs
    produced of the house did not show any visible damage  and  the  report
    relating to the grandfather's death  contained  no  suggestion  of  the
    sudden onset of a fatal condition in recent traumatic circumstances  of
    violence.  She did not seek to make any further submissions.

16.  In reply Mr Butterworth  said  that  the  failure  to  attack  all  the
    findings did  not  mean  that  they  were  conceded  and  repeated  his
    submission that there were concerns about the way the judge had  relied
    unduly on issues of plausibility.

Assessment of the Issues

17.  I must consider whether the judge erred in law in such a way  that  the
    decision should be set aside.  In the light of the issues raised in the
    grounds and submissions and the fact that Ms Brocklesby-Weller accepted
    that they did raise some issues of concern, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge did err in law such that the decision should be  set  aside.   So
    far as the report following the incident on 17 June 2015  is  concerned
    the judge regarded it as significant that the document made no  mention
    whatsoever of trauma of any kind to the grandfather in the  attack  and
    no mention of his subsequent death before the certificate  was  issued.
    However, this has failed to take into account the appellant's  evidence
    that the attack was reported to the police on 17 June 2015 and that  it
    was the appellant's evidence that there was no further updating of  the
    information.  If correct, in these circumstances it would be  an  error
    to  expect  the  police  report  to  include  information   about   the
    grandfather's death or any trauma in the attack.

18.  I am also  satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  by  drawing  an  adverse
    inference about the credibility of  the  account  in  relation  to  the
    attack on 17 June 2015 by his comment that there was  no  depiction  of
    fire damage to the house.  It had not been part of the appellant's case
    that these photographs showed damage caused by the attack.   The  judge
    referred to an indistinct photograph at page  144  of  the  appellant's
    bundle but commented that this  was  identified  by  the  appellant  as
    simply showing damage to stock.  The other photograph relating  to  the
    house was at 171 of the bundle but the appellant  had  never  suggested
    that it showed fire damage.

19.  I am also find that there is substance  in  ground  5  that  the  judge
    erred by commenting at [41]-[43] that the appellant did  not  name  any
    individual tribal leaders and that the only tribal involvement  was  at
    the hospital.  However, the judge did provide names of Abu  Zaid  tribe
    members and there was evidence in  the  appellant's  statement  dealing
    with issues of tribal involvement.

20.  The grounds relating  to  plausibility  and  issues  arising  from  the
    document about the land owned by the appellant's mother, if they  stood
    by themselves, would not be sufficient to show that the judge had erred
    in law but when they are taken with the factors identified  in  grounds
    1, 2 and 5 I am satisfied that the judge has erred in law by  taking  a
    number of inaccurate and therefore irrelevant matters into account when
    assessing the appellant's credibility.  I am satisfied that  these  are
    such that they do undermine  the  safety  of  the  judge's  finding  on
    credibility and accordingly the decision should be set aside.

21.  Both representatives agreed that  in  these  circumstances  the  proper
    course was for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a full re-hearing.



Decision

22.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  reconsideration
    by way of a full re-hearing before  a  different  judge.  No  anonymity
    direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   H J E Latter  Date: 16 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
