
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/02715/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 August 2019                         |On 24 September 2019              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     s r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by A & P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the  Appellant  is  an  asylum  seeker  and  it  entitled  to
anonymity.

2. This  is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State refusing him recognition as a refugee  and/or  leave  to
remain on human rights grounds.   Mr  Paramjorthy  did  not  represent  the
appellant in the First-tier Tribunal and did  not  settle  the  grounds  of
appeal.  These comments are not addressed to him, but it is  right  to  say
that the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  are  not  helpful.   They
complain repeatedly in rather acidic terms about the First-tier  Tribunal's
delay, but this is not  a  case  where  the  delay  is  serious.   It  took
something like four-and-half-months to be promulgated.  It should have been
done sooner, we all know that, but there was no evidence before me that the
delay was the cause of the difficulty in the case.

3. By way of example the grounds say the judge was "not attentive"  and  was
"not remembering because Counsel was  described  wrongly  as  a  Presenting
Officer.  That  is  clearly  a  mistake  but  it  is   obvious   from   the
contemporaneous note it was a mistake at the time.  It  is  nothing  to  do
with delay.  This case has not gone wrong because of  delay;  it  has  gone
wrong because of a rather odd, erroneous approach to an important strand of
evidence.

4. This is a case where  the  appellant  has  produced  apparently  credible
medical evidence of markings on his back  which  is  described  as  "highly
consistent" with him being beaten. Rather than looking at that evidence and
the reasons for it and then how those reasons might impact  upon  any  risk
the appellant has in the event of return, the First-tier Tribunal Judge has
decided to disbelieve  the  evidence  because  a  complaint  was  not  made
consistently about cigarette burns.  That does not deal with the  scars  on
the back and the mechanism for them arriving there, and  really  makes  the
whole Decisions and Reasons unsatisfactory because the most important  part
of it has not been addressed.

5. There is a secondary  point  which  is  that  the  judge  has  not  dealt
adequately with the risk on return because of sur place activities. It  has
merit.

6. Mr Paramjorthy's third point is that there are signs of  carelessness  in
the Decision and Reasons, the most obvious one being paragraphs 24 and  25.
Paragraph 24 is limited simply to the word "Medical" and  paragraph  25  to
the word "The".  I do not know how this came about but at the very least it
is indicative of poor proofreading and does not sit  comfortably  with  the
duty to have given anxious scrutiny.  If there had been nothing else  wrong
with the Decision I doubt that this error would have  undermined  it.   The
real problem here is the failure to engage with the evidence of scarring on
the appellant's back and the reasons for it.

Notice of Decision

7. The parties before me agreed that  this  is  unsatisfactory  and  is  not
something that can be appropriately repaired easily in the Upper  Tribunal.
It has to be reheard and as the  appellant's  case  has  not  been  decided
properly I agree with the parties that this is a  case  that  needs  to  be
heard again in the First-tier Tribunal and I so order.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 September 2019              |





