
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02713/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Teams             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 June 2021                       |On 23 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Togo who was born in  1993.  He  appealed
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 6 March 2020 dismissing his claim for international protection.
    The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 22 December 2020,
    dismissed his appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claimed to have been involved in opposition  politics  in
    Togo and that he faced a real risk of harm as a consequence  should  he
    return there. The appellant's account of past events  was  rejected  as
    untrue by the judge. At  [47],  the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant
    claimed in his asylum interview and subsequently in the course  of  his
    claim that he was member of the ANC, a political  party.  However,  the
    judge observed that, in his  screening  interview,  the  appellant  had
    stated that, 'if you don't belong to a political party, you don't  have
    anything.' The judge found that, 'this, it is my  clear  view,  is  the
    appellant saying that he is not a member of  a  political  party.'  The
    judge noted that the appellant later in the same interview in  response
    to a question about membership  of  'pro-government  groups,  political
    organisations, armed or  violent  organisation,  group  or  party'  had
    answered 'no.' The judge found that on two occasions in  the  screening
    interview, the application  had  'made  no  mention  of  any  political
    issues, opinion or activity whatever...'

 3. In my opinion, the judge has misunderstood  the  appellant's  evidence.
    First, it is not correct to say that the appellant had made no  mention
    in the  screening  interview  of  political  activity.  At  [4.1],  the
    appellant stated that he feared 'the government' 'because we  did  some
    demonstrations. We asked for our rights.'  Secondly,  it  is  tolerably
    clear that the appellant (giving evidence in French with the assistance
    of  an  interpreter)  has  used  the   expression   'political   party'
    specifically to refer to the ruling government party of Togo. He refers
    at [4.1] to 'the political party' 'organising elections ... we will  be
    hit'. When he says that, 'if you don't belong to a political party, you
    don't have anything'  it  is  obvious  from  the  context  that  he  is
    referring to the political party, i.e. the ruling party. By analogy, if
    one had spoke of 'the Party' in Soviet  Russia  any  time  between  the
    1930s and the 1980s one would have only  have  been  understood  to  be
    referring to Soviet  Communist  Party.  Indeed,  if  in  the  screening
    interview  answers  one  replaces  the  indefinite  with  the  definite
    article, the sense is made even clearer. Thirdly, the question which  I
    have  quoted  at  [2]  above,  whilst  it  does  refer  to   'political
    organisations', mainly concerns membership of pro-government or  'armed
    or violent' organisations; again it is important to remember  that  the
    question was put to the appellant through an interpreter.

 4. The judge's failure to understand this part of the appellant's evidence
    has impacted on other parts of her analysis. Understandably  given  her
    reading of the screening interview, the judge has taken a  particularly
    dim view of the credibility of the appellant's account  which  appeared
    to change inexplicably from one in which the appellant had no political
    interest whatever to the appellant  being  at  risk  of  detention  for
    membership of the ANC. For the reasons I have given above, the  judge's
    assessment is not accurate. Secondly, whilst she accepts the  expertise
    and agrees with the findings of the report of the expert, Dr  Lawrence,
    the judge did not 'accept' the  report  because  its  'prevailing  pre-
    requisite' was that the appellant was a person with 'an anti-government
    profile' which the judge categorically found that the appellant did not
    possess. As that finding is not sound, the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    expert report has also been tainted by her error.

 5. I find that, notwithstanding the judge's additional findings  rejecting
    the credibility of the appellant's evidence,  it  is  not  possible  or
    desirable to separate out and  preserve  those  other  findings  whilst
    rejecting the incorrect findings on the screening interview. The  judge
    has carried out a holistic assessment  of  the  evidence,  as  she  was
    required to do; consequently, her errors in part of that analysis  have
    vitiated the whole. There will need to be a  hearing  de  novo  of  the
    appeal which is better conducted in the First-tier  Tribunal  to  which
    the appeal is returned for it to remake the decision.  As  regards  the
    remaining grounds of appeal, some arise directly from the judge's error
    in respect of the screening interview. The remaining grounds  were  not
    addressed in any detail, if at  all,  at  the  Upper  Tribunal  initial
    hearing and, given that none of the findings of fact of the  First-tier
    Tribunal are to be preserved, I do not propose address them now.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for it to remake the decision following a hearing de novo.


    LISTING DIRECTIONS: first available date;  not  Judge  Mack;  2  hours;
    First-tier Tribunal to decide whether face to face  or  remote;  French
    interpreter; Manchester.


         Signed                              Date 10 June 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

