
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02290/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th April 2019                            |On 10th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     SR
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Bisson, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka. He appeals with permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lawrence) ("FtTJ"),
    promulgated on the 3rd May 2017 dismissing his appeal against the
    decision to refuse his protection and human rights claim.


 2. Following the dismissal of his appeal, grounds of appeal were issued
    for permission to appeal but on 31 May 2017 the First-tier Tribunal
    refused permission. On renewal, the application for permission was
    refused also by a judge of the Upper Tribunal (see the decision dated
    14 September 2017).


 3. An application was made to challenge the refusal of permission by way
    of judicial review and on 2 January 2018 and order was made by Mr
    Justice Supperstone who granted permission to apply for judicial review
    on the grounds that he considered that the claim raised an arguable
    point of principle, namely, whether in light of the decision of VT
    (Article 22 Procedures Directive -Confidentiality) Sri Lanka [2017]
    UKUT 368, promulgated on 19 July 2017, the FtTJ was entitled to place
    any or any significant weight on the results of the verification of
    documents by the TID. The order made reference to CPR 54.7A(9) and that
    if the Upper Tribunal or any interested party sought a hearing of the
    substantive application it must make its request for such a hearing no
    later than 14 days after service of the order granting permission. It
    also recorded "if no request for hearing is made, the court will make a
    final order quashing the refusal of permission without a further
    hearing".


 4. It does not appear that any substantive application followed and
    therefore the refusal of permission was quashed.


 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the 16th March 2018 by Mr CMG
    Ockleton, Vice-President of the Upper Tribunal as follows:


             "Permission is granted in the light of the decision of the
             High Court in this case. The parties are reminded that the
             upper Tribunal's task is that set out in section 12 of the
             2007 Act."


 6. It is as a result of that grant of permission that the appeal comes
    before the Upper Tribunal. The grounds advanced by the appellant are
    those originally provided, and Mr Bisson, Counsel and behalf of the
    appellant, relies upon the grounds which formed the application before
    the High Court. He submitted that the judge erred in law by placing
    weight on the DVR obtained by the respondent. He submitted that the
    method in which the verification was undertaken undermined the weight
    that could be attached to such a document. The respondent had
    instructed RALON (a branch of the immigration services at the BHC in
    Colombo) to provide the court documents and arrest warrant to the TID,
    who the appellant had claimed were the ones responsible for his ill-
    treatment. Therefore, the weight attached to such a report would have
    to be seen in the light of how the document was obtained and who it was
    obtained from.  Mr Bisson relied upon the decision in VT (as cited).


 7. He further submitted that it had not been clear what information had
    been provided to the TID or whether it had been redacted and written
    requests were made from the appellant's solicitors (see letter 24th of
    July 2016 and at S140).


 8. He further highlighted differences between the factual circumstances in
    VT and the case of this appellant and that the case number xx/xxx/8/xxx
    on the appellant's document appeared to be consistent with the number
    used for the TID and therefore, the only evidence that undermined the
    document was the verification report from the TID.


 9. As to the remainder of the grounds, he submitted that other supporting
    relevant evidence had not been assessed when reaching an overall
    holistic view of the appellants credibility and whether the events as
    claimed had taken place.


10. Mr Tufan and behalf of the respondent relied upon the Rule 24 response
    in which it was stated that as the appeal had been adjourned at the
    appellants request the documents submitted must be checked by the
    respondent, the respondent had taken steps to verify the documentation.
    Furthermore, there was nothing to suggest that the appellant could be
    identified if it had been found that no case exists under the reference
    number provided. If there was no such case, there has been no process
    identified in the grounds to establish why or how the authorities could
    link non-existent case to the appellant.


11. He was not able to inform the court what information had been sent to
    undertake the enquiries but submitted that in light of the decision in
    PA (protection claim, respondent's enquiries, bias)[2018] UKUT 337,
    there was no general requirement on the respondent to obtain the
    consent of an applicant before making an enquiry about the applicant in
    his country of origin (contrary to VT). He therefore submitted that it
    was open to the judge to consider the verification report in the light
    of the evidence. Furthermore, at paragraph 17 the judge considered the
    medical report in detail.


Decision on the error of law:

12.  Having had the submissions of the advocates and in the light of the
    issues raised in the papers before the Tribunal, I am satisfied that
    the decision of the FtTJ demonstrates the making of an error on a point
    of law. I shall set out my reasons for reaching that conclusion.


13. The core of the appellant's claim was that his father was a prominent
    member of the LTTE and also that his brother had membership of that
    organisation. In October 2009 he claims to have been arrested for a
    period of four days, suffered ill-treatment and released on the payment
    of a bribe. It was also stated that he was arrested for a second time
    in 2010 and was released on reporting conditions but that he had left
    the country on 8 March 2010.


14. In support of his claim the appellant provided a number of documents
    which he stated that emanated from Sri Lanka which include court papers
    and an arrest warrant from the TID. The respondent thereafter sought to
    authenticate those documents. It appears that a request was made by the
    appellant solicitors to check those documents and the Rule 24 response
    makes reference to the hearing being adjourned for that purpose.
    Consequently, the reply received in the form of a DVR was that the
    documents were found to be "not genuine" and it was recorded that the
    reference xxxxx was "not relevant to the TID."


15. The FtTJ consider the documentary evidence provided by the appellant in
    the light of the DVR. The judge stated that the meaning of the contents
    of the DVR were "not clear" but that as the document stated no case had
    been filed by the TID it fundamentally undermined the appellant's claim
    to have been arrested and detained. It is of note that the appellant's
    representatives had sought clarification as to what documents had been
    sent for authentication which the judge appeared to resolve a paragraph
    12 however, as recorded at paragraph 13, the solicitors were also
    concerned that the respondent sought authentication of documents from
    the TID as opposed to the court and to the lawyer who had provided a
    certified copy.


16. The judge considered the issue and observed that a better enquiry would
    have been with a third-party and not with an "interested party" such as
    the TID or a lawyer. Notwithstanding those reservations the judge
    reached his decision that as the appellant had not provided further
    evidence, he attached weight to the DVR and then concluded at paragraph
    16 that the claim was a "concoction" an rejected his claim of being
    arrested.

17. At paragraph 17, the judge dealt with the expert medical report in very
    short terms stating "I find the evidence does not survive anxious
    scrutiny. I find the appellant's case is built on falsehood and I find
    no more told the truth to Dr than he did to the respondent or the
    Tribunal." No reference was made to the contents of that report or the
    opinion reached.


18. I am satisfied that the decision demonstrates material errors of law.
    Dealing with the issue of the DVR, it is plain that the judge expressed
    some reservations that the TID was not independent and therefore the
    inference raised from that is that this may affect the weight attached
    to the issue, although that was not directly articulated. The judge did
    not have the advantage of the later decision of the Upper Tribunal in
    VT (as cited) which had been promulgated two months after the judge's
    decision. There is also now a later decision of PA (set out above).
    Those decisions provide helpful guidance when dealing with the issues
    raised in this appeal.


19. As the decision sets out, Article 22 of the 2005 Procedure Directive
    sets out a number of provisions relating to the collection of
    information which are then transposed into the Immigration Rules at
    paragraph 3391A. On the facts of the claim was that the TID who
    provided the source information for the DVR were the authorities the
    appellant feared, given the warrant was issued under the Prevention of
    Terrorism Act. At paragraphs 86-92, the Upper Tribunal in VT make it
    plain that they were concerned as to the method of enquiry with the TID
    and that the current method risks breaching the prohibition in Article
    22 and therefore would be unlikely to produce reliable evidence
    relating to the authenticity of the document in question (see paragraph
    91). Whilst in that case the TID had no record of the case number, the
    UT found that given the concerns about the reliability of the evidence
    from an alleged act of persecution who may have motive to undermine a
    protection claim, they could place no weight on the evidence.


20. When applied to the present appeal, Mr Tufan was not able to inform the
    court what information had been given to the TID and whether his name
    had been given. Both applicants agree that it was not known what was
    sent. Mr Bisson submitted that in light of the information in VT (which
    the judge did not have available) there was evidence relevant to this
    appeal which set out the correct number for the court xxxx/xxx/8/xxxx
    and could be seen as corresponding to the TID. He submitted that the
    only issue then was the information in the DVR itself and whether it
    could be reliable.


21. In the light of the decision of VT, which I accept the judge did not
    have the advantage of, there are nonetheless errors in the overall
    assessment of the documents and in particular the reliability and
    weight that could be attached to the DVR. Questions still remain
    unanswered as to what information was sent to the country for the
    purposes of the verification.


22. I am satisfied that the judge erred in his findings at paragraph 11 and
    15 in the assessment of the weight and accuracy of the DVR report. This
    also is relevant to a further issue raised in the grounds. At paragraph
    16 the judge rejected the core of the appellant's claim based on the
    DVR report. However, there was other supporting evidence which required
    assessment before reaching, that conclusion. At paragraph 17-18, the
    judge dealt with the report of the psychologist instructed who had
    reached an opinion that the appellant had been suffering from PTSD. The
    judge rejected the report on the basis that it was based on what the
    appellant had told him. The judge went on to state at [18] that the
    evidence did not survive anxious scrutiny and that the appellant's case
    is built on "falsehood" and that he did not tell the truth to the
    Tribunal or to the psychologist.


23. Detailed guidance was given in JL (China) about the preparation of
    medical reports for the First-tier Tribunal, as summarised in the
    headnote. The opening words are: "Those writing medical reports for use
    in immigration and asylum appeals should ensure where possible that,
    before forming their opinions, they study any assessments that have
    already been made of the appellant's credibility by the immigration
    authorities and/or a Tribunal judge (SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155
    [30]; BN (psychiatric evidence discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279
    (IAC) at [49], [53]))." The headnote also states: "The more a diagnosis
    is dependent on assuming that the account given by the appellant was to
    be believed, the less likely it is that significant weight will be
    attached to it (HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [23])." And "Even
    where medical experts rely heavily on the account given by the person
    concerned, that does not mean their reports lack or lose their status
    as independent evidence, although it may reduce very considerably the
    weight that can be attached to them".


24.  I cannot accept the submission made by Mr Tufan that the judge
    comprehensively considered the report at those paragraphs. There was no
    assessment of the content of the report. At B15 a conclusion was
    reached by observing the appellant's clinical presentation (see
    paragraphs 9596) and the symptoms that was seen by the psychologist was
    said to be "difficult to feign". The psychologist also considered other
    possibilities and whether or not this was a false allegation (see
    paragraphs 99 - 102). However, no assessment was made of those issues.


25. Furthermore, the conclusions on the appellant's credibility were made
    before considering that evidence. I would accept that a judge has to
    start somewhere in analysing the evidence however, I am satisfied that
    that the adverse assessment of credibility was made before properly
    considering the medical evidence and that this is an error of law (see
    Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367). Other documentary evidence was
    provided which included documents from lawyer who attached the
    certified copies which was relevant to making an overall holistic
    assessment of credibility, along with the medical evidence.


26. No finding was made also on the appellant's evidence that after the
    verification report the TID visited his home (see paragraph 6 of the
    updated witness statement exhibited at P54).


27. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the errors identified in the
    grounds are made out. As those errors go to findings of fact and
    analysis of evidence, I set aside the decision and do not preserve any
    of the findings.

28. As to remaking the decision, given the nature of the errors I accept
    the submission made by Mr Bisson and Mr Tufan that further evidence
    will be required and further clear findings made, including updating
    evidence relevant to the appellant's circumstances. Both advocates
    submit that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

29. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of
    appeals in this Tribunal. That reads as follows:


    "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to
    re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
    Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
    (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

30. Thus, I have reached the conclusion that it is appropriate to remit  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all matters.  In the
    light of the diagnosis set out in the report, consideration  should  be
    given to the guidance given in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ
    1123.




Notice of Decision


31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is therefore set aside.  It is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


                                Date     9/5/2019

                                    Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
