
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02341/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 March 2017                      |On 26  May 2017                    |
|                                      |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                             Mr RAZAKUDDIN SHIN
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:

For  the  Appellant:      Mr  G  Franco,  Counsel  instructed  by  Schneider
Goldstein
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Burma, date of  birth  23  November  1986,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision,  dated  23  February  2016,
    refusing him  asylum,  Humanitarian  Protection  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.  His appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kaler
    on 11 August 2016 who dismissed his appeal on 26 August 2016.

2.   Permission to appeal that decision was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes on 6 October 2016.  On 10 November  2016,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 December 2016, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  I  A  M
    Murray set aside Judge Kaler's decision promulgated on 26  August  2016
    and a resumed hearing was listed before the Upper Tribunal on 22  March
    2017.

3.    The Appellant, a national of Myanmar, claims  to  have  been  born  in
    Maungdaw, Rakhine in Burma.  His  date  of  birth  is  said  to  be  23
    November 1986.  The Appellant seems to have left Burma at the age of  4
    in 1990 and entered Bangladesh unlawfully with his father and  brother.
    The Appellant claims that his  father  was  a  Rohingya  refugee.   The
    Appellant, given his  age  at  the  material  times,  has  very  little
    recollection of life in Burma and his  earliest  recollections  are  of
    life in a refugee camp in Bangladesh until about  1994  when  he  lived
    elsewhere but finally in Sylhet.

4.   The Appellant did not grow up in Rohingya culture but is a  speaker  of
    Bengali/Sylheti.  The Appellant claims  that  he  was  brought  to  the
    United Kingdom and entered the United Kingdom by clandestine  means  in
    2002, having  travelled  through  various  countries  including  India,
    Pakistan, Turkey, Greece and France.  The Appellant says that he  is  a
    Sunni Muslim and that Muslims and Rohingya  Muslims  are  not  accepted
    within Myanmar, they are rejected by those of the  Buddhist  faith  and
    are persecuted.

5.   The Appellant says that he has been poorly educated and was brought  to
    the United Kingdom and put to work; which he did for many  years  as  a
    kitchen porter and in similar low-paid employment.    The Appellant  is
    clearly lacking in any in-depth knowledge of the Rohingya or  of  their
    history and culture or their traditions.  His recollections of life  in
    Bangladesh are simply living in  a  camp  or  outside  of  a  camp  and
    assimilating into Bangladeshi society.  The  Appellant  says  that  his
    father made no effort to introduce the Appellant to the Rohingya way of
    life or its culture  and  background.   Accordingly  he  did  not  know
    Rohingya words or dialect and only spoke Bengali/Sylheti.

6.   In considering the Appellant's evidence and recollection  of  his  time
    in Myanmar or Bangladesh, I fully take into  account  his  age  at  the
    material time, bearing in mind he  was  still  a  child  when  he  left
    Bangladesh in 2002  and  to  this  extent  his  knowledge  of  Rohingya
    customs, language and culture was neither necessary nor material to the
    life he was brought up with by  his  father.   If  the  Appellant  left
    Myanmar at the age of 4 in 1990, it is perhaps unsurprising he  has  no
    particular recollection of life there and, insofar as he was brought up
    in a refugee camp until 1994 before living outside of such  a  camp  in
    Sylhet, when he was not being brought up in a Rohingya area or culture,
    it is understandable that his recollection of matters is very  limited,
    bearing in mind his age and the circumstances in which he was living at
    the time.  The Appellant has no entitlement or  status  in  Bangladesh.
    He  was  not  lawfully  in  Bangladesh  and  certainly  the  Bangladesh
    authorities have never given him status to reside there.   He  has  not
    been granted refugee  status  in  Bangladesh.   The  Appellant  has  no
    apparent status as a Rohingya Muslim in Myanmar and there is nothing to
    indicate that he could be safely returned there.

7.   It is  clear  that  there  have  been  variations  in  the  Appellant's
    account, for  example,  in  an  Asylum  Intake  Unit  method  of  entry
    interview sheet in 2015 the Appellant said that  he  had  left  Myanmar
    when he was 10/11.  In representations made on his behalf by  Schneider
    Goldstein in December 2015, it was said that the Appellant had  entered
    Bangladesh by clandestine means in 1990, remained in a camp at  Teknaf,
    Cox's  Bazar,  Chittagong,  until  1994,  before  living  elsewhere  in
    Bangladesh.  In a statement of 10 December  2015,  the  Appellant  said
    that, although he could not remember anything about Myanmar because  he
    was very young at the time,  he  believed  that  his  father  had  been
    harassed by the Burmese authorities and  that  their  family  had  been
    persecuted along with other Rohingya Muslims.  His mother had  died  in
    1986 after his birth and persecution suffered by  his  parents  was  no
    longer tolerable and thus his father had eventually  decided  to  leave
    Myanmar in 1990 when he was 4 years of age.

8.   The Appellant describes growing up in the refugee  camp  in  Bangladesh
    in difficult circumstances due to their  illegal  status.   His  father
    sent him to the  UK  in  2002,  died  in  2006  and  his  brother  left
    Bangladesh to work in Malaysia in 2007. Since 2010  the  Appellant  has
    lost contact with his brother.

9.   The Appellant's Asylum Interview Record  dated  11  December  2015,  is
    extensive in length and he repeats that he left  Myanmar  when  he  was
    only 4 years of age, has no recollection of the matter or of his mother
    and he has little actual recollection in detail of his father's life or
    the business his father conducted in Myanmar: Although he believes that
    it was attacked by Buddhists and his father was prevented from working.
     He essentially says his father did not share  recollections of  events
    or encourage  him  to  remember  events  and  that  he  encouraged  the
    Appellant to live in the present rather than dwell on the past.

10.  The Appellant said that the reference in the  earlier  interview  where
    it is recorded he had referred to leaving Burma at 10 or  11  years  of
    age was an interpretation mistake at the time of the interview and  not
    his understanding of events.  The  Appellant  confirmed  that  he  only
    spoke Bengali and Sylheti and did not speak  Rohingya  because  he  was
    very small at the time and he was not taught to do so.

11.  The Appellant's account of life in the refugee camp  in  Bangladesh  is
    one of deprivation.  Similarly the Appellant believes that  his  father
    left the camp and travelled outside of it to work but it is  clear  the
    Appellant has no real recollection of where he went  to  work  or  what
    they did or the extent to  which  he  accompanied  his  father.   These
    matters are not particularly dealt with in interview in any  depth  but
    it is fair to say the Appellant's recollection of those matters is very
    thin.  The Appellant says that his journey to the  United  Kingdom  was
    arranged by his father and that once he got here he was put to work and
    essentially provided  with  food  and  accommodation  where  he  worked
    largely in the restaurant trade.

12.  The Appellant therefore stayed for many years  in  the  United  Kingdom
    working because that was the arrangement that  had  been  made  and  he
    believed that he had to stick to it for fear of the man, who he claimed
    had put him to work, in what is now referred to  by  the  Appellant  as
    'slavery'.  It should be said that there has been no consideration of a
    case based on modern day  slavery  by  the  Respondent,  the  Competent
    Authority nor it seems did the Appellant's representatives raise it  as
    an issue.     The Appellant says that he was poorly paid which seems to
    be because Mr Kober was only passing on some of the  Appellant's  wages
    and at times had taken all of them  to recover the  costs  of  bringing
    the Appellant to the United Kingdom.

13.  The Appellant's evidence addressed the friendships  he  had  made  with
    Bangladeshis in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant did not claim asylum
    until 2015 and had illegally resided in the UK and worked here  without
    making an asylum claim.  It therefore is the case  that  his  behaviour
    falls to be considered in the context of Section 8(2) of the Asylum and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004.   The  Respondent
    therefore follows the line that the Appellant is in fact a national  of
    Bangladesh and it is  doubted  whether  the  Appellant  was  a  Burmese
    national at all.

14.  Additionally it is held against the Appellant by the  that he does  not
    have sufficient knowledge of  the  Rohingya  or  of  life  in  Rohingya
    society or of his family history concerning life in Burma if  he  lived
    there.  The Appellant is also criticised, by  the  Respondent,  because
    the Appellant explains gaps in his knowledge by reference to  the  fact
    that his father did not wish to talk about matters in the past, avoided
    the issues and really did not tell the Appellant about life  in  Burma,
    bearing  in  mind  it  ultimately  appears,  the  Appellant's  entirely
    consistent account is that  he  left  at  the  age  of  4.  It  is  not
    incredible that the Appellant's father would not reveal anything to the
    Appellant about Rohingya Muslims other  than  that  they  were  treated
    badly, perhaps the point takes the matter no further.

15.  Quite simply it comes down to whether or not, to that low  standard  of
    proof identified in Sivakumaran (1998) ImmAR  97,  Ravichandran  (1996)
    ImmAR 147 and Karanakaran [200] EWCA Civ 11, the  Appellant  has  shown
    that he is likely to be a Rohingya faced with the attitudes  which  are
    contained in the background evidence of the Rohingya people and the ill-
    treatment and  discrimination  that  they  have  faced  in  Myanmar  or
    Bangladesh.

16.    I note Respondent asserts that  because  the  Appellant  lived  in  a
    refugee camp for a number of years and that there must have been  other
    Rohingya in the camp, the Appellant would have had  contact  with  them
    and have learned Rohingya.  The  failure  to  do  so  was  regarded  as
    "internally  inconsistent  and  implausible"  but  on  what  basis  the
    Respondent holds that view I do not know.  The background  evidence  is
    not forthcoming on the issue.  Similarly doubts about whether a  person
    may leave the camp to work which the Respondent expressed again is  not
    directly related to the evidence other than the generality of  a  UNHCR
    report in 2012 which says movements outside camps are only permitted if
    refugees have explicit permission from the Camp Commander and  normally
    permits were only given for emergency medical treatment.

17.  I do not know whether or not as a fact people would leave the camps  to
    go and work but it seems to me that one source of that kind as  to  the
    generality  cannot  be  regarded  as  determinative  of  all  camps  or
    locations where refugees were found in Bangladesh.  It is  also  clear,
    on  the  Appellant's  account,  that  they  left  the  camp  and  lived
    elsewhere, seemingly unlawfully and again that does not on the face  of
    it appear to be out with the background information.  The Appellant, in
    his evidence before me, was thoroughly  cross-examined  but  maintained
    the general position referable to his statement as to  his  background.
    He did not seek to elaborate on what his father had ever talked to  him
    about or the circumstances of the camp in which he  had  lived  or  the
    period of time he had spent in Bangladesh. He believed that he would be
    identifiable in Myanmar, not least because of his religious  faith  but
    also because he was essentially not a Burmese speaker or a  speaker  of
    any Burmese dialects.

18.  The Appellant did not elaborate upon his evidence  about  life  in  the
    camp in Bangladesh nor events there.  The  Appellant  did  not  enlarge
    upon the issue of the business his father had had in Myanmar or any  of
    those circumstances.  The Appellant confirmed that he attends a  mosque
    in East Ham in London and that he follows the Sunni Muslim faith.   The
    Appellant said he had no friends in  the  United  Kingdom  of  Rohingya
    background and he had not learned more of it  and  its  culture  whilst
    here.  The Appellant essentially repeated that his work in  the  United
    Kingdom had largely been subject to exploitation and  used  to  recover
    the costs of bringing him to the United Kingdom.  In addition he relied
    upon statements of support not least from  one  Mohammed  Ahmed,  whose
    statement was drawn to my attention.

19.  Mr Mohammed Ahmed, a British national but of Bangladeshi  origin,  born
    20 December 1985, has known  the  Appellant  since  2006  when  he  was
    working in a restaurant and they became good friends.  He  speaks  well
    of the Appellant's reliability, honesty and trustworthiness.   He  says
    that he is aware Rohingya refugees are treated badly by the authorities
    and general public in Bangladesh because of their unlawful status.   He
    believes they suffer mistreatment and abuse on a daily basis and live a
    helpless life.  He says he would be devastated  if  the  Appellant  was
    forced to return to Bangladesh where he would have no lawful status and
    suffer persecution.  He  believed  the  Appellant  was  extremely  hard
    working and an asset to the UK.  Mr Ahmed does not give any opinion  as
    to whether the Appellant is a Rohingya from Myanmar.

20.  The background evidence, particularly the paper  on  Rohingya  refugees
    in Bangladesh and Thailand, published by the Danish Immigration Service
    in 2011, concerns a number of issues raised in this  appeal.     It  is
    clear in that report that the Muslim population from  northern  Rakhine
    state in Burma are  known  as  the  Rohingya,  that  is  the  area  the
    Appellant claims to originate from and that some  28,000  Rohingya  are
    registered as living in two official refugee camps  in  Bangladesh  and
    some 200,000  unregistered  Rohingya  live  in  surrounding  towns  and
    villages outside  of  the  two  camps.   It  is  said  that  there  are
    approximately 750,000 stateless  Rohingya  in  Burma  in  the  northern
    Rakhine state.  In addition, Malaysia is host to some  90,000  Rohingya
    refugees and asylum seekers.  It is clear that there  have  been  large
    flows from time to time of refugees into Bangladesh. Prior to 1991  and
    1992 there was a flow of people who  it  was  said  had  been  forcibly
    evicted by the Burmese Army and mistreated.  It seems that during  1991
    and 1992, that is after the Appellant with his father and brother  left
    Burma, further compulsory land and property acquisition,  confiscation,
    rape, summary executions, physical torture, the destruction of mosques,
    religious  activities  banned  and   Muslim   leaders   harassed   were
    characteristic of that period.

21.  The current situation, in 2011, was that the Rohingya in  the  northern
    state  of  Rakhine  faced  systematic   and   endemic   discrimination,
    fundamental and basic human rights being denied, forced labour and ill-
    treatment, including discrimination leading to forced  deportation  and
    the  restriction  of  movement  owing  to  the  enduring  condition  of
    statelessness: The result of  the  Rohingya's  historic  difficulty  in
    obtaining citizenship, particularly following an Act  called  the  1982
    Citizenship Act, which led to  land  confiscation,  forced  relocation,
    evictions through violent means which were widespread and endemic.

22.    It appears that it is common ground that it  is  quite  difficult  to
    distinguish between Rohingya and Bangladeshi citizens because the  main
    distinctive factor is the language  which  is  similar  but  different.
    However, it would seem that many  Rohingya  who  have  been  living  in
    Bangladesh for a number of years  learned  Chittagonian/Bangla  dialect
    in order to assimilate, avoid discrimination  and  stigma  of  being  a
    Rohingya.  It appears that  Rohingya  in  Bangladesh  follow  the  same
    cultural and  religious  practices  as  the  local  Muslim  Bangladeshi
    population and  there  are  no  obvious  differences  between  the  two
    communities culturally or religiously.  Whilst  inside  the  camps  the
    Rohingya have their own mosques and there are madrassa schools for boys
    and girls  teaching  the  Quran  in  Urdu.   Differences  in  religious
    practices nevertheless seem to show that the Rohingya  have  sought  to
    integrate into Bangladesh.  Their  appearance  is  similar  and  it  is
    difficult  to  differentiate  them.    The  struggle  for  survival  by
    Rohingya has in  many  cases  eclipsed  their  cultural  and  religious
    practices, making it difficult to differentiate their unique practices.
     It appears that Rohingya in origin who are inside  the  refugee  camps
    are categorised as 'Myanmarese refugees', whereas Rohingya outside  the
    camps are 'undocumented  Myanmarese  nationals'.   There  is  no  exact
    figure for the number of undocumented individuals but there may  be  at
    least 300,000 or more.  It was said amongst  other  things  that  there
    were some 250,000 undocumented Rohingya in Cox's  Bazar  and  in  other
    places including Chittagong as well as Dhaka.

23.  It appears that UNHCR (Bangladesh) have not been permitted to  register
    newly arriving Rohingya  since  mid-1992  and  according  to  estimates
    something like  200,000-400,000  undocumented  Rohingya  are  currently
    residing in various towns and villages outside refugee camps  in  Cox's
    Bazar.

24.  However many Rohingya there are in Bangladesh, it seems that  they  are
    generally tolerated by the local people but there  is  competition  for
    jobs in the local labour market and the Rohingya are also  of  interest
    to powerful people who want cheap labour available.  The government  of
    Bangladesh therefore  accepts  responsibility  but  does  not  want  to
    encourage further refugees.  Some have been repatriated.  It is  to  be
    noted that many areas where the  Rohingya  are  settling,  for  example
    Cox's  Bazar  and  Chittagong,  are  some  of  the  poorest  parts   of
    Bangladesh.  Thus it is thought that there is a pull factor to Rohingya
    to leave Myanmar and to integrate and  get  assistance  in  Bangladesh.
    What is clear from the Danish report is just to  what  extent  and  how
    large the Rohingya population is in  Bangladesh  and  the  stresses  it
    places on facilities there.  In addition there  is  plainly  resentment
    that the Rohingya are  at  the  heart  of  organisational  problems  in
    Bangladesh and the over-populated and poorer areas are subject  to  all
    sorts of pressures.

25.  The 2015 UNHCR overview of Bangladesh presents a very familiar  picture
    but identifying the continuing intercommunal conflict in Rakhine  state
    being the basis of significant internal displacement.  The 2013 Country
    Report by the US DoS identifies that  the  UNHCR  had  estimated  about
    800,000 Muslim Rohingya in northern Rakhine state  who  were  stateless
    and that figure did not  include  stateless  persons  in  the  rest  of
    Rakhine state include stateless IDPs.  It was said  that  the  Rohingya
    experience severe legal, economic and social  discrimination,  controls
    on their movement with  the  displaced  population  being  particularly
    vulnerable  to  trafficking  and  exploitation.   There  certainly  was
    nothing to suggest at that stage any likely improvement.

26.   Restraints  which  have  been  placed   on   Rohingya   have   impeded
    integration.  It is said by the UNHCR :-

         "Finally, it should not be forgotten that the Rohingya are  one  of
         the world's largest and most prominent groups of stateless  people,
         an issue which has attracted considerable  international  attention
         as a result of the UNHCR's recent advocacy efforts in this area."

27.  It seems to me that, whilst the evidence of particular influxes in  the
    1970s and in the early 1990s are identified, it does not exclude others
    leaving at different times and it would be surprising if it simply  was
    the  case  that  only  influxes  occurred  in  those  periods  although
    obviously the numbers  involved were very substantial.

28.  The general stance that  Bangladesh  takes  towards  Rohingya  is  that
    repatriation rather than integration is the correct  solution  but  the
    UNHCR does not hold out particular hopes that  that  is  likely  to  be
    effective as that report notes

         "There  are  relatively  few  options  for  UNHCR  to   pursue   in
         Bangladesh.  Resettlement has been stopped.  Voluntary repatriation
         to Myanmar is currently not foreseeable.  Local integration  cannot
         be officially pursued.  Self-reliance remains the only  option  but
         without freedom of movement  or  right  to  work  this  remains  an
         elusive quest."

29.  On a fair reading of the report, the UNHCR is essentially powerless  to
    do much about the numbers and conditions  in  which  Rohingya  live  in
    Bangladesh or are excluded from Myanmar.

30.  I take into account the summary of these  matters  and  the  conditions
    faced by Rohingya sourced in  the  UK  Country  of  Origin  Information
    Service on Bangladesh of September 2012 which  states  in  relation  to
    Rohingya refugees

         "They live in squalor, receive very limited aid and are subject  to
         arrest, extortion and detention.  Unregistered  refugee  women  and
         girls are particularly vulnerable to sexual and physical attacks."

31.  It describes Rohingya being turned back at the borders  of  Myanmar  by
    the Bangladesh authorities and the limitations  on  refugee  protection
    available there. The documentation  also  shows  the  extent  to  which
    Rohingya in seaborne flight from Myanmar risk a great  deal,  including
    death, but are prepared to take those risks.  It seems to me that  even
    if an element of them are economic migrants, the fact is that they have
    and are prepared to take  the  extremely  hazardous  route  of  fleeing
    persecution in Myanmar but it seems to me self-evident that  there  are
    very significant obstacles to their integration into Myanmar.

 32.    I found the Appellant was  generally  credible  and  discharged  the
    burden of proof to the  low standard, bearing in mind he  was  a  child
    and very young at most material times in Myanmar  and  Bangladesh.  His
    father was the one who controlled the Appellant's destiny in  2002.  He
    was an ill-educated child when brought to the UK  in  2002.I  find  the
    Appellant was not brought up as a Rohingya.

33. I find on the evidence the Appellant's claim  set  with  the  background
    evidence shows the Appellant is stateless in Bangladesh and  faces  the
    real risk of poverty, hardship and destitution contrary  to  Article  3
    ECHR as inhuman and degrading treatment. It does not seem to me   since
    he is not entitled to return to Bangladesh that he  can  reasonably  be
    considered to be obliged to integrate there.

 34.    Similarly, if the Appellant can  be  returned  to  Myanmar,  I  find
    there is a real risk  , notwithstanding his ignorance of Rohingya ways,
    that he would be identifiable as coming from Rakhine State, a Muslim by
    faith, who has not lived in Myanmar for many years nor been assimilated
    in local ways. The Myanmar state is on the evidence  complicit  in  the
    mistreatment of Rohingya. The Appellant would have no family  or  local
    network or connections to provide protection or assistance  on  return.
    The background evidence does not suggest there  is  protection  by  the
    Myanmar state or local population to which  the  Appellant  could  have
    recourse. Given the well publicised dislike of Rohingya I do  not  find
    internal relocation is not a reasonable option even assuming  he  would
    be allowed to enter and move to the north of Myanmar.



DECISION

The appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention  and  Article  3  of  the
ECHR.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was requested nor is one required.

FEE AWARD

The appeal has succeeded but on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  and  matters
arising after the date of the Respondent's decision  and  upon  a  different
appraisal of the evidence.  No fee award is appropriate.


Signed                                  Date5 April 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
