
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 6 October 2016                     |on 11 October 2016                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    M B Z
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Miss K Tobin instructed by City Legal Partnership
For the Respondent: Mr I Richards Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                     DECISION AND REASONS - ERROR OF LAW


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Fowell promulgated on the 25 April 2016,  following  a  hearing  at
        Newport on the 12 April 2016, in which the  appellants  appeal  was
        dismissed on all grounds.









Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh who was born on 16  April
        1971. The appellants evidence given to the First-tier  Tribunal  is
        set out at [14] to [16] of the decision under challenge.
     3. The Judge, having considered the material, concluded at  [32]  that
        "Overall I accept the respondent's view that these maters have been
        concocted to support a bogus claim, and no reliance can  be  placed
        upon them.  Accordingly, I do not accept that the appellant  is  at
        risk of persecution, or to be in need of  humanitarian  protection,
        even to the lower standard".
     4. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant-Hutchison  granted  permission  to
        appeal in the following terms:


             "It is arguable that the  Judge  has  misdirected  himself  by
             making a finding on an answer given by  the  Appellant  during
             his screening interview in relation to one of the main reasons
             for his claim and to place weight on  it  to  demonstrate  the
             lack of the Appellant's credibility when in fact the Appellant
             did mention it.  This may have made a material  difference  to
             the outcome or the fairness of proceedings  such  as  how  the
             Judge considered the objective evidence which  show  that  the
             high level of violence is not limited to senior members of the
             BNP, the way in which documents such as newspaper articles and
             medical evidence may have been  considered  and  the  lack  of
             weight given to letters from the  BNP  Party  in  the  UK  and
             Bangladesh".




Error of law


   5. The  first  element  the  Judge  was  required  to  consider  was  the
      credibility of the appellants claim to be a member of  the  Bangladesh
      Nationalist Party, often abbreviated to BNP, which is one of  the  two
      major contemporary political parties of Bangladesh. The Judge  started
      his consideration of the credibility of the account  by  reference  to
      the country information provided by the appellant.
   6. At [21-24 and 25] the Judge  makes  reference  to  a  number  of  such
      reports. It is not disputed by the Judge that there is a high level of
      political violence in Bangladesh  and  widespread  harassment  of  the
      opposition but it has been found  that  this  is  mainly  confined  to
      limiting the activities of senior BNP members, with  some  arrests  of
      BNP figures following outbreaks of violence [25].
   7. At [24] it has been found:


             "There are further reports to the same  effect.   The  overall
             picture  however  is  not  as  presented  by  the   appellant.
             Firstly, the position  has  become  more  polarised  and  more
             violent since the 2014 election, with the greater majority  of
             deaths and injuries  occurring  in  the  course  of  political
             protests.  Although there are clearly human rights abuses, and
             a number of opposition supporters are seized by police or  RAB
             each year, there  is  no  suggestion  in  these  reports  that
             political opponents and their  family  members  are  routinely
             tracked down and killed.  On the appellant's account, he comes
             from a political family  and  was  an  active  member  of  the
             party's youth wing, between 10 and 15 years ago.  He does  not
             point to any particular political event or  enemy  to  explain
             this apparent vendetta against him, yet  the  authorities  are
             still trying to trace him years later, and  do  not  baulk  at
             attacking and killing members of  his  family.   There  is  no
             suggestion  that  his  brother,  sister,  brother  in  law  or
             daughter were politically active in any way,  just  that  they
             were related to him.  This degree of enmity  towards  a  long-
             removed political opponent is on an altogether different scale
             to the crack-downs on current  and  active  opponents  in  the
             country, and the difference is emphasised by the fact that the
             abduction of a single BNP spokesman (who  was  not  apparently
             harmed) is worthy of mention in an annual Human  Rights  Watch
             report. Had there been widespread and even  fatal  attacks  on
             BNP supporters, let alone their family members, the  political
             and human rights  situation  in  Bangladesh  would  be  of  an
             altogether different kind.  My  starting  point  therefore  is
             that the account presented  by  the  appellant  is  materially
             different from the available background information."


   8. The grounds assert the Judge is incorrect in  the  assessment  of  the
      background evidence. The claim is based  upon  political  violence  is
      Bangladesh and it is said the appellant's account of such violence  is
      in accordance with the background evidence. Specific reference is made
      to  the  respondents  Country  Information  and  Guidance:  Bangladesh
      opposition to the government, February 2015, in which it is stated:


             1.4 Policy Summary


             Membership or perceived  support  of  groups  opposed  to  the
             current government does not of itself give  rise  to  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution  in  Bangladesh,  but  may  do  so
             depending on the individual circumstances of the appellant.


             High levels of politically motivated violence are  perpetrated
             by the security forces  and  both  opposition  and  government
             supporters in Bangladesh.   Actual  and  perceived  opposition
             political activists, members  and  supporters  may  experience
             violence, harassment, arbitrary arrests,  detention,  enforced
             disappearances, extra-judicial killings, torture,  destruction
             of property and forced displacement.


   9. Ms Tobin also made reference in  her  oral  submissions  to  a  report
      written by Amnesty International 2015/16 in which reference is made to
      hundreds of opposition supporters being detained for various  periods,
      at times on politically motivates  grounds,  which  it  was  submitted
      showed that detention and  release  is  not  limited  to  just  senior
      members of the party.  This material has been considered but  must  be
      placed in context as the section of  the  report  headed  'Background'
      refers to an anti-government campaign by the BNP between  January  and
      March turning violent as hundreds of buses  and  other  vehicles  were
      attacked by demonstrators using petrol bombs. Senior  members  of  the
      BNP were arrested and charged with arson and  hundreds  of  opposition
      members were detained for days or months before being released some of
      whom were charged with  arson.   It  is  not  unreasonable  to  expect
      arrests by the authorities following acts of criminality even if  they
      have a political motive.
  10. In relation to  the  respondents  Country  Information  and  Guidance,
      February  2015,  paragraph  1.3.6  refers  to  harassment,   arbitrary
      arrests, detention, enforced disappearance and other examples of  ill-
      treatment against activists as noted by the Judge.   Miss  Tobin  also
      referred to  other  sections  of  the  report  which  refer  to  going
      political violence. It is arguable, however, that the finding  by  the
      Judge that these reports do not support the appellants  account  is  a
      finding reasonable open to him on the evidence.   The  Judge  did  not
      say there is no political violence in Bangladesh and, in fact, clearly
      sets out reference to  examples  of  such  violence.  What  the  Judge
      appears to have been saying is that notwithstanding such examples  and
      reports of violence the appellant's claim that the  authorities  track
      down political opponents with his limited  profile  and  their  family
      members routinely, and kill them, is not made out.  The grounds  refer
      to the general level of violence in Bangladesh,  which  was  accepted,
      but fail to identify sufficient evidence  to  support  the  appellants
      claim he faces a real risk on return as a  person  politically  active
      ten to fifteen years previously in the BNP youth wing  or  to  provide
      support for his claim of such violence against family members. As such
      the assertion of legal error in the Judge staring  his  assessment  of
      the credibility from an unsustainable position is not made out.
  11. The Judge was arguably entitled to draw  adverse  inference  from  the
      fact the appellant entered the UK in November 2007 yet did  not  claim
      asylum until he was arrested in 2011 [26].
  12. The Judge also noted that when the appellant  finally  claimed  asylum
      the basis of the claim is said to be as follows:


         "You came to the United Kingdom because you had a very big loan  of
         58/62 thousand pounds.  You were a businessman  and  you  and  your
         friend took out a very big loan with high interest. You  then  lost
         your business and  "...I come here with hope  that  maybe  I  would
         have better hope and means to pay back the loan.  All my family are
         in a risky situation cause the loan sharks are threatening  me  and
         my family...." You cannot return to Bangladesh because of the  loan
         and the loan sharks.. also three of your friends have been murdered
         by the government.


  13. Ms Tobin correctly submitted that notwithstanding reliance on a  basis
      of claim that was not pursued and replaced by the claim to be at  risk
      on the basis of political violence, the judge was required to consider
      the fact the situation could have changed in the interim.
  14. The appellant claims he has evidence of  a  real  risk  on  the  basis
      claimed by way of evidence of attacks upon his family. The Judge deals
      with this element of the case at [29-31] in the following terms:


             29. I note too that none of the attacks against family members
             which have been
             described  in  evidence  had  occurred  at  the  time  of  the
             screening interview, which is itself an unusual feature.    If
             the appellant was being pursued by elements within  the  Awami
             League one would expect the attacks and efforts to locate  him
             to have come after his departure rather than to have started 5
             years later. The fact is more consistent with the respondent's
             explanation, that he concocted his account  of  these  attacks
             after absconding in 2011.


             30. The evidence of these individual attacks is also weak.  As
             to his daughter, the CT  scan  report  records  that  she  had
             fallen from a height. The account given by his sister makes no
             mention  of  being  injured  herself,  although  there  is   a
             translation of a news item at page 24 which does say that  she
             was injured.  Nevertheless, it is unusual that  she  does  not
             mentioned the fact.  Her own affidavit says that he was hit on
             the head and this accords with the death certificate, but  the
             news report says that her husband was stabbed.


             31.  The  deposition  statement  provided  by  the  appellant'
             brother about the attack he suffered sets out a lurid  account
             of being attacked and robbed by a group  of  men.   They  were
             lying in wait for him while he  went  home  from  Dr  Mehedi's
             house on his motorbike, and they and  Dr  Mehedi  pursued  him
             before beating and stabbing him. But there is  no  mention  in
             his account of any involvement with BNP, either by the  author
             or the appellant.  His short statement at page 18 by  contrast
             makes no mention of the circumstances of the attack  but  says
             this was the same group who attacked his sister, and  that  he
             was attacked by cleaver and dagger because he would  not  give
             them his brother's address. These two accounts have little  in
             common and there is no medical evidence  of  his  injuries  or
             treatment.


  15. It is claimed in the grounds that there has been a procedural  failure
      in  that  none  of  the  discrepancies  were  put  to  the  appellant.
      Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal are adversarial by nature.  The
      burden of proving entitlement falls upon the person so alleging  which
      in this case is the appellant. The discrepancies arise between written
      evidence available to the parties before the  hearing.  The  appellant
      was represented by experienced Counsel at the  hearing.   It  is  also
      known in this jurisdiction, where written judgments are the norm, that
      a Judge will hear the evidence and thereafter retire to  consider  the
      issues and produce a written judgment.  It is possible in  some  cases
      that an issue may arise that requires a further hearing  but  this  is
      rare.  The fact an issue is considered relevant by the judge that  may
      not have been spotted or dealt with by the appellant in  his  evidence
      does not amount  to  arguable  legal  error  if  referred  to  in  the
      decision.  The Judge is entitled to think that the appellant will have
      provided all the evidence he is seeking to rely upon.
  16. The reference to the  lack  of  medical  evidence  of  the  appellants
      brothers injuries is not a rejection of this element of  the  case  on
      the basis that without corroboration the account will not be accepted,
      as asserted in paragraph 7 of the grounds, but a statement of the fact
      that no medical evidence has been  provided.  The  Judge  sets  out  a
      number of reasons why the claim the injuries suffered by the family as
      a result of the appellants political activities are not believed.
  17. The Judge is also challenged in  relation  to  his  treatment  of  the
      letter from the BNP relating to the appellants alleged  membership  of
      this group.  It has not been shown the Judge failed to  consider  this
      element of the evidence. The Judge refers to letters provided  in  the
      bundle at [13(f)].
  18. It has not been shown the Judge failed to  consider  all  the  written
      evidence. These letters refer to alleged membership and activities for
      the BNP in the UK and the appellant's membership of the youth party in
      Bangladesh from 2001. The Judge's treatment of the evidence  from  the
      BNP is summarised at [32] as follows:


         32 Nor am I persuaded of the appellants political involvement  with
         the BNP.  The photographs  he  has  produced  show  him  merely  in
         proximity with certain figures, and is  more  likely  to  be  self-
         serving evidence. No one from the BNP in the UK attended to support
         his case..."


  19. From this it can be inferred that the Judge placed little weight  upon
      the evidence of membership and/or sur  place  activities  which  is  a
      finding within the range of reasonable findings open to the  Judge  on
      the evidence.
  20. In light of the Judge  considering  the  evidence  with  the  required
      degree of anxious scrutiny and having given adequate reasons  for  the
      findings made, the weight to be given to that evidence is a matter for
      the Judge. It has not been shown that the adverse credibility findings
      in relation to the factual matrix relied upon or membership of the BNP
      were not within the range of those reasonably open to  the  Judge.  On
      that basis the appeal must fail for the claim to be at  risk  for  the
      reasons stated was not found to have been made out.
  21. No arguable legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal
      has been made out. The decision shall stand.

Decision

    22. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    23. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11 October 2016

