
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02519/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 November 2020 via Skype for Business    |On 10 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                TM (Pakistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Jones, Counsel, instructed by Connaught
Solicitors


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been not been objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was V (video). A face to  face  hearing
was not held because it  was  not  practicable,  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was  referred  to  were  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal and bundle from  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal, the contents of which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: they were content that the  hearing
had been conducted fairly in its remote form.

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. For  convenience,  I  will
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brannan promulgated on 29 July 2020, in which he allowed
    an appeal by the appellant against the decision of the respondent dated
    2  March  2020  to  refuse  his  claim  for  asylum  and   humanitarian
    protection.

Factual background and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan,  born  in  December  1981.  He
    arrived in this  country  in  August  2011  as  the  Tier  4  (General)
    dependent partner of his then wife, such leave expiring on  29  October
    2012. He and his wife divorced in 2012 after, he claims, she caught him
    engaging in sexual activity with another man. Thereafter, the appellant
    remained in the United Kingdom without  leave,  although  attempted  to
    regularise his status under the EEA regime, but that was  unsuccessful:
    see the refusal decision dated 9  April  2014.  On  10  May  2019,  the
    appellant claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  that  he  would  face  being
    persecuted on account of being a gay man in Pakistan.  That  claim  was
    refused, and  it  was  the  appellant's  appeal  against  that  refusal
    decision that was under consideration in the proceedings below.

 4. The  judge  directed  himself  in  relation  to  the  applicable  legal
    framework concerning the determination of asylum claims, in  particular
    claims based on homosexuality.  It had been clarified with the  parties
    at the hearing that the sole  issue  in  the  appeal  was  whether  the
    appellant was gay. The judge allowed the appeal.   Although  the  judge
    had correctly identified the  relevant  questions  under  HJ  (Iran)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31  (see  [14]),
    including the "why" question, it had been conceded by the Secretary  of
    State that, if the appellant were able to demonstrate that he was a gay
    man, the appeal should succeed: see [15].  Before me, the Secretary  of
    State does not seek  to  resile  from  that  concession.  Instead,  she
    contends that the judge erred  when  reaching  his  findings  that  the
    appellant is a gay man, by failing to  consider  the  evidence  in  the
    round, and by reaching inconsistent findings,  such  that  the  reasons
    given were insufficient.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien.

 5. As this is a challenge to findings of fact reached by the trial  judge,
    it is necessary to outline the judge's analysis and  findings  in  some
    depth.

 6. The judge analysed the appellant's case under two distinct strands: pre-
    2019 and post-2019, because the evidence concerning the two was  "quite
    different": see [23].

 7. The judge dealt with post-2019 first.  The appellant's evidence in this
    regard concerned his relationship with a Mr U, whom he claims  to  have
    met at a gay club known as XXL, in 2018. Mr U is also from Pakistan and
    has been granted asylum status on account  of  being  gay.   Mr  U  had
    provided a letter to the respondent in support and gave evidence before
    the  judge.  The  judge  analysed  the   evidence   concerning   Mr   U
    forensically, splitting it up into its constituent elements: see  [25].
    At [26], the  judge  noted  that  the  respondent  had  not  sought  to
    challenge the fact of the appellant's claimed relationship with  Mr  U,
    whether in the asylum interview, or  in  cross  examination.  That  was
    significant, noted the judge, because the hearing had been  held  on  a
    face-to-face basis, at the request of the  respondent,  to  ensure  the
    best possible environment for the appellant's credibility, and those of
    his witnesses, to be analysed.

 8. The judge gave reasons for rejecting some of the concerns raised by the
    respondent about the appellant's claimed attendance at  the  XXL  club.
    See [34]. The respondent has not challenged this aspect of the  judge's
    analysis.  The judge also noted evidence from a Mr L, who is also  gay,
    and has refugee status on that account. He noted at [39] that there was
    not only testimony from two gay men that the appellant is gay,  one  of
    whom claims to be in a relationship with the appellant, but  there  was
    also photographic evidence from gay pride events and dinners together.

 9.  The  judge  highlighted  discrepancies  across  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and  Mr  U  concerning  when  they  first  met.   By  way  of
    explanation, the appellant said he was not good with dates,  and  Mr  U
    said that his letter to the respondent had been drafted by a friend, to
    help with writing the letter in  English:  see  [31].   At  [40],  when
    drawing together his analysis, the judge observed that  there  remained
    an inconsistency as to when they met, in these terms:

         "But  the  inconsistency  on  a  key  aspect   of   their   claimed
         relationship, being when they met, cannot be overlooked. Mr  U  had
         given three different dates for when they met.  The  appellant  has
         given two.  I therefore find that they did not enter a relationship
         when they say they did. But that does not mean they are  not  in  a
         relationship now. Both say  they  are.  The  respondent  has  never
         questioned either about their relationship to find  out  if  it  is
         genuine. She had both of their witness statements in advance of the
         hearing and could at the very least have  cross  examined  them  on
         this, if not  investigated  the  relationship  in  advance  of  the
         hearing. At the hearing I was careful not to descend into the arena
         by cross-examining the witnesses on this key part of their claim  -
         that is the role of  the  respondent  in  our  adversarial  system.
         Without their evidence being  challenged,  I  find  on  the  asylum
         standard of proof that the appellant and Mr U are in a relationship
         now."

10. That led the judge to a global conclusion on the appellant's  post-2019
    narrative, namely that he was in a relationship with a man, and that he
    was therefore gay. That, said the judge, disposed of the case. However,
    at that stage, he said that it was in  the  "interests  of  justice  to
    consider also the pre-2019 situation for completeness".

11. The judge's pre-2019  analysis  considers  the  reasons  given  by  the
    respondent  for  rejecting  the  account  given  by  the  appellant  of
    realising he is gay.  During  the  appellant's  asylum  interview,  the
    respondent had warned the appellant not to reveal details of any sexual
    experiences, as they would not be taken into account. The  judge  noted
    at [46] that that approach was consistent with that  of  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union in A, B  and  C  v  Staatssecretaris  van
    Veiligheid en Justitie C-148/13 to C-150/13.  However,  the  judge  was
    concerned that the respondent's decision to disregard  all  details  of
    the appellant's accounts of sexual activity potentially  prevented  the
    appellant from being able to rely on the foundation of his claim to  be
    gay, which is based on him having had sex with other men on a number of
    occasions. The absence of an emotional  narrative,  as  sought  by  the
    respondent during the  asylum  interview  and  as  highlighted  in  the
    refusal decision, meant that the respondent was  herself  falling  into
    the trap of testing against the very stereotypes which were  prohibited
    by A, B and C, the judge held. Her search for  an  emotional  narrative
    would  be  unlikely  to  be  requested  from  a  man  claiming  to   be
    heterosexual, the judge observed. The result of  that  approach,  found
    the judge, was  that  it  was  difficult  to  find  the  truth  of  the
    appellant's narrative: see [49].

12. The judge then outlined certain aspects of the appellant's  case  which
    he considered to be implausible; these included the likely inability of
    the  appellant  to  have  been  able  to  access  heterosexual   online
    pornography in 1995, the fact that the appellant's claimed first sexual
    experience with another man was when he was aged 30, in  this  country,
    despite his claim to have realised he was gay some  14  years  earlier,
    and general  concerns  about  the  implausibility  of  the  appellant's
    claimed financial support from various gay benefactors. The judge  said
    at [50] that the respondent could have examined the credibility of much
    of the appellant's narrative without having to  go  into  detail  about
    sexual practices. As a result, the judge said that he had  to  rely  on
    his  own  plausibility-based  concerns  arising  from  the  appellant's
    account.

13. At  [59],  despite  the  earlier  concerns  about  the  timing  of  the
    appellant's realisation that he was gay  when  compared  to  his  first
    homosexual encounter, the judge accepted that it was reasonably  likely
    that the appellant did realise that he was gay when  he  was  16  years
    old, and that he was content with that realisation while  being  scared
    from the repercussions.

14. The judge was candid about his concerns with the appellant's case.   At
    [60], he noted inconsistencies between the appellant's account that the
    first person he revealed his sexuality  to  was  a  man  he  met  in  a
    Sainsbury's shop, whereas he also claimed to have been  caught  by  his
    wife having sex with a man before then.  At [65], the judge found  that
    the appellant's account of when his family found out that  he  was  gay
    was contradictory, and did not fit with the overall narrative of having
    divorced in 2012, and lived as a gay man since then without his  family
    knowing either about the divorce, or  his  gay  lifestyle.   The  judge
    rejected the suggestion that he had lost all contact with  his  family;
    the appellant's failed EEA application was based on his cousin's  wife.
    He had not lost all contact, found the judge.

15. At other points, the judge explained why he did not accept some of  the
    concerns of the respondent.  For example, at [61], the judge  explained
    why he did not consider it was inconsistent for the appellant  to  have
    informed  only  some  of  his  friends  that   he   was   gay,   whilst
    simultaneously being open about his sexuality in gay clubs.  The  judge
    held that:

         "It is quite credible that someone will have friends who they  tell
         about their sexual orientation in  the  cold  light  of  day  while
         expressing that orientations during fleeting romances of the night.
         Furthermore, the clubs that  the  appellant  describes  himself  as
         going to our [sic] clubs for gay men: one does not need to  discuss
         one's sexuality there; it is evident by one's presence."

16. This led to a global conclusion at  [68]  that  it  was  impossible  to
    construct an alternative credible narrative of the appellant's life  in
    the UK between 2012 and  2019.  The  judge  specifically  rejected  the
    appellant's claim to have divorced his wife and 2012 because she  found
    him having sex with a man, with his family in Pakistan not finding  out
    the true reasons, and the fact of the divorce, until 2019. On the other
    hand, said the judge, he did not accept the respondent's submissions in
    relation to the appellant's feelings when he was 16. The judge found to
    the asylum standard that the appellant did realise that he was gay when
    he was 16.

17. Concerning section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, the judge accepted the  appellant's  account
    of having not known that it was possible to claim asylum on that  basis
    until he was informed by Mr U, after  which  point  he  claimed  asylum
    promptly.

18. The judge's global conclusion at [74] was in these terms:

         "The appellant has a boyfriend. He is  therefore  a  gay  man.  The
         respondent concedes this  means  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in Pakistan."

Submissions

19. There are two strands to the Secretary of State's  submissions.  First,
    she submits that by divorcing the pre-2019 and post-2019 analysis,  the
    judge failed to consider the appellant's case in  the  round.  That  is
    significant, submits Mr Whitwell, in light of the credibility  concerns
    the judge  had  concerning  the  appellant's  pre-2019  narrative.   In
    relation to the post-2019 narrative,  the  judge's  concerns  with  the
    conflicting accounts given by the appellant and Mr U  about  when  they
    met were not resolved with sufficient clarity, and  led  to  the  judge
    failing  to  provide  sufficient  reasons  for  his  finding  that  the
    appellant was in a gay relationship with Mr U.

20. As to the judge's concerns with the respondent's expectation  that  the
    appellant would be able to provide some form  of  emotional  narrative,
    the respondent was entitled to do  expect  the  appellant  to  give  an
    explanation in this regard, and that expectation  was  consistent  with
    the approach set out in her  country  policy  and  information  note  -
    Pakistan: sexual orientation and gender identity or expression, version
    3.0, July 2019. It was irrelevant for the judge to focus  on  the  fact
    that heterosexual people are not normally questioned  about  their  own
    emotional journeys, given heterosexual orientation is rarely, if  ever,
    an issue upon return to Pakistan.

21. In oral submissions, Mr Whitwell highlighted the  following  additional
    deficiencies in the judge's reasoning.  He  submits  that  the  judge's
    finding, reached in isolation, that the appellant was gay based on  the
    post-2019 material, removed from the  judge's  analysis  the  following
    four essential issues. First, the  fact  that  the  appellant  did  not
    reveal his sexual orientation before  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    Secondly, the fact that the  appellant  did  not  have  any  homosexual
    experiences prior to the age of 30, despite the judge's finding that he
    had been aware of his sexual orientation from the age of  16.  Thirdly,
    the fact that the judge did not accept the appellant's case  of  having
    been caught while engaging in sexual activity with another man  by  his
    wife. Fourthly, the absence of pressure from his family in Pakistan  to
    remarry for seven  years.  In  light  of  those  features,  submits  Mr
    Whitwell, the judge's finding at [41]  that  the  appellant  was  in  a
    relationship  with  another  man  and  was,  therefore,  gay,  was  not
    sustainable.

22. The sequential way in which the judge analysed the evidence in the case
    failed to engage with an analysis conducted in the round, submitted  Mr
    Whitwell. By the time the judge considered what took place before 2019,
    he had already found that the appellant was gay.  That  was  a  finding
    reached on the basis of an incomplete consideration of the evidence  in
    the round.

23. The judge was said by Mr Whitwell to have failed to follow the approach
    advocated by gay rights organisations such as  Stonewall,  whereby  the
    following features of an individual's sexual identity journey should be
    considered: difference; stigma; shame; and harm. Similarly,  the  judge
    failed to engage with the UNHCR guidelines on determining asylum claims
    based on sexual orientation. The judge even quoted a passage  from  the
    book of Leviticus at [47], concerning the prohibition on  a  man  lying
    with another man, attempting to reconcile that with the  New  Testament
    teaching that  one  should  love  one's  neighbour,  which  was  wholly
    irrelevant to this case concerning the appellant's  prospective  return
    to a majority Muslim country.

24. These factors, submits Mr Whitwell, mean that the judge's decision  was
    generally unclear,  reached  without  a  proper  consideration  of  all
    matters in the round, and failed to disclose sufficient reasons for his
    findings.

25. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Jones  submits  that  the  Secretary  of
    State is trying to overlook mistakes made  by  the  presenting  officer
    before the First-tier Tribunal, such as the decision not  to  challenge
    by way of cross-examination the existence, rather than the origins,  of
    the appellant's claimed relationship with Mr U.  The process before the
    tribunal is adversarial, she submits, and it is for a party to put  its
    case during the trial process. It is not  possible  retrospectively  to
    attempt to advance a different  case,  in  circumstances  such  as  the
    present. She submits that the judge was clear that at no time  was  the
    fact of the gay relationship between Mr U and the appellant  challenged
    before the First-tier Tribunal, and that the inconsistencies, taken  at
    their highest,  merely  related  to  dates.  It  was  significant,  she
    submits, that the judge directed himself that it would be inappropriate
    to descend into the arena and perform the respondent's  task  for  her.
    That led to a finding, to  the  asylum  standard  of  proof,  that  the
    appellant was gay. Once the judge reached that conclusion,  submits  Ms
    Jones, the matters before 2019 were of less relevance.

26. To the extent that the Secretary of State now contends that  the  judge
    failed to give sufficient reasons, Ms Jones submits that  it  is  clear
    from the judge's decision why the Secretary of State lost, and why  the
    appellant one. The trial  at  first  instance  is  the  opportunity  to
    establish facts, and it is not open to the Secretary of State  to  have
    another go at that process within the appellant framework.

Discussion

27. It is important to recall that an appeal to the Upper Tribunal lies  on
    a point of law, not a point of fact.  Findings of fact are  not  immune
    from being infected by errors of law.  In R (Iran) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    outlined the following categories of errors of fact which may amount to
    errors of law:

         i) Making perverse or irrational findings on a  matter  or  matters
         that were material to the outcome ("material matters");

         ii) Failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons for findings on
         material matters;

         iii) Failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of  fact
         or opinion on material matters;

         iv) Giving weight to immaterial matters;

         v) Making a material misdirection of law on any material matter;

         vi) Committing or permitting a  procedural  or  other  irregularity
         capable of making a material  difference  to  the  outcome  or  the
         fairness of the proceedings;

         vii) Making a  mistake  as  to  a  material  fact  which  could  be
         established by objective  and  uncontentious  evidence,  where  the
         appellant and/or his advisers were not responsible for the mistake,
         and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a  mistake  was
         made.

28. Applying the above criteria necessarily entails reviewing the decisions
    made by the judge below as to  what  was  material  to  the  issues  in
    dispute, the weight to be ascribed to certain matters  in  relation  to
    that ascribed to other matters, and the overall approach to the  entire
    body of evidence.   As  to  how  this  tribunal  should  analyse  those
    matters, the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal have given  guidance  as
    to the approach to be taken.  The task calls for restraint on the  part
    of the appellate  tribunal,  and  deference  towards  the  fact-finding
    judge.

29. In Henderson v Foxworth Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41;  [2014]  1  WLR
    2600 at [62], the Supreme Court held, with emphasis added:

         "It does not matter, with whatever degree of  certainty,  that  the
         appellate court considers that it would have  reached  a  different
         conclusion. What matters is whether the decision  under  appeal  is
         one that no reasonable judge could have reached."

30. In Fage UK Ltd v Chobani UK Ltd [2014] EWCA Civ 5, the Court of  Appeal
    underlined the caution with which appellate tribunals  should  approach
    the task of reviewing findings of fact reached by trial judges.  One of
    the reasons, said the court at [114.iv], was that:

         "In making his decisions the trial judge will have  regard  to  the
         whole of the sea of evidence presented to him, whereas an appellate
         court will only be island hopping."

31. On the issue of the trial  judge's  assessment  of  the  weight  to  be
    attached to individual  pieces  of  evidence,  the  Supreme  Court  has
    summarised  the  jurisprudence  on  the  issue  in  these  terms.   The
    principles, it said:

         "...may be summarised as requiring a conclusion either  that  there
         was no evidence to support a challenged finding of  fact,  or  that
         the trial judge's finding was one that no  reasonable  judge  could
         have reached."

    See Perry v Raleys Solicitors [2019] UKSC 5 at [52].

32. In UT (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1095 at [32], the Court of Appeal described the reasons  given
    by the First-tier Tribunal for allowing an appeal as "tolerably clear",
    finding  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  not  have  overturned  the
    decision.

33. In Simetra Global Assets Limited v Ikon Finance  Ltd  &  Others  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1413, the Court of Appeal summarised some of the facets of the
    duty to give sufficient reasons in the following terms, at [46].

         "First, succinctness is as desirable in a  judgment  as  it  is  in
         counsel's  submissions,  but  short  judgments  must   be   careful
         judgments. Second, it is not necessary to deal expressly with every
         point, but a judge must say enough to show that care has been taken
         and that the evidence as a  whole  has  been  properly  considered.
         Which points need to be dealt with and which can be omitted  itself
         requires  an  exercise  of  judgment.  Third,  the  best   way   to
         demonstrate the exercise of the necessary care is to  make  use  of
         "the  building  blocks  of  the  reasoned  judicial   process"   by
         identifying the  issues  which  need  to  be  decided,  marshalling
         (however briefly and without needing to  recite  every  point)  the
         evidence which bears on those issues, and giving  reasons  why  the
         principally relevant evidence is either  accepted  or  rejected  as
         unreliable. Fourth, and in particular,  fairness  requires  that  a
         judge should deal with apparently  compelling  evidence,  where  it
         exists, which is contrary to the conclusion which  he  proposes  to
         reach and explain why he does not accept it."

34. Simetra  Global  Assets  Limited  built  upon  a  line  of  established
    authorities concerning  the  parameters  of  a  judge's  duty  to  give
    reasons. In English v Emery Reimbold  &  Strick  Ltd.  (Practice  Note)
    [2002] EWCA Civ 605, Lord Phillips MR concluded  his  lengthy  practice
    note judgment in these terms, at [118]:

         "...an unsuccessful party should not seek to upset  a  judgment  on
         the ground of inadequacy of reasons unless, despite  the  advantage
         of considering the judgment with knowledge of  the  evidence  given
         and submissions  made  at  the  trial,  that  party  is  unable  to
         understand why  it  is  that  the  Judge  has  reached  an  adverse
         decision."

35. Finally, in Dover DC v CPRE Kent [2017] UKSC 79; [2018] 1  WLR  108  at
    [35], the Supreme Court cited and underlined a well-known extract  from
    the speech of Lord Brown in South Bucks District Council and another  v
    Porter (No 2) [2004] UKHL 33 at [36]:

         "The reasoning must not give rise to  a  substantial  doubt  as  to
         whether  the  decision-maker  erred  in   law,   for   example   by
         misunderstanding some  relevant  policy  or  some  other  important
         matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational  decision  on  relevant
         grounds. But such adverse inference will not readily be drawn.  The
         reasons need refer only to the main issues in the dispute,  not  to
         every material consideration." (Emphasis added)

36. It is also necessary for judges to consider the evidence in a  case  in
    the round.  Although not particular to the asylum context,  this  is  a
    principle which is often invoked in challenges  to  decisions  in  this
    jurisdiction.  See Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367, at [24], per Wilson J (as he then was):

         "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must  not  reach
         his or her conclusion before surveying all  the  evidence  relevant
         thereto."

37.  Against  that  background,  I  turn  to  the  Secretary   of   State's
    submissions. There is superficial force  in  the  submission  that  the
    judge decided  the  evidence  in  the  case  in  two  distinct  phases.
    Plainly, the judge considered the post-2019 evidence separately to  the
    pre-2019 evidence; the question is whether he fell into error by  doing
    so.

38. When one examines the findings the judge made by reference to the post-
    2019  evidence,  namely  the  finding  that  the  appellant  is  in   a
    relationship with another man and that he was, therefore,  gay,  it  is
    difficult to see how the scepticism the judge  had  concerning  certain
    aspects of the pre-2019 evidence could have  undermined  that  finding.
    Properly understood, the submission of the Secretary of State  must  be
    that the finding that the appellant's claimed relationship  with  Mr  U
    was one that was not properly open to the judge on the evidence  before
    him, in light of the judge's concerns with the pre-2019 evidence.

39. That is a difficult submission for the Secretary of State  to  sustain,
    for at least three reasons.

40. First, the degree of restraint must be exercised by this tribunal  when
    reviewing a decision made by the judge below. I do not have  access  to
    the whole sea of evidence in the same way as he did, having had  access
    only to summaries of what took place during cross examination  and  the
    oral evidence. My exposure to the evidence that was  before  the  judge
    may be described as "island hopping" at best.

41. Secondly, the Secretary of State did not seek  to  challenge  in  cross
    examination the claims made by both the appellant and Mr  U  that  they
    were, at that time, in an ongoing sexual relationship. As submitted  by
    Ms Jones, it is difficult for the Secretary of  State  now  to  contend
    that the judge fell into error by not finding against the appellant  on
    an issue that was unchallenged below.

42. Thirdly, even if the judge did have  significant  credibility  concerns
    with  certain  aspects  of  the  appellant's  pre-2019  account,  those
    concerns were not such that no reasonable judge could ever  find  that,
    post-2019, the appellant was in an  ongoing  sexual  relationship  with
    another man, and, in light of the whole sea of evidence,  that  he  was
    gay.  It is trite asylum law that certain  parts  of  a  claim  may  be
    embellished or exaggerated, and that many genuine asylum claims lie  at
    the heart of an exaggerated narrative. It was  entirely  open  to  this
    judge to find that the effect of the pre-2019 credibility concerns were
    not such as to undermine the  post-2019  findings.  In  any  event,  Mr
    Whitwell's submissions concerning the pre-2019 narrative relied upon by
    the appellant were, in essence, complaints about the weight ascribed by
    the judge to the evidence in his overall assessment. It  was  a  matter
    for the judge to consider the impact of the appellant's claimed lack of
    sexual experiences with other men before coming to the United  Kingdom.
    Similarly, the judge's concerns around the appellant's claimed lack  of
    contact with his family in Pakistan, and the impact of those  concerns,
    were also matters of weight.

43. Mr Whitwell's reliance on Mibanga is therefore misconceived. Mr Justice
    Wilson's emphasis in that case was on the need for a  judge  to  survey
    all "relevant" evidence before reaching a conclusion. Here,  the  judge
    identified as a central issue for resolution the  question  of  whether
    the appellant's claim relationship with Mr U was genuine. He took  into
    account the photographs that were before the tribunal which displayed a
    range of different life situations in which the appellant  appeared  to
    be within the company of other  LGBT  persons,  for  example  at  pride
    marches. The relevant evidence in relation to the judge's  findings  on
    the post-2019 issue were considered in the round, carefully, before the
    judge reached his conclusion that the  appellant  is  gay  due  to  his
    relationship with Mr U at [41].  That  was  an  approach  open  to  the
    judge.

44. For the above reasons, I find that the judge did not  fall  into  error
    through dividing the analysis of the appellant's case into two distinct
    phases.

45. Mr Whitwell contends that the judge failed to take into account the so-
    called difference, stigma, shame and harm approach to analysing  sexual
    orientation claims. That methodology, which Mr Whitwell did not seek to
    expand upon before  me,  nor  address  how  it  would  or  should  have
    influenced  the  judge's  decision,  had  not  been  the   subject   of
    submissions before the judge below. Neither, it  seems,  at  the  judge
    expressly been invited to consider the UNHCR guidelines.  I  accept  Ms
    Jones' submission that in this adversarial context, it is not now  open
    to the Secretary of State to complain that the judge failed to consider
    something that would have been to her benefit in circumstances when she
    had the opportunity to invite him to do so, yet did not. The judge  was
    plainly live to the risk of "descending into the arena" (see [40]), yet
    quite rightly chose to resist any temptation to  do  so.   The  judge's
    analysis of the  appellant's  relationship  with  Mr  U  was  forensic,
    careful, and insightful.  He reduced the appellant's claims  concerning
    the relationship to three central propositions: see [25].  He  analysed
    the inconsistencies concerning the dates, considered  the  respondent's
    objections based on her analysis of the answers given by the  appellant
    during his asylum interview, and looked at the  remaining  evidence  in
    the case. This was precisely the task which lay before the  judge,  and
    one which the judge approached in a manner open to him.   Another judge
    may  have  focussed  on  the  appellant's  emotional  journey  to   the
    realisation that he was a gay man, which is  the  focus  of  the  UNHCR
    guidelines at [62], but that is not to say that this  judge  reached  a
    finding of fact that was not open to him on the evidence.

46. The concern of this tribunal is  not  whether  the  judge  reached  the
    "correct" answer, but rather whether he took into account all  relevant
    considerations, gave sufficient reasons, and arrived at findings  which
    were rationally open  to  him  on  the  evidence.  In  performing  that
    assessment, great deference must be paid by this appellate tribunal  to
    the judge as trial judge. Nothing in the  submissions  of  Mr  Whitwell
    demonstrates that the judge  approached  and  irrational  decision,  or
    failed to give sufficient reasons. The reference to Leviticus  and  the
    New Testament sought to encapsulate  in  a  trite  proposition  complex
    theological issues, but the overall point made by the judge was  clear,
    in the context; he was  rejecting  the  respondent's  reliance  on  the
    absence of an "emotional" narrative as an irrelevant factor, which  was
    a concern that was open to the judge. It is plain why the judge reached
    his findings concerning the post-2019 issues.  It cannot be  said,  and
    nor did Mr Whitwell seek to submit, that the judge's finding concerning
    the post-2019 evidence was a finding that  no  reasonable  judge  could
    have reached on that evidence. For  the  reasons  set  out  above,  and
    consistent with the authorities  on  when  an  appellate  tribunal  may
    interfere with a finding of  fact  reached  below,  it  was  a  finding
    rationally open to the judge on the evidence.

47. It is clear why the appellant succeeded before the First-tier Tribunal.
     The concerns of the Secretary of State are  disagreements  of  weight,
    with which the Upper Tribunal has no role in interfering. The reader of
    the decision is left with a tolerably clear understanding  of  why  the
    judge  allowed  the  appeal;  the  judge   was   satisfied   that   the
    (unchallenged) evidence of  the  appellant  and  Mr  U  concerning  the
    existence of their relationship was sufficient to demonstrate that  the
    appellant is a gay man.  It was not necessary for  the  judge  to  deal
    with every single point, and he dealt with all compelling points  in  a
    manner consistent with the task upon him as  the  primary  tribunal  of
    fact.

48. I find that the judge reached a decision that was open to  him  on  the
    evidence and did not involve the making of an error of law in doing so.

49. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law such that it must be set aside.

This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 11 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

