
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02730/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2017                            |On 8 February 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                    M S T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on  9  July  1989.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student on 22  February  2014
    with leave valid until 27 June 2015.  He made an application for asylum
    on the basis that he feared  persecution  if  returned  to  Afghanistan
    because his brother had worked as an  interpreter  with  the  US  Armed
    Forces.   The  Respondent  accepted  that  his  brother  had  been   an
    interpreter for the US Special Forces but refused his asylum claim in a
    decision dated 30 October 2015.  The Appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision and his appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Adio for  hearing  on  15  March  2016.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 29 March 2016 the judge dismissed the appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was sought from the Upper  Tribunal  on  13  April
    2016.  The grounds provided as follows:

    (i)   the judge had  materially  erred  in  failing  to  accede  to  an
         application to adjourn the appeal in order to obtain evidence  from
         an expert, Mr Zadeh, as to the authenticity of documents  submitted
         by the Appellant.  The documents in question were  from  the  Crime
         Investigation Directorate of Kabul Province  and  also  threatening
         letters from the Taliban;

    (ii) the judge had failed to give anxious scrutiny to the evidence  and
         the case as a whole, made errors of fact  which  were  material  in
         relation, for example, to the date of kidnapping of the Appellant's
         father and that he had erred in his assessment of letters from  the
         police. I note these were the  letters  for  which  it  was  sought
         authentication by the expert.  It was also asserted that the  judge
         had assessed the  evidence  from  the  perspective  of  the  United
         Kingdom, which was unreasonable;

    (iii)    the Judge had further erred in respect of  his  treatment  and
         analysis of the expert evidence of Professor Giustozzi, that he had
         misinterpreted this evidence and that he had failed to determine  a
         material issue which was  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  bears  a
         striking resemblance to his brother, the brother in question  being
         the brother who has now been  granted  asylum  in  the  USA  having
         worked as an interpreter for the Special Forces in Afghanistan.

 3. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    and upon renewal was  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  in  a
    decision dated 2 June 2016.  The Appellant's solicitors then brought  a
    Cart judicial review of the decision refusing permission to appeal  and
    in an Order dated 14 October 2016, the Honourable  Mr  Justice  Collins
    granted permission to apply for judicial review stating as follows:

         "I have just been persuaded that this is a rare case  in  which  it
         would be appropriate to grant permission.  The FTT's decision  went
         against the claimant largely because he did  not  accept  that  his
         father had been kidnapped by or at the behest of the Taliban.   The
         claimant was obviously a potential target as his brother had  acted
         for the US Forces and in the circumstances there is, this being  an
         asylum claim, an arguable compelling circumstance within  the  Cart
         test.  I am also persuaded that the refusal of the adjournment  was
         arguably wrong."

 4. Following that decision there was an Order on 16 November quashing  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to appeal and on 12
    December  2016  the  Vice  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in light of the decision and
    Order of the High Court.

    Hearing

 5. At the hearing before me, having read the skeleton  argument  submitted
    by Ms Akinbolu on behalf of the Appellant dated 17  January  2017,  and
    upon sight of the Order of Mr Justice Collins dated  14  October  2016,
    which he had not previously seen, Mr Armstrong agreed that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had erred materially in law  and  that  the  matter
    should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  hearing  de
    novo.  In light of Mr Armstrong's helpful concession, I find  that  the
    Judge erred materially in law and I remit the appeal  to  be  heard  de
    novo by a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Adio.

6.   I make the following directions:

6.1. A copy of the expert report of Dr Hassan Zadeh to be  served  upon  the
    Home Office and the Tribunal;

6.2. The appeal is to be listed for three hours with a Dari interpreter  and
two witnesses.

6.3. Upon receipt of the report of Dr Zadeh and in light of  Dr  Giustozzi's
    expert evidence that family members of interpreters to  the  US  Forces
    are at risk of persecution, the Respondent will communicate the outcome
    of her review of the underlying decision of  30  October  2015  to  the
    First tier Tribunal at the earliest opportunity.


     Signed:  Rebecca Chapman                Date: 6 February 2017

     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: Rebecca Chapman                          Date: 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

