
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02048/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 24 October 2016                   |on 26 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  T K DAWIT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Speirs, of Katani & Co, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD refused the appellant's claim by letter dated 12 October 2015,
    for these reasons.  The appellant had  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    establishing that he is a national (or  former  habitual  resident)  of
    Eritrea (paragraphs 13 - 14).  On his Facebook  page  he  said  he  was
    proud to be Ethiopian, the country of his and his parents'  birth,  and
    he was "considered to be a national of Ethiopia" (paragraph 15  -  16).
    Even if accepted to be of Eritrean origin, he had not shown that he had
    been deprived of or was no longer  entitled  to  Ethiopian  nationality
    (paragraph 17).  He was accepted to be  a  Pentecostal  Christian,  but
    that gave  rise  to  no  risk  on  removal  to  Ethiopia,  as  proposed
    (paragraph 25).  Even if he had illegally exited  Eritrea,  that  would
    not present a risk on return  there  (paragraphs  26  -  28,  based  on
    materials post-dating country guidance).  Failure to  claim  asylum  in
    another country (in particular, in France), was adverse to  credibility
    (paragraphs 29 -30).

 3. FtT Judge Fox allowed the appellant's appeal by decision promulgated on
    11 July 2016.  He found that the appellant was an Eritrean national who
    was protected from return there due  to  risks  arising  from  enforced
    national service (paragraphs 14 and 15).  He noted what the  respondent
    said   about   Ethiopian   nationality   and   that   the   appellant's
    representative  had  written  to  the  Ethiopian  authorities,  but  he
    expressed no conclusion (paragraphs 16 and 17). The materials  produced
    by the respondent  did  not  suffice  to  set  aside  country  guidance
    (paragraph 18).

 4. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT refer to ST Ethiopia  CG  [2011]
    UKUT 00252 and to MA v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  289.   In  essence,  they
    complain about the absence of a conclusion on Ethiopian nationality.

 5. A rule 24 response for the appellant says that the grounds "... fail to
    mention that in disputed nationality cases  ...  the  burden  of  proof
    rests with the Home Office to prove that the [appellant] is Ethiopian",
    and that burden was not discharged.

 6. Submission for SSHD.  The judge went wrong at  paragraph  7  by  saying
    that the appellant firstly left Eritrea in 1990.  The country  did  not
    then exist.  The burden is on the appellant not on the SSHD throughout,
    and as to nationality the standard is the balance of probability; MA at
    paragraph 78.   There was material error but it would be going too  far
    to say that the case must have failed on this issue,  as  matters  were
    intertwined.  The case should be remitted for fresh hearing in the FtT.

 7. Submission for appellant.  The facts found by the judge pointed to  the
    appellant being Eritrean.  The burden was on the SSHD, as  accepted  in
    Guidance (produced in the appellant's first inventory of productions in
    the FtT, item 13) at paragraph 3.1, "If the Home Office  considers  the
    appellant to be a specific nationality other than that claimed ...  the
    burden rests with the Home office to prove  the  assertion".   Although
    the judge thought that the letter sent  to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  on
    behalf of the appellant (dated 23 May 2016, and produced on the day  of
    the FtT hearing) did not provide  sufficient  information,  the  letter
    said all that was needed.  The appellant in his witness statement  also
    said that he had been to the Embassy. The judge failed to mention that.
      The judge noted that the appellant produced a  birth  certificate  to
    support his claim to Eritrean nationality (paragraph 13).  The decision
    should stand.  If it were to be set  aside,  the  positive  credibility
    findings should be retained.

 8. Reply  for  SSHD.   The  guidance  applied  to  cases  where  the  SSHD
    positively undertook to prove another nationality.  It did not  reverse
    the usual burden on an appellant to establish his case  of  deprivation
    of apparent citizenship.  It would be  odd  if  the  appellant's  birth
    certificate proved Eritrean nationality, as no such status  existed  at
    the date of his birth.

 9. On reference to the bundle, I noted that the birth certificate is  only
    an untranslated photocopy.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. The case posed to the judge a critical question: is  the  appellant  an
    Ethiopian citizen?  The absence of an answer is (without more) an error
    of law requiring the decision  to  be  set  aside.  The  point  is  not
    excluded by his being an Eritrean citizen.

12. The burden of showing deprivation of a nationality generally rests with
    an appellant, along with the rest of his case.

13. The SSHD has the burden at points where she chooses to assume it,  such
    as by offering to prove a nationality which an appellant denies.   That
    does not carry the corollary that on the SSHD  falling  short  of  such
    proof, an appellant is entitled to  recognition  as  a  refugee.   That
    burden  remains  on  him,  including  any  issue  of   deprivation   of
    nationality.

14. As to preservation of any findings, there is force  in  the  submission
    that matters are inextricable, but the submission that findings  should
    be preserved is also of some substance, when the SSHD has not  directed
    any specific grounds against the favourable findings.  However, I  note
    the appellant's complaints in course of the UT hearing that his  letter
    to the Embassy was misrepresented against his interests, and that other
    evidence was overlooked.  He would not wish to be encumbered  on  those
    matters.  I also note the emerging  matter  of  the  birth  certificate
    being taken in his favour when it was untranslated and  as  such  ought
    not to have carried any weight and when, as Mr Matthews pointed out, it
    would be  very  strange  if  it  records  a  nationality  not  then  in
    existence.

15. It would be a constrained and artificial exercise for another judge  to
    negotiate a passage through previous findings with which  both  parties
    legitimately disagree.  The only satisfactory  course  is  an  entirely
    fresh hearing.

16. At the fresh hearing parties should be ready to address  the  issue  of
    Ethiopian nationality in the context of onus and standard of proof, and
    to assess the case according to most recent country guidance (a further
    case is about to be published).

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  its
    findings are to stand. The nature of  the  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of
    Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the  FtT  for  an  entirely
    fresh hearing.

18. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Fox.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            26 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
