
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/02780/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 November 2017                      |   On 21 November 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     mg
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel instructed by
Montague
     Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey  born  on  10  October  1994.   He
    arrived in this country on 2 September 2016 and applied for  asylum  on
    that day.  The application was refused on 3 March 2017.  The  appellant
    appealed and his appeal came before a  First-tier  Judge  on  19  April
    2017.  The judge noted that the appellant's claims were  based  on  his
    fear of persecution in Turkey on the basis of imputed political opinion
    as a supporter of the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) and the  People's
    Democratic Party (HDP). He also said he was of Kurdish ethnicity and of
    the Alevi faith.

2.   The appellant claimed to have been detained by the  Turkish  police  on
    12 October 2015 where he was ill-treated and questioned about  being  a
    member of the PKK.  He was released  after  two  days.   He  was  again
    arrested he claimed on 12 August 2016 and detained for three days,  and
    again accused of being a member of the PKK.  He said  he  had  accepted
    the accusations after three days of ill-treatment because  he  believed
    he was in danger of his life and he was released on condition  that  he
    would act as an agent.  The appellant travelled to Istanbul and paid an
    agent with the assistance of his father to  enable  him  to  leave  the
    country on a Turkish passport.

3.   Although the Secretary of State did not accept that the  appellant  was
    Kurdish or of the Alevi faith, these issues were resolved in favour  of
    the appellant by the First-tier Judge and  there  has  been  no  cross-
    appeal on her findings.  The judge did comment that the  appellant  was
    not particularly active or devoted in his practice of the Alevi  faith.



4.   The judge then turned to consider the issue of the  appellant  claiming
    to be a member and/or supporter of the BDP  and  the  HDP.   The  judge
    identified significant credibility issues and found in paragraph 32  of
    her decision  that  given  the  contradictions  and  vague  answers  to
    questions she did not accept that  the  appellant  had  any  meaningful
    connection with the HDP  or  that  he  participated  in  activities  or
    protests.  The appellant had claimed to be in the youth arm of the  BPD
    and an active worker for the HDP.

5.   The judge then went on to consider  the  question  of  the  appellant's
    claimed arrest and detention which she rejected for the reasons set out
    in paragraphs 33 and 34 of her decision as follows:

         "33. I went on to consider the appellant's claims  of  having  been
             arrested, detained and tortured by the Turkish police  on  two
             occasions.  First of all with regard to the claimed arrest  on
             12 October 2015, the appellant said that he and a friend  were
             taken to police headquarters.  He said that he  did  not  know
             what happened to his friend but he was accused of  involvement
             with the PKK which he has consistently denied.  The respondent
             is wrong  to  suggest  in  the  letter  of  refusal  that  the
             appellant admitted to being in the PKK.  It is clear from  his
             interview responses that he did not admit to being in the PKK.
              Whilst the appellant describes a typical method  of  torture,
             ie of being hosed down; he does not explain how  he  sustained
             the injury which resulted in the scar on his shoulder.  It  is
             the appellant's case that the scarring on his shoulder is  the
             result of having been  tortured.   He  also  incurred  a  head
             injury resulting in a  scar  on  the  occasion  of  the  first
             arrest.  It is the appellant's claim that he was beaten up and
             blindfolded.  No medical evidence was adduced to  support  the
             appellant's account of the scarring.  The  appellant  gave  no
             details as to specifically how the  shoulder  injury  occurred
             other than to say he  had  been  dragged  to  the  floor.   No
             evidence was adduced as to say  whether  he  required  medical
             attention save to say that the appellant visited a  doctor  in
             the United Kingdom and was now taking medication.  I find  the
             appellant's accounts of the arrests  to  be  implausible.   He
             said he was singled out together with his  friend  because  he
             was Kurdish and yet it is the appellant's case and it has been
             accepted by the respondent that he lived in an area which  was
             not Kurdish and his first language was Turkish.  It  does  not
             explain how he was able to be identified by the police in this
             way.  I have found that the appellant did not have a political
             profile or association with the HDP, in the absence of this  I
             am unable to find that the  appellant's  account  is  truthful
             with regards to him having been  taken  away  by  the  police.
             Furthermore, according to the appellant he was simply released
             'due to lack of evidence'.  This seems improbable  given  that
             the appellant goes on to say that on 12  August  2016  he  was
             'sought' by the  police  again  in  terms  of  three  military
             vehicles and four solders [sic] attending at his home.  He was
             asked for by name according to his account  at  interview  and
             grabbed by two soldiers with a further two soldiers  searching
             the house and he  was  then  taken  away.   According  to  the
             appellant, he was taken  to  the  Kahramanmaras,  the  special
             branch that combats terrorism.  If  the  appellant  is  to  be
             believed this would suggest that he has  a  profile  that  was
             known to the police.  This does  not  sit  credibly  with  the
             appellant's claim that he was released because  there  was  no
             evidence against him only some months  previously  in  October
             2015 and August 2016 to explain why the police would  come  in
             the way that they did and in such numbers with three  military
             vehicles in order to find him.  I find that his account  lacks
             credibility.


         34.  It is the appellant's case  that  he  was  then  subjected  to
             further torture while he denied being a  member  of  the  PKK.
             According to the appellant the interrogators were able to find
             out nothing from him because he had  nothing  to  disclose  to
             them and yet it is his case that he was released on  condition
             that he would then act as police informer.  I find this to  be
             improbable.  It is not, in my  finding,  credible  to  suggest
             that having been able to give the interrogators no information
             whatsoever that  the  appellant  would  then  be  released  on
             condition that he became an informer.  I therefore  find  that
             his whole account of arrest and detention lacks credibility."

6.   The judge identified further credibility issues  regarding  the  length
    of time the appellant had spent in Turkey after his arrest  and  before
    his departure to the UK.  She found that the inconsistencies undermined
    the credibility of his account that he had ever been  arrested  in  the
    middle of August or at all.  In paragraph 36 she  considered  that  the
    claim that the family were able to obtain a substantial sum to pay  the
    agent to help him leave Turkey lacked credibility given that the family
    were farmers.  It was claimed he had paid  the  agent  $US10,000.   She
    found the account of how he had obtained a  visa  and  dealt  with  the
    agent to be vague.  His account of handing his passport to  someone  on
    the plane and not getting it back was improbable.

7.   The judge concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  a  political
    profile and she disbelieved  his  accounts  of  having  been  arrested,
    detained and tortured.

8.   She considered the risks on return in paragraph 39 of her  decision  as
    follows:

     "I then went on to consider the appellant's risk on return as a  failed
         asylum seeker of Kurdish ethnicity and Alevi faith.  The  appellant
         relies on the case of IK. I considered the factors in that case and
         find that he is not known to have any suspected involvement with  a
         separatist organisation.  This is because  I  do  not  believe  his
         accounts of having been arrested or detained.  I do not believe  he
         was beaten or tortured by the authorities and I do not accept  that
         there was only a short amount of time between his last  arrest  and
         him leaving Turkey for the reasons set out above.  This is  because
         I do not believe he was ever arrested.  Neither do I accept that he
         was asked to be an informer  and  whilst  I  have  been  shown  one
         photograph of him having attended a Nevruz celebration in  the  UK,
         this falls short of demonstrating that he has become involved  with
         political activities in the United Kingdom.  I accept only that  he
         is of Kurdish ethnicity and Alevi faith and  I  was  not  presented
         with any other information in the objective evidence as to why  for
         these reasons alone  he  would  be  at  risk  on  return.   He  has
         completed his military  service.   Because  I  do  not  accept  his
         accounts of having been arrested or detained I do not  accept  that
         he was fingerprinted or photographed.  Whilst he  would  fall  into
         the category of those returning  on  a  one  way  emergency  travel
         document, because I have not accepted that he left the country with
         the assistance of an agent it is likely, in  my  finding,  that  he
         left the country legally and therefore even if he  is  investigated
         as a failed asylum seeker, it is my finding that there is  no  real
         risk of persecution as a consequence for the  reasons  as  set  out
         above."

9.   In considering the question of humanitarian protection the judge  noted
    recent difficulties in Turkey following the referendum, but  found  she
    had not been presented with evidence to show that there was such a high
    level of indiscriminate violence arising  from  armed  conflict  as  to
    expose  the  appellant  to  a  serious  and  individual  threat.    She
    accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

10.  Counsel who had represented the  appellant  at  the  appeal  (not  Miss
    Panagiotopoulou) settled two grounds in support of the application  for
    permission to appeal.  Reference  was  made  to  paragraph  33  of  the
    decision where the judge had referred to three military vehicles coming
    to the appellant's village in order to find him.  It was submitted that
    this was not an accurate reflection of what the appellant had  said  in
    oral evidence.  The  appellant  had  stated  in  interview  that  three
    military vehicles had come to his village, four soldiers  had  come  to
    his house and they asked for him by name  and  he  was  detained.   The
    appellant had not asserted that he thought the three military  vehicles
    had been sent for him specifically.  The appellant had been asked to re-
    clarify in re-examination whether he was saying that the vehicles  came
    generally to the village or that he thought they were sent specifically
    for him and he had answered "Generally they came, then arrested me".

11.  In relation to ground 2 and the risks on return reference was  made  to
    an additional witness statement drafted and filed on  the  day  of  the
    hearing dated 19 April 2017  referring  to  a  recent  incident  where,
    following the referendum in April 2017, a  group  of  people  who  were
    supporters of the Government/authorities had attended  the  appellant's
    parents' home and threatened to harm them and demanded  to  know  where
    the appellant was now  living.   This  had  not  been  considered  when
    assessing the risk on return.

12.  Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Judge on 13  September
    2017.  Reference was made to a note  of  the  proceedings  compiled  by
    Counsel instructed to appear before  the  First-tier  Judge  confirming
    what was said in the grounds of appeal  about  the  military  vehicles.
    The judge had placed heavy reliance on the error of fact and it  was  a
    material error of law.

13.  In  relation  to  the  risks  on  return  reference  was  made  to  the
    handwritten statement drafted on  the  day  of  the  hearing  with  the
    assistance of Counsel where the appellant had referred to the  incident
    following the referendum where a group had attended his  parents'  home
    and threatened to harm them and demanded to know  where  the  appellant
    was living.  The judge made no reference to this matter.

14.  Miss Ahmed took me to AM v Secretary of  State  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1634
    where Ward LJ had referred at paragraph 54  to  Piglowska  v  Piglowski
    [1999] 1 WLR 1360 and what had been said by Lord Hoffmann at page  1372
    and in particular on the point that an Appellate Court  "should  resist
    the temptation to subvert the principle that they should not substitute
    their own discretion for that of the judge by a narrow textual analysis
    which enables them to claim that he misdirected  himself."   The  judge
    had not erred in paragraph 33 in terms of referring to  three  military
    vehicles and there was no merit in the argument.  The findings had been
    open to the First-tier Judge.  In relation to the  second  ground  Miss
    Ahmed referred to Muse v Entry Clearance Officer  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  10
    where reference had been made by Toulson LJ to what had  been  said  by
    Lord Brown in South Bucks District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL  33
    and in particular the sentence "The reasons need refer only to the main
    issues in the dispute, not to every material  consideration."   It  was
    clear when the decision  was  read  as  a  whole  that  the  judge  had
    disbelieved the account given.  She did not consider that the appellant
    had been truthful.  Miss Ahmed referred to IA Somalia  v  Secretary  of
    State [2007] EWCA Civ 323 and submitted the judge could not  have  come
    to a different conclusion and there was no material error of law.

15.  Counsel submitted that it was plain that the judge had not referred  to
    the appellant's evidence in the second witness  statement  and  it  was
    clearly a material error of law.  In relation to the first  ground  the
    judge had misunderstood the appellant's position about  the  number  of
    vehicles  seeking  him  -  they  had  not  come  specifically  for  the
    appellant.  If she had understood the evidence properly she might  have
    accepted  the  appellant's  account.   Accordingly,  the  decision  was
    materially flawed in law and a fresh hearing was required.

16.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  decision.   I  can
    only interfere with the decision of the  First-tier  Judge  if  it  was
    flawed in law.  I note that the judge had the benefit of  hearing  oral
    evidence from the appellant and his uncle.  The general approach of the
    First-tier Judge was fair in that she rejected part of the Home  Office
    case, resolving the issues of Kurdish  ethnicity  and  Alevi  faith  in
    favour of the appellant.  However, as I have already  said,  the  judge
    made negative credibility findings  in  respect  of  the  appellant  in
    paragraphs 30 to 32 of her decision.  It is said that the  judge  erred
    in placing weight  on  the  question  of  whether  the  three  military
    vehicles had  come  specifically  to  attend  at  his  home  with  four
    soldiers.  It is said that in re-examination the  appellant  was  asked
    "Do you mean they [sic] three vehicles came just for you  or  generally
    to the  village?"  and  the  appellant  replied,  "Generally  came  and
    arrested me."  I note that in answer to question 97 at the  appellant's
    interview he was asked how many people had come  to  his  house  on  12
    August 2016 and he  is  recorded  as  having  replied  "Three  military
    vehicles, four soldiers came into the house."  I am not satisfied  that
    the judge erred in her consideration of the facts still less  that  she
    misdirected herself in law in her consideration of the material  before
    her.  She was entitled to conclude that the appellant's account  lacked
    credibility.

17.  In relation to the second ground it is said  that  the  judge  did  not
    have regard to the appellant's  witness  statement  handed  in  at  the
    hearing and dated 19 April.  In fact, at paragraph 24 of  the  decision
    the judge records the documents which she had taken  into  account  and
    she makes specific reference to this document at  24(vi):  "Handwritten
    witness statement of the appellant also dated 19 April." Accordingly  I
    find no reason to doubt that the judge had taken the witness  statement
    into account. I am satisfied she would have had it mind and would  have
    given it appropriate weight.

18.  The judge comprehensively rejected the  appellant's  claim  of  arrest,
    detention and  ill-treatment  and  found  that  the  appellant  had  no
    political profile. She noted current developments in Turkey  after  the
    referendum. The absence of an express reference to what was said in the
    witness statement was not a material error of law in my view. Viewed as
    a whole the determination is well and properly reasoned and the judge's
    finding that the appellant would not be at risk on return was  open  to
    her.

19.  I do not find that the grounds identify a material  error  of  law  and
    accordingly this appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity Direction

20.  I deem it appropriate to make an anonymity direction  in  this  appeal.
    Anonymity order made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.





Signed                                  Date: 20 November 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal






