

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02637/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 June 2017                             |On 7 June 2017                 |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               ISATOU MANSARY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Miss L McCrorie, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge David C Clapham SSC, promulgated on 17 January 2017.

 2. In a response under rule 24 to the grant of permission, the SSHD said:

      "The respondent  does  not  oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
      permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal to determine the  appeal
      with a fresh  oral  (continuance)  hearing  to  consider  whether  the
      appellant qualifies as a refugee".

 3. That is a standard form of wording. It is badly phrased, but  has  been
    in common use for some years where the respondent concedes  that  there
    has been such error by the FtT as to require rehearing of the case.

 4. Mr Govan acknowledged that the response is in terms which are  intended
    to indicate a concession of error of law,  but  pointed  out  that  the
    nature of any error is not indicated.  He said  that  his  instructions
    were to seek to argue that  notwithstanding  the  response  (which  was
    signed by a different representative of the SSHD)  there  had  been  no
    error of law by the FtT.

 5. Miss McCrorie submitted that the concession could not be withdrawn,  or
    alternatively that there were no circumstances such that the UT  should
    permit its withdrawal.

 6. Neither representative could refer to any authority on whether or  when
    such a concession could be withdrawn.

 7. In absence of authority, I expressed  my  view  that  a  concession  is
    capable of being withdrawn, but subject to the permission  of  the  UT;
    and that where the SSHD has led an appellant has been  led  to  believe
    that her case in the UT is not resisted (and in effect a remit  is  all
    that she sought in her grounds) then  a  strong  explanation  would  be
    needed to justify a reversal.

 8. No explanation was offered of how it came about that a  concession  was
    issued in writing, in unqualified terms, and withdrawal then sought.

 9. In those circumstances, I  declined  to  allow  the  concession  to  be
    withdrawn, and indicated that the appeal to the UT would be resolved as
    follows.

10. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  None  of  its  findings  are  to
    stand, other than as a record of what was said at the hearing.

11. In terms of section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and  of  Practice
    Statement 7.2 the case is remitted to the FtT  for  an  entirely  fresh
    hearing.

12. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge David C Clapham SSC.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            5 June 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




