
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02206/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 April 2017                     |On 10 July 2017                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                            NISHANTHA JAYASEKARA
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                    Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, of Counsel, instructed by Polpitiya &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction.  I  have  not
been asked to make one and see no justification for an order being made,  so
none is made.

Introduction

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Mark Eldridge (hereafter "the Judge") dismissing his appeal against a
   decision of the Secretary of State refusing his protection claim, but
   allowing his appeal contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR. The Respondent
   cross-appeals against the Judge's decision allowing the appeal on human
   rights grounds.

Background

2. The Appellant is a national of Sri  Lanka  born  on  19  April  1975.  He
   entered the UK on 5 April 2011 with entry clearance conferring  leave  to
   enter as a student. He claimed asylum on 19 May 2015 on the  basis  that,
   whilst he is married with children in Sri Lanka; he is in  fact  gay  and
   had multiple gay encounters in Sri Lanka and in the UK. In 2008,  he  was
   forced into resigning from his employment in Sri Lanka as his  colleagues
   were suspicious of his sexuality and he eventually came to the UK as  his
   marriage was intolerable. At the end of January 2015, he met his  current
   partner and they have lived together as gay partners  since  March  2015.
   The Appellant's wife and other people in Sri Lanka have come to know that
   he is gay. His wife  (as  well  as  others)  have  displayed  threatening
   behaviour towards him because of his sexuality and she has prevented  him
   from speaking to his children.

3. The appeal was first heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon  on  15
   February 2016; his decision dismissing the appeal was set  aside  by  the
   Upper Tribunal and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  -
   hence the route by which the matter came before the Judge.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4. There was no dispute and the Judge accepted  the  Appellant  is  gay  and
   living with his partner in the UK in a relationship akin to  marriage  or
   civil partnership. There was also no dispute that as a gay man  he  would
   live openly in Sri Lanka. The Judge  also  accepted  that  the  Appellant
   resigned from his media career in Sri  Lanka  because  of  his  perceived
   sexuality, and that, he may be well-known within media circles but not to
   the general public. The  Judge  further  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
   sexuality had become known to his wife  and  that  she  regarded  him  as
   either gay or bisexual, and was open about her displeasure.  Given  these
   factual findings the Judge identified  that  the  issue  before  him  was
   whether the Appellant could live openly as a gay man in Sri Lanka without
   risk, or whether his enforced removal would  infringe  his  human  rights
   contrary to Article 8 (ECHR).

5. The Judge then turned to consider the  Upper  Tribunal's  extant  country
   guidance namely LH and IP (gay men: risk) Sri Lanka CG [2015] UKUT 00073
   (IAC), and the Respondent's Country Information  and  Guidance  (CIG)  on
   Sexual Orientation and  Gender  Identity  in  Sri  Lanka  (v  1.0)  dated
   September 2015. In respect of the latter the Judge stated (at [45]):

   "That document reflects the country guidance decision in LH  and  IP  and
   that  there  is  often  discrimination  against  LGBT   persons-obviously
   including gay men - and that the State is generally unwilling to  provide
   protection to those likely to be subject to serious harm  or  persecution
   on the grounds of the sexuality or gender identity" (sic)

6. In consequence of  this  analysis  the  Judge  concluded  the  background
   evidence did not undermine the application of LH  and  IP  where  it  was
   found that "in general the treatment of gay men in  Sri  Lanka  does  not
   reach the standard of persecution or serious harm."

7. In his omnibus conclusion, the Judge stated thus (at [47]):

   "I find it instructive to read the decisions taken about  the  individual
   Appellant's in LH and IP. Whist I accept that the Appellant would wish to
   live as an openly gay man in his home country and to be able to  enjoy  a
   partnership on that basis, I do not find that the realistic  consequences
   of him returning and doing so would give rise to a risk of persecution or
   serious harm. In reaching this conclusion I accept that the circumstances
   in this appeal are different from the Appellants in the country  guidance
   decision, who preferred to live a discreet life whilst  safe  within  the
   United Kingdom, and that his circumstances will not be respected  by  his
   wife and others  who  believe  him  to  be  gay.  He  will  be  placed  a
   disadvantage  including  the  inability  for  any  relationship   to   be
   recognised legally, and he is also likely  to  face  discrimination  but,
   even having appropriate concern and regard  for  the  lower  standard  of
   proof demanded of him, I conclude this will not  be  to  the  level  that
   requires international protection."(sic)

8. Accordingly, the appeal under the Refugee Convention failed.

9. The Judge went on to consider  the  Appellant's  claim  under  Article  8
   outside of the Immigration Rules ("the  Rules")  having  found  that  the
   requirements of Appendix FM of the Rules could  not  be  met.  The  Judge
   answered the  first  four  Razgar  ([2004]  UKHL  27)  questions  in  the
   affirmative  and  the  issue  thus  boiled  down  to  the   question   of
   proportionality. The Judge referred to section 117B of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") and considered that  the
   maintenance of effective immigration controls was in the public interest.
   The Judge found the Respondent had failed to serve a  notice  created  to
   curtail the Appellant's leave, which led him to conclude that the  asylum
   claim was lodged and the relationship commenced during a period of lawful
   leave, albeit the Judge recognised that his leave was precarious  "within
   the meaning of the 2002 Act". The Judge concluded  that  the  Appellant's
   ability to speak English and his economic  self-sufficiency  through  his
   partner were neutral factors and  did  not  weigh  in  the  interests  of
   removal.

10. The Judge however concluded that there were  "insurmountable  obstacles"
   to family life continuing outside the UK. The Appellant's partner  was  a
   British citizen who had lived in the UK all his life. He was a  pensioner
   with health concerns. He had no connections to Sri Lanka and he  and  the
   Appellant would face discrimination and harassment as a gay couple there.



11. Accordingly, the appeal succeeded on human rights grounds.

Application for permission to appeal & Submissions

12. Both parties applied for and were granted permission to  appeal  by  the
   First-tier Tribunal on 9 March 2017. At the hearing both  representatives
   made helpful submissions the sum of which can be summarised as follows.





On behalf of the Appellant

13. The Appellant's grounds contend that the Judge erred  in  not  admitting
   an unreported decision of the Upper Tribunal containing information post-
   dating the country guidance case, which accepted inter alia, the evidence
   that the  authorities  continued  to  perpetrate  unlawful  and  criminal
   behaviour towards LGBT persons with impunity. It was further  argued  the
   Judge erred in finding that the CIG reflected the  country  guidance  and
   failed to address risk arising from threats received from the Appellant's
   wife and family members in Sri Lanka.

On behalf of the Respondent

14. The Respondent's grounds argued that the Judge was  wrong  to  find  the
   Appellant had extant leave  when  the  relationship  was  formed  as  the
   curtailment  notice  had  been  effectively  served  on   him.   In   the
   circumstances, the Appellant did not have leave and the Judge was  bound,
   but failed to attach "little weight" to the  relationship.  Further,  the
   Respondent argued the Judge failed to consider  the  possibility  of  the
   Appellant returning to Sri Lanka to apply for entry clearance to  re-join
   his partner and that the reasons given for finding that family life could
   not continue outside the UK were inadequate.

15. In a Rule 24 Reply the Appellant opposed  the  Respondent's  appeal  and
   contended that the Respondent's grounds were a mere disagreement with the
   Judge's decision. It was also  argued  that  the  Judge  was  correct  in
   holding the Appellant's leave had not been effectively curtailed  by  the
   Respondent.

Discussion / Conclusions

The Protection Claim

16. I am satisfied that the Judge erred in law in dismissing the  protection
   claim on asylum grounds.

17. It is plain from the Judge's factual findings  that  on  return  to  Sri
   Lanka the Appellant would live openly as a gay man in the face of threats
   particularly from his estranged wife and family  who  are  aware  of  his
   sexuality. These were the essential ingredients of  the  factual  premise
   upon which risk was to be assessed. Ms Bayati's  complaint  centres  upon
   the Judge's conclusion that the Appellant was not at risk of serious harm
   and/or persecution and she criticises his approach to and his  assessment
   of the background evidence.

18. Ms Bayati, who also represented  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, sought before the Judge to rely on an  unreported  decision  of
   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini in which he departed from  the  country
   guidance. In her skeleton argument Ms Bayati prayed in aid  paragraph  11
   of the Tribunal's Practice Direction which applies when seeking  to  rely
   on an unreported decision. At the hearing, the Judge ruled in  favour  of
   the Appellant (it does not appear that there was  any  dissent  from  the
   Respondent's representative) and admitted the decision.  However,  during
   his deliberations, the Judge clearly changed his mind  and  excluded  the
   decision citing Ms  Bayati's  failure  with  reference  to  the  Practice
   Direction to "(c) certify that the proposition is not to be found in  any
   reported determination of the Tribunal, the IAT or the AIT  and  had  not
   been superseded by the decision of a higher authority."

19. Ms Bayati, in her grounds and in her submissions before me, stated  that
   she complied with (c) expressly before the Judge.  There  is  no  dispute
   that she did so. In my judgement, that was  sufficient  as  the  Practice
   Direction does not exclude the possibility of  (c)  being  complied  with
   expressly. Whilst I  am  thus  satisfied  that  the  Judge's  reason  for
   excluding the decision is procedurally flawed, the error, such as it  is,
   is not material as he rightly recognised that this did  not  prevent  the
   Appellant from relying on the CIG which he considered in any event.

20. Nevertheless, I am however satisfied that the Judge's  consideration  of
   the background evidence and the guidance  in  LH  and  IP  is  materially
   flawed, and that his assessment of risk was therefore inadequate.

21. In LH and IP the panel held, inter alia, at [123 (3) & (4)] that:


   "Applying the test set out by Lord Rodger in the Supreme  Court  judgment
   in HJ and HT, in general the treatment of gay men in Sri Lanka  does  not
   reach the standard of persecution or serious harm.


   There  is  a  significant  population  of  homosexuals  and  other   LGBT
   individuals in Sri Lanka, in particular in Colombo.  While there is  more
   risk for lesbian and bisexual  women  in  rural  areas,  because  of  the
   control exercised by families on unmarried  women,  and  for  transgender
   individuals and sex workers in the cities, it will be a question of  fact
   whether for a particular individual the risk  reaches  the  international
   protection standard, and in particular, whether it extends  beyond  their
   home area."

  22. The Appellant's case was that he fell outside the generality  of  such
      cases as there was a marked deterioration  of  the  situation  in  Sri
      Lanka for an openly gay man who intended to live as such and, who  had
      been outed and threatened by his wife and family. Reliance was  placed
      on the CIG of September 2015, which I am told is the latest  guidance,
      and relies on source materials that  mostly  post-dates  the  evidence
      considered by the panel in LH and IP. I accept Ms Bayati's  submission
      that, generally, the evidence  demonstrates  that  there  has  been  a
      negative progression in the State's attitude towards LGBT  persons  in
      terms of abuse, arbitrary arrest,  extortion  and  most  significantly
      violence, and is not, as Mr Tufan submits, the same  as  the  evidence
      before the panel in LH and IP.


  23. The Judge's analysis of this evidence is stark and is  dealt  with  in
      swift terms at [45] and rejected on the basis that  the  GIC  reflects
      the guidance in LH and IP, in that,  "there  is  often  discrimination
      against LGBT persons". In my view the Judge's analysis, such as it is,
      failed to properly engage with the  evidence  and  was  an  inadequate
      assessment of the background evidence that was before him. That  error
      is plainly material and is further compounded  by  the  Judge's  clear
      failure to assess risk in light of the Appellant's individual  profile
      as an openly gay man, and to address the consequences that may  befall
      him from  his  wife  and  family  on  account  of  his  sexuality.  To
      acknowledge  as  the  Judge  did  at   [47]   that   the   Appellant's
      "circumstances will not be  respected  by  his  wife  and  others  who
      believe him to be gay", did not sufficiently engage with  and  address
      the claimed risk posed to the Appellant.


  24. It follows that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  the
      Refugee Convention must be set aside.

25. In the event I reached that conclusion, Mr Tufan invited me  to  adjourn
   the hearing for the matter to be heard by a panel  and  made  no  further
   submissions on the individual merits of the appeal. Ms Bayati invited  me
   to remake  the  decision  on  the  evidence,  which  I  consider  is  the
   appropriate course. I am not remaking the decision on any  general  point
   of principle. I thus see no reason why I should not remake  the  decision
   on the facts appertaining to this Appellant on the  evidence  before  me.



Remaking the Decision

26. In remaking the decision, I have borne in mind that  the  burden  is  on
   the Appellant to show that there is a real  risk  of  persecution  and/or
   serious harm in the event of a return for a Convention reason. In LH  and
   IP it was confirmed that "gay men in Sri Lanka  constitute  a  particular
   social group." There is thus no dispute that the  Refugee  Convention  is
   clearly engaged.

27. I see no reason why any of the Judge's factual findings are in  any  way
   undermined by the  arguments  before  me.   I  summarise  them  as  being
   acceptance that the Appellant is a Sinhalese gay man from Colombo who has
   engaged in multiple gay relationships in Sri Lanka and in the UK.  He  is
   living openly as a gay man in the UK and will do so in  Sri  Lanka  where
   his sexuality is known to his wife and family who have threatened him and
   who will not be discreet about it.

28. These factual findings must be considered  within  the  legal  framework
   applicable in such cases as enunciated in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of  State
   for the Home Department [2011] 1 AC 596. Lord Hope at [35]  set  out  (in
   his own words concurring with Lord Roger at  [82])  the  approach  to  be
   followed in such cases:

    "This brings me to the test that should be adopted by the  fact-finding
    tribunals in this country. As Lord Walker points out in para  98,  this
    involves what is essentially an individual and  fact-specific  inquiry.
    Lord Rodger has described the approach in para 82, but I would like  to
    set it out in my own words. It is necessary to proceed in stages.

    (a) The first stage, of course, is to consider whether the applicant is
    indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of that  orientation  he
    will not be entitled to be treated as a member of the particular social
    group. But I would  regard  this  part  of  the  test  as  having  been
    satisfied if the applicant's case is that he is at risk of  persecution
    because he is suspected of being gay, if his past  history  shows  that
    this is in fact the case.

    (b) The next stage is  to  examine  a  group  of  questions  which  are
    directed to what his situation will be on  return.  This  part  of  the
    inquiry is directed to  what  will  happen  in  the  future.  The  Home
    Office's Country of Origin report will provide  the  background.  There
    will be little difficulty in holding that in countries such as Iran and
    Cameroon gays or persons who are believed to be gay are persecuted  and
    that persecution is  something  that  may  reasonably  be  feared.  The
    question is how each applicant, looked at  individually,  will  conduct
    himself if returned and how others will react to what  he  does.  Those
    others will include everyone with whom he  will  come  in  contact,  in
    private as well as in public. The way he conducts himself may vary from
    one situation to another, with varying degrees of risk. But  he  cannot
    and must not be expected to conceal aspects of his  sexual  orientation
    which he is unwilling to conceal, even from those  whom  he  knows  may
    disapprove of it. If he fears persecution as a result and that fear  is
    well-founded, he will be entitled to asylum  however  unreasonable  his
    refusal  to  resort  to  concealment  may  be.  The  question  what  is
    reasonably tolerable has no part in this inquiry.

      (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will  not  be  able
    to do in the country of his  nationality  everything  that  he  can  do
    openly in the country whose protection he seeks is not the test.  As  I
    said earlier  (see  para  15),  the  Convention  was  not  directed  to
    reforming the level of rights in the country of origin. So it would  be
    wrong to approach the issue on  the  basis  that  the  purpose  of  the
    Convention is to guarantee to an applicant who is gay that he can  live
    as freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to do if he
    were not returned. It does not guarantee to everyone the  human  rights
    standards that are applied by the  receiving  country  within  its  own
    territory. The focus throughout must be on  what  will  happen  in  the
    country of origin.

    (d) The next stage, if it is found that  the  applicant  will  in  fact
    conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is  to  consider
    why he will do so. If  this  will  simply  be  in  response  to  social
    pressures or for cultural or religious reasons of his own choosing  and
    not because of a fear of persecution, his  claim  for  asylum  must  be
    rejected. But if the reason why he will resort to concealment  is  that
    he genuinely fears that otherwise he will be  persecuted,  it  will  be
    necessary to consider whether that fear is well founded.

    (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does  he  have  a  well-
    founded fear that he will be  persecuted?  If  he  has,  the  causative
    condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department  [2006]  2  AC  426,  para  5  will  have  been
    established.  The applicant will be entitled to asylum."

   29.      In view of the facts as found the Appellant is gay and  that  is
    known to his estranged wife and others  in  Sri  Lanka.  The  issue  of
    living "discreetly" does not necessarily arise in this case as there is
    also no dispute the Appellant would live openly as a  gay  man  in  Sri
    Lanka. In  any  event,  as  the  Tribunal  held  in  MSM  (journalists;
    political opinion; risk)  Somalia  [2015]  UKUT  00413  (IAC),  "forced
    modification" or "discreet" behaviour is a  possibility  that  must  be
    disregarded.

   30.      The next and crucial  question  that  I  must  consider  is  how
    others will react to the Appellant living  openly  as  a  gay  man  and
    whether from  the  nature  of  any  reaction  he  would  be  liable  to
    persecution. The Respondent's position is, that the Appellant can  live
    openly without being liable to persecution. For  the  reasons  set  out
    below I find that the Appellant could not do so.

   31.      My starting point is the panel's assessment and  conclusions  in
    LH and IP.

   32.      At [107] the panel noted that "the question whether there  is  a
    risk of persecution in the HJ and HT  sense  is  one  of  fact,  having
    regard to the evidence of what actually happens in Sri Lanka."

   33.      In answering that question the panel  based  its  assessment  on
    background evidence depicting the events on the  ground  from  2002  to
    August 2014 (see Appendix A). Following consideration of that  evidence
    the panel stated as follows:

      "110.      The risk for gay men is not, we consider, at the  level  of
           persecution or serious harm in Sri Lanka as a whole.  The  legal
           potential of sanctions underlies the  instances  of  the  police
           arresting homosexual men and subjecting them to abuse, sometimes
           violent, and to extortion. Although the  examples  to  which  we
           have been referred appear to us to be generally  credible,  they
           are few, they date back over a period of up to 8 years, and  the
           same ones are cited repeatedly in the various reports. The level
           of abuse in the reports generally falls short of  the  level  of
           persecution. The main  exception  is  the  allegation  that  the
           police sometimes rape gay men in custody.  That  allegation  was
           not established by specific instances, save for the  transgender
           individual in the  student  research  example,  which  tends  to
           support the drawing of a distinction between  the  treatment  of
           transgender individuals and that of gay  men  in  general.   The
           evidence suggests that such risks as there  are  apply  more  to
           some homosexual men than for others.  The examples cited and the
           general opinion of the experts centre  on  transgender  persons,
           commercial sex workers, and visitors to cruising areas or  other
           homosexual pick up venues.

      111.  The state has little or no interest in recording  such  matters.
           There are no official statistics.  Numerous members of the LGBTI
           community confide in Equal Ground, but it is a relatively  small
           organisation in a country with a large population.  We  conclude
           that instances of abuse of members of the  LGBTI  community  are
           underreported.  Taking that into  account,  and  accepting  that
           there are some incidents  at  the  serious  end  of  the  scale,
           including rape, the appellants have not been able  to  point  to
           more than a few specific instances  at  or  near  the  level  of
           persecution.   These  appear  to  arise  from  opportunism   and
           exploitation, not from systematic hostility.

         112.    We find force in the argument that in  such  cases  as  are
           recorded  there  is  a  failure   of   state   protection.   The
           perpetrators named in most if not all of the instances cited  to
           us are police officers.  There is no evidence that such abuse is
           ordered from a high level, but nor is there  any  evidence  that
           the state does anything  to  stop  it.   On  the  contrary,  the
           perpetrators, as far as we can see, enjoy complete immunity.

                  .............

     115.   We do not accept the submission for the  appellants  that  LGBTI
           groups, due to their nature, are from  time to time the  subject
           of harassment or raids by the Sri Lankan  authorities.   As  the
           circumstances of the closure of CoJ ("Companions on a  Journey")
           emerged in evidence, this attracted homophobic publicity, but we
           find from Ms Flamer-Caldera's evidence that the closure was more
           closely related to an inquiry into allegations of  embezzlement,
           rather than being a homophobic  crackdown  by  the  authorities.
           Pride events are arranged and staged with great care,  but  they
           happen regularly, under secure conditions but not in secret.

                   .............


     118.  The evidence of general persecution of gay men thus amounted  to
           a  low  number  of  serious  incidents.   Equal  Ground  is  the
           immediate  or  underlying  source  for  almost   all   of   that
           information.  While  we  have  accepted  that  there  is  under-
           reporting, we are unable to agree that the  incidents  involving
           gay men are of a scale, frequency or  pattern  to  constitute  a
           general risk of persecution.  Although there is a lack of  state
           protection, there is no evidence of serious harm except in those
           isolated instances.  There may be a few  members  of  the  wider
           LGBTI  community  who  suffer  difficulties  at  the  level   of
           persecution, but the evidence is not there to indicate  that  it
           is only because they are gay men."

(Emphasis added.)

     34.    It is perhaps not surprising given the extent  of  the  evidence
      before the panel that it concluded, inter alia, that whilst there  was
      a failure of state protection in cases of recorded abuse, "in  general
      the treatment of gay men in Sri lanka does not reach the  standard  of
      persecution or serious harm." However, the panel also recognised  that
      "it will be a question of fact whether for a particular individual the
      risk reaches the international protection standard."

     35.    It is that very issue  that  I  am  invited  to  assess  in  the
instant appeal.

     36.    I assess the Appellant's  appeal  as  at  the  date  of  hearing
      applying, as I am bound to do, any extant country  guidance.  In  this
      regard, the Practice Directions for the First-tier and Upper  Tribunal
      (IAC) 2011 states:

      "12.2 A reported determination of the Tribunal, the  AIT  or  the  IAT
      bearing the letters CG shall be treated as  authoritative  finding  on
      the country guidance issue identified in the determination,  based  on
      the evidence before the members of Tribunal that determine the appeal.
      As a result, unless it has been expressly superseded  or  replaced  by
      any later CG determination, or is inconsistent  with  other  authority
      that is binding on the Tribunal,  such  a  country  guidance  case  is
      authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal: -

      a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and

      b) depends upon the same or similar evidence"

     37.    Ms Bayati submits the country guidance is not  determinative  of
      the Appellant's appeal and reliance is placed on 12(b) not being  met.
      She contends that the CIG is set  on  evidence  that  post-dates  that
      assessed by the panel in LH  and  IP  and  demonstrates  that  for  an
      individual with his accepted characteristics and profile, that he will
      be liable to persecution because of his sexual identity.

     38.    The passages relied  upon  by  Ms  Bayati  as  being  of  direct
application are as follows:

      "2.3.1 Although same-sex sexual activity is criminalised in Sri  Lanka
      there have been no successful prosecutions and very few charges during
      the 50 years of the Sri Lankan state.

      2.3.2 In general the level of discrimination and abuse faced by  LGBTI
      persons in Sri Lanka is not such that it will reach the level of being
      persecutory or otherwise inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.  This  was
      confirmed for gay men in the country guidance case of LH and  IP  (gay
      men: risk) Sri Lanka CG  [2015]  UKUT  00073  (IAC)  where  the  Upper
      Tribunal found that in general the treatment of gay men in  Sri  Lanka
      does not reach the standard  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  (para
      123(3)).

      2.3.3 The  Upper  Tribunal  in  LH  and  IP  found  that  there  is  a
      'significant population of homosexuals and other LGBT  individuals  in
      Sri Lanka, in particular in Colombo' and that  'While  there  is  more
      risk for lesbian and bisexual women in rural  areas,  because  of  the
      control exercised by families on unmarried women, and for  transgender
      individuals and sex workers in the cities, it will be  a  question  of
      fact  whether  for  a  particular  individual  the  risk  reaches  the
      international protection  standard,  and  in  particular,  whether  it
      extends beyond their home area.'(Para 123(4))    2.3.4  LGBTI  persons
      frequently face discrimination in accessing  employment,  housing  and
      health services.  Sexual  harassment  at  work  and  hate  speech  and
      vilification of LGBTI communities by media  and  public  officials  is
      reported to be common (see Attitudes of the state).

      2.3.5 Male-to-female transgender women and masculine-looking women  of
      lower economic status report that police used the  Vagrants  Ordinance
      of the Sri Lanka Penal Code that  prohibits  loitering  in  public  to
      detain them (see Legislation and  Implementation  of  legislation  and
      Attitudes of the state).

      2.3.6 There are reports that some LGBTI Sri Lankans can suffer  sexual
      violence, emotional violence and physical  violence  at  home  and  in
      public spaces. Examples of  such  incidents  include:  death  threats,
      sexual assault,  rape,  physical  attacks,  kidnappings,  as  well  as
      emotional  and  psychological  abuse  by  public  and  private  actors
      including, verbal humiliation, threats of family abandonment and being
      forced to end same-sex relationships (see Societal attitudes).

      ..............

      2.5 Are those at risk able to seek effective protection?

      2.5.1 There are no legal safeguards to prevent discrimination based on
      sexual orientation or gender  identity.  Incidents  of  homophobia  go
      unreported due to individuals wanting  to  protect  their  identities.
      Police often  misinterpret  the  laws  on  the  basis  of  a  person's
      appearance  or  behaviour  and  there  have  been  reports  of  police
      assaulting, harassing and extorting money or sexual favours from LGBTI
      individuals with impunity, particularly in Colombo as  well  as  other
      areas (See Attitudes of state officials, Societal attitudes and  State
      protection).

      2.5.2 The lack  of  anti-discrimination  legislation  to  protect  the
      rights of LGBTI individuals has meant that they have no recourse to  a
      remedy when particular laws  are  used  against  LGBTI  persons  in  a
      discriminatory manner. Such  discrimination  is  further  enabled  and
      promoted   by   the   continued   criminalisation,    and    therefore
      stigmatisation, of  LGBTI  persons.  LGBTI  individuals  who  are  the
      victims of violence or hate crimes cannot report these crimes  to  the
      police without fear that their sexual orientation or  gender  identity
      will be exposed or highlighted, leading to further discrimination  and
      marginalization and, potentially,  in  theory,  to  prosecution  under
      articles 365 and 365A of the Constitution. LBGTI people who experience
      physical violence rarely seek  compensation,  redress  or  counselling
      from service providers  who  work  with  women  who  have  experienced
      violence (See State protection).

      2.5.3 There is a general perception in the LGBTI community that police
      officers used blackmail and violence against persons they perceived to
      be homosexual, bisexual, or transgender. If the person's  fear  is  of
      serious harm/persecution at the hands of the state, it is unreasonable
      to consider they would be able to avail themselves of  the  protection
      of the authorities.

      2.5.4 If the person's fear is of serious harm/persecution at the hands
      of non-state  agents  or  rogue  state  agents  then  effective  state
      protection is unlikely to be available. The evidence is that the state
      is unwilling  to  provide  protection  to  those  subject  to  serious
      harm/persecution on grounds that they are LGBTI. Decision makers  need
      to consider each case on its facts.  The onus  is  on  the  person  to
      demonstrate why they would not  be  able  to  seek  and  obtain  state
      protection.

    39.     The guidance further states the following regarding the attitude
      of the Sri Lankan authorities towards LGBT persons:

      4.1.1 The US State Department's 2014 Country Report  on  Human  Rights
      Practices (USSD Report 2014), Sri Lanka, published on  25  June  2015,
      noted that, 'Authorities very rarely enforced the criminal provisions.
      In recent years human rights organizations reported  that,  while  not
      actively arresting and prosecuting  members  of  the  LGBT  community,
      police  harassed  and  extorted  money  or  sexual  favors  from  LGBT
      individuals with impunity  and  assaulted  gay  men  and  lesbians  in
      Colombo and other areas. ... '

      4.1.2 The same source further noted that: 'A civil society group  that
      worked to advance LGBT rights reported close  monitoring  by  security
      and intelligence forces. In a March  report  by  the  Women's  Support
      Group, "Sri Lanka: Not Gonna Take  it  Lying  Down,"  13  of  33  LGBT
      persons interviewed in the country between 2010 and 2012  admitted  to
      having been the victim of some kind of violence at the hands of  state
      agents. Interviewees noted police often utilized existing  laws,  such
      as the 1842 Vagrants Ordinance, to detain any individual deemed to  be
      "loitering," which generally led to detention and  at  times  physical
      and sexual abuse. Interviewees also  noted  that  police  and  antigay
      groups  also  used  penal  code  sections  on  "gross  indecency"  and
      "cheating by personation" to  brand  LGBT  persons  as  "perverts  and
      criminals." There was also a general perception in the LGBT  community
      that police officers used blackmail and violence against persons  they
      perceived to be homosexual, bisexual, or transgender.'

      4.1.3 A report by the Kaleidoscope trust, Speaking Out, The rights  of
      LGBTI citizens  from  across  the  Commonwealth,  2014,  stated  that,
      'Although the law is rarely  enforced  it  continues  to  be  used  to
      threaten and harass LGBTI people.  A  recent  study  by  human  rights
      organisation EQUAL GROUND found that 90 [percent] of trans people  and
      65 [percent] of gay men reported experiencing police violence based on
      their  sexuality  and/or  gender  identity.  The  law  still   retains
      widespread support amongst lawyers and the police.'

      4.1.4 A Shadow Report to the UN Human Rights Committee  regarding  Sri
      Lanka's protection of the Rights of LGBTI Persons (Response to List of
      Issues) Compiled by the Kaleidoscope Human Rights Foundation with  the
      assistance of  DLA  Piper  International  LLP  and  Sri  Lankan  LGBTI
      Advocacy Groups,  dated  September  2014,  stated:  'There  have  been
      reports  of  arbitrary  arrests  and  detention  by  law   enforcement
      officials and violent and abusive police behaviour. Although  arrested
      LGBTI individuals have thus far not been charged or prosecuted,  there
      have been reports of  subsequent  blackmail,  extortion,  violence  or
      coerced sexual acts of individuals by police officers. For example, in
      one reported cases two gay men were arrested by  police  in  a  public
      restroom in Colombo and taken to a police station. At the station, the
      police officers used derogatory terminology and accused the two men of
      having sex in the restroom. The police then drove the men  to  another
      location where the men were forced to pay a bribe to the police before
      being  released.  The  transgender  nachchi  community  is  especially
      vulnerable  to  such  victimisation,  abuse  and   exploitation.   The
      awareness that most LGBTI individuals will be unwilling and fearful to
      report such incidents and the subsequent lack of action by  the  State
      gives police officers the license to continue such practices.

      4.1.5 As noted  in  the  International  Gay  &  Lesbian  Human  Rights
      Commission (IGLHRC) shadow report of October 2014:  'Section  365A  of
      the Penal Code Amendment Act No 22 of 1995 prohibits "any act of gross
      indecency" in public or in private. The law  is  used  to  criminalize
      adult consensual same-sex relations. Section 399  of  the  Penal  Code
      penalizes  "cheating  by  personation"  and  is  used  to  criminalize
      transgender  men  and   women,   masculine-appearing   lesbians,   and
      individuals who cross-dress.  The  Vagrancy  Ordinance  of  1842  that
      prohibits loitering in public is used to detain transgender women  and
      men because they look different... 'The State grants  police  officers
      broad authority to interpret and enforce these laws, often leading  to
      discriminatory application and often also wrongful application on  the
      basis of a person's appearance or behavior. Masculine-looking lesbians
      reported being targeted by police under Section 399 of the  Sri  Lanka
      Penal Code for "cheating by  personation."  Several  misrepresentation
      cases have been brought to court because women were "discovered to  be
      disguised as men" and their "true" sexual identity was exposed to  the
      public. Male-to-female transgender women and masculine  looking  women
      of lower economic status also reported that police used  the  Vagrants
      Ordinance of the Sri Lanka Penal Code to detain  them.  Detention  and
      release was often conditional on paying a bribe. Same-sex  couples  in
      Sri Lanka spoke of difficulties obtaining  pension  schemes  and  bank
      loans on the basis of shared income with their same-sex partners.'"

    40.    While the representatives agreed that paragraph 4.1.1 of the CIG
      represents the same information that was before the panel  in  LH  and
      IP,  and  paragraph  4.1.2  confirms  the  content  of  the  US  State
      Department Report of 2014, I accept Ms Bayati's  assessment  that  the
      CIG demonstrates that there has been a negative progression  in  terms
      of the evidence of abuse  (physical  and  sexual),  arbitrary  arrest,
      extortion and violence against LGBT persons including gay men by state
      agents. The evidence further highlights that the penal code is used to
      level criminal charges for gross  indecency,  and  that  state  agents
      acted with impunity with no redress for LGBT  persons,  in  a  climate
      where the rule of law bred inequality for gay persons and was used  to
      commit violence against such persons.

    41.     Ms Bayati placed emphasis  on  paragraph  4.1.3  in  particular,
      which reports that  65%  of  gay  men  surveyed  had  reported  police
      violence based on their sexual identity  and  the  UNHCR  findings  of
      arbitrary arrests and detention, blackmail,  extortion,  violence  and
      coerced sexual acts. I  agree  that  this  is  a  high  percentage  of
      violence and other criminal acts against  gay  men  because  of  their
      sexual  identity.  The  question  is  whether  that  high   percentage
      constitutes a real risk. Ms Bayati draws from  the  analysis  of  Lord
      Roger in HJ Iran at [91] citing Sedley LJ in Batayav  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1489, [2004] INLR 126 at
      [38]:

      "If a type of car has a defect which causes  one  vehicle  in  ten  to
      crash, most people would say that it presents a real  risk  to  anyone
      who drives it,  albeit  crashes  are  not  generally  or  consistently
      happening."

    Getting away from metaphor, I suppose that it may be debatable  whether
    a gay man would be at real  risk  of  persecution  (in  the  Convention
    sense) if, on returning to his own country, he would face a one in  ten
    risk of being prosecuted and made to pay a fine, or sent to prison  for
    a month. But if he would face a one in ten risk of being prosecuted and
    sentenced to death by public hanging from a crane there could  be  only
    one answer."

   42.      Adopting a quantitative analysis  Ms  Bayati  submits  that  the
    figure of 65% exceeds the 1 in 10 chance  espoused  by  Lord  Roger  in
    HJ(Iran). I agree.

   43.      In my judgement, the evidence points to the  authorities  having
    demonstrated unlawful and criminal behaviour and violence towards  LGBT
    persons with impunity. The evidence does not suggest  that  these  acts
    are for any reasons other than the sexual identity  of  the  individual
    harmed. There is  a  recognised  lack  of  state  protection  for  such
    individuals. This potential risk and lack of protection must  apply  to
    persons  such  as  the  Appellant  who  hold  a  subjective   risk   of
    persecution.

   44.      I am satisfied that I can attach weight to the  CIG  given  that
    such reports are "generally prepared with care and couched in carefully
    selected terms" - see MSM (supra) at [23]. Despite the  care  in  which
    the terms of the CIG are couched  and  the  importance  given  to  that
    evidence  by  the  Respondent  by  its  very  inclusion,  she  has  not
    considered it in her refusal. Ms Bayati makes no formal complaint about
    that, but rightly points out, that the Respondent should have done  so.
    Nevertheless, the failure does not  prevent  me  from  considering  the
    guidance on appeal.

   45.      The  background  material  that  forms  the  foundation  of  the
    applicable paragraphs of the CIG that I cited earlier  are  taken  from
    the following reports - US Department  of  State,  Country  Reports  on
    Human  Rights  Practices  for  2014  published  on  27  February  2015;
    Kaleidoscope trust, Speaking Out, The rights  of  LGBTI  citizens  from
    across the Commonwealth, 2014; Kaleidoscope, Shadow Report  to  the  UN
    Human Rights Committee regarding Sri Lanka's protection of  the  Rights
    of  LGBTI  Persons  (Response  to  List  of  Issues)  Compiled  by  the
    Kaleidoscope Human Rights Foundation with the assistance of  DLA  Piper
    International LLP and Sri Lankan LGBTI Advocacy Groups, September  2014
    and the International Gay & Lesbian Human Rights  Commission  (IGLHRC),
    Violence Against Lesbians, Bisexual Women and  Transgender  Persons  in
    Sri Lanka, Presented to the 112th Session of The Human Rights Committee
    of the United Nations International Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political
    Rights (ICCPR), October 2014.

   46.      The Respondent's evidence before me thus contrasts  considerably
    with that before the panel in LH and IP who had the  Respondent's  2013
    and  2014  Operational  Guidance  Notes   (OGN)   respectively,   which
    summarised the Respondent's position at that time. As noted by a  panel
    of the Upper Tribunal in MD (Women Ivory Coast CG [2010] UKUT 215 (IAC)
    the distinction between the Respondent's  CIG  and  her  OGNs  are  not
    without a difference. The fact that the Respondent has incorporated up-
    to-date evidence which she has vetted and researched (see page 2 of the
    CIG) into her guidance is a matter of some import. The Respondent  puts
    forth no good reason why the Tribunal should not place weight upon  the
    Respondent's researched and vetted CIG and as I indicated earlier I  do
    so.

   47.     In the context of the Appellant's case, he is  a  Sinhalese  man
      returning to Sri Lanka as an openly gay  individual,  who  intends  to
      live as such, and whose estranged wife and family have threatened  him
      should he return. On that basis, in view of the evidence  relied  upon
      by the Respondent, which portrays a high percentage  of  violence  and
      other criminal acts being committed against gay men because  they  are
      gay and, in part on a quantitative analysis, leads me to conclude that
      there is a real risk of persecution on return to Sri Lanka because  of
      the Appellant's sexual identity as a gay man. Accordingly, I find that
      the Appellant is entitled to asylum.

    48.     I emphasise that this decision is not intended  to  be  guidance
      about gay men in Sri Lanka generally. It decides  that  the  Appellant
      has proved his case on his individual profile and the  accepted  facts
      in light of up-dated country evidence.

     49.    I therefore allow the appeal under the Refugee Convention.

The Human Rights Claim

      50. In light of my findings  that  the  Appellant  is  a  refugee  the
      argument that any enforced removal will infringe his human  rights  is
      academic, so I shall consider the Judge's decision on the hypothetical
      basis that he is not a refugee.

      51.   While the Judge's decision could  have  been  clearer  and  more
      focused, I am not satisfied that  he  materially  erred  in  law.  The
      Judge's decision must be read in the following context. He found  that
      there was family life between the Appellant and his partner - they had
      a close relationship and were living together since March  2015  in  a
      relationship akin to a  marriage  or  civil  partnership.  I  set  out
      earlier (at [9] and [10])  the  Judge's  reasons  for  concluding  the
      question  of  proportionality  fell  in  the  Appellant's  favour.  An
      essential ingredient to the assessment was that both the Appellant and
      his partner would face discrimination living as a gay  couple  in  Sri
      Lanka albeit not at a level crossing the threshold of persecution [47]
      & [63].

      52.   The Respondent's challenge (as pleaded in the  grounds)  to  the
      Judge's decision centres around three issues. First, he was  wrong  in
      finding that the Appellant's leave  had  not  been  curtailed  by  the
      Respondent; second, that his reasoning was inadequate by  his  failure
      to consider the possibility of the Appellant returning to Sri Lanka to
      apply for entry clearance and  third,  that  inadequate  reasons  were
      given for finding that it was unreasonable for the Appellant's partner
      to relocate to Sri Lanka.

      53.   These challenges to the Judge's decision are in my view  without
merit.

       54.    The  Respondent's  case  before  the  Judge   was   that   the
      relationship commenced at a time when the Appellant had  no  leave  to
      remain in the UK. Thus it was argued the Appellant had  no  legitimate
      expectation that he would be able to continue the relationship in  the
      UK [57]. In response to  that  argument  the  Judge  noted  that  "the
      Appellant was able through his solicitors to produce extracts from the
      Respondent's own records following an application  for  disclosure  of
      the relevant file........It is apparent from those  records  that  the
      Appellant's leave was curtailed on 10 July 2014 but that the notice to
      him was "served to file". The records go on to state at the  "time  of
      embarking the subject did have substantive leave." [57]

     55.    He continued at [58]:

      "I understand this to mean that the Respondent now accepts that  while
      she created a notice to him about the curtailment of  his  leave,  for
      whatever reason, this was never served upo.dn him and that she accepts
      that he continued to have substantive leave until  3  July  2015  (see
      page 6 of the decision letter). This has  to  mean  in  turn  that  he
      commenced his relationship with [his partner] whilst he was legally in
      the United Kingdom and, indeed, he claimed asylum while he  still  had
      that status, I so  find.  This  is  relevant  for  the  assessment  of
      considerations under section 117B."

     56.    The Respondent in her grounds argues that this is plainly  wrong
      because the notice of curtailment was deemed to be served because  she
      had no record of  the  Appellant's  address.  Reliance  is  placed  on
      "Article 8ZA(4) of the Immigration (Leave to Enter and  Remain)  Order
      2000",  but  the  applicable  provisions  are  not  set  out  therein.
      Helpfully, Ms Bayati does set them out in her detailed Rule 24  Reply.
      It is not necessary to set them out here as there is no dispute  about
      them. Essentially, if the notice cannot be served on the Appellant  or
      the service of such notice has failed then it is deemed to  have  been
      given.

     57.    The Appellant's case before the Judge was that  the  notice  had
      never been served upon him. His address was known  to  the  Respondent
      and to the college he was studying at before its licence was  revoked.
      Ms Bayati reproduced the evidence that  was  before  the  Judge  which
      fully supports his findings at [57]  &  [58].  The  Respondent's  bald
      assertion in the grounds that she did not  have  the  details  of  the
      Appellant's last address does not sit comfortably with  that  evidence
      and no error of law can thereby be discerned. I am  thus  inclined  to
      agree with Ms Bayati that the Respondent's challenge is misleading. Mr
      Tufan, whilst not conceding  the  issue,  was  unable  to  surmount  a
      response. That is not surprising in view of the evidence  produced  by
      the Appellant. I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled to  conclude
      that there had been no effective service of the notice of  curtailment
      and so the  relationship  commenced  whilst  the  Appellant  was  here
      lawfully. This challenge is plainly not made out.

      58.     As  for  the  second  ground,  viz.  the  Judge's  failure  to
      adequately deal with the possibility of the Appellant returning to Sri
      Lanka and making a valid application  for  entry  clearance,  while  I
      acknowledge that the Judge did not deal with the issue,  in  fairness,
      this was not a matter that was raised by the Respondent either in  the
      refusal or at the hearing. Mr Tufan submits that this is  nevertheless
      a material misdirection in law and reliance is placed  on  R  (on  the
      application  of  Chen)  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM-  Chikwamba-  temporary
      separation-proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).

     59.    This ground is misconceived. It was never the Respondent's  case
      that this was a Chikwamba situation since it has always been  accepted
      that he failed to meet the requirements of the Rules,  and  could  not
      hope to do so in an application for entry clearance. The reasoning  in
      the decision was in no way predicated on a Chikwamba type logic, since
      there were no prospects of  success  upon  an  application  for  entry
      clearance. The whole point was that if the Appellant returned  to  Sri
      Lanka, there would be an effective severance of  family  life,  unless
      the partner travelled with him.  Further,  as  recognised  in  Chen  a
      strong evidence-backed case may demonstrate good reason for  departing
      from  the  general  requirement  of  prior  entry  clearance.  In   my
      judgement, there were good reasons in this  case  on  account  of  the
      Judge's conclusion that the  Appellant  and  his  partner  would  face
      discrimination  on  return.   Even  if,  therefore,  the   Judge   had
      considered the issue of entry clearance,  it  is  unlikely  given  his
      findings that he would have reached a different conclusion.

      60.   This leads to the  third  ground  and  the  complaint  that  the
      reasons given for the Appellant's partner being unable to relocate  to
      Sri Lanka were inadequate. No particulars are given in the grounds  as
      to why that is so. It is clear to any reader of this decision why  the
      Judge concluded  the  Appellant's  partner  could  not  reasonably  be
      expected to relocate at [62]-[63]. Those reasons, which  I  shall  not
      repeat again here, were clear and adequately reasoned.

      61.   While Mr Tufan relied on the grounds he did not amplify them  in
      any detail in his submissions. He submitted that the issue of  whether
      the  Appellant's  leave  was  lawful  or  not  when  the  relationship
      commenced was something of a red herring as the  Judge  was  bound  to
      consider the Appellant's precarious status. This submission is plainly
      wrong. The Judge was aware that the Appellant's leave was  "precarious
      within the terms of the 2002 Act" and took that into account [62]. The
      Judge was clearly referring to section 117B of the 2002 Act - see [56]
      & [58] - and had regard to it. While the Judge did not spell  it  out,
      in view of his legitimate conclusion that there was family  life,  and
      that the relationship commenced at  a  time  when  the  Appellant  had
      lawful leave, the provisions of section 117(4) & (5) did not apply  to
      him.

      62.   In his submissions Mr Tufan raised two  further  issues.  First,
      that the Judge was wrong to apply an "insurmountable  obstacles"  test
      at [62] and further, was wrong to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  was
      financially independent within the meaning of section 117B  (3)  given
      his financial dependency on his partner [59]. While Ms Bayati did  not
      raise the issue, these are not matters upon which permission to appeal
      was granted, but as the representatives addressed the issues  I  shall
      deal with them.

      63.   While the use of the phrase "insurmountable obstacles"  at  [62]
      is unfortunate - it does not apply  to  a  proportionality  assessment
      outside of the Rules - it is clear in my view on a holistic reading of
      the decision that this does not  undermine  his  conclusion  that  the
      Appellant's partner could not be expected to  reasonably  relocate  to
      Sri Lanka. That conclusion was reached taking full account of and  the
      weight to be attached to the public interest.

      64.   While I  accept  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
      Appellant's economic self-sufficiency did not weigh in  the  interests
      of removal [59], it is apparent that even if the  Judge  had  factored
      this into his assessment, it would not have made a material difference
      to the outcome; there being no evidence the Appellant was likely to be
      a burden on the State. It is sufficiently clear from the way that  the
      decision is framed that the Judge did not in reality  simply  consider
      that  section  117B  was  a  sufficient  answer  to   the   issue   of
      proportionality. In the context of the  decision  as  a  whole  it  is
      evident that the Judge did  consider  the  other  factors  and  simply
      considered that the public interest in maintaining immigration control
      had been outweighed. In an otherwise balanced consideration I find the
      error is not material.

   65.      I am thus satisfied that on a holistic reading  of  the  Judge's
      decision that any errors, such as they  are,  are  not  material.  The
      Judge came to a rational conclusion that was clearly open  to  him  on
      the evidence. The Judge's decision in this respect shall stand.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal
on asylum grounds. I substitute a decision allowing the appeal under the
Refugee Convention.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal on human rights
grounds shall stand.



Signed      Date 25 June 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed      Date 25 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

