
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02060/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2019                     |On 29 May 2019                       |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                jagannath [s]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Bhuiyan of Londonium Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 3 March  1982.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 13 October 2009 as a Tier 4  (General)
    Student with leave  valid  until  27  October  2013.   He  returned  to
    Bangladesh on 5 January 2011 and returned to the UK on 20 January  2011
    on his student visa.  On 25 May 2011, the appellant's wife and daughter
    entered the UK.

 2. On 22 October 2013, the appellant applied for further leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student which was granted until 30  August  2015.
    On 1 September 2015, the appellant applied for further leave to  remain
    based upon his private and family life.  This application  was  refused
    on 16 January 2016.

 3. Then, on 20 January 2017, the appellant applied for asylum.   His  wife
    and daughter were dependants upon his application and claim.

 4. On 24 January 2018, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for asylum, humanitarian protection  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.  That decision was appealable to the  First-tier  Tribunal  by
    the appellant.  No appealable decisions were made  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's wife and daughter.  Nevertheless, all three lodged  notices
    of appeal with the First-tier Tribunal.  In respect of the  appellant's
    wife and daughter, the Duty Judge (Judge  S  Kaler)  determined  on  13
    February 2018 that  there  were  no  valid  appeals  as  no  appealable
    decisions had been made  in  respect  of  them.   That  conclusion  was
    clearly correct.

 5. The appellant's appeal  came  on  for  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 26 July 2018.  In a determination promulgated on 23  August
    2018, Judge Lever dismissed the appeal on  all  grounds.   However,  in
    doing so, Judge Lever appears to have understood there  to  be  appeals
    before him brought, not only by the appellant, but also by his wife and
    daughter.  They are referred to in the heading of the determination and
    the appeal file numbers, created by the First-tier Tribunal  when  they
    lodged their notices of appeal, are also set out in  the  determination
    heading.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  On 19 September  2018,  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Keeffe) granted the  appellant  permission
    limited to a single ground, namely that Judge Lever had been  wrong  in
    law to determine (and dismiss) appeals  by  the  appellant's  wife  and
    daughter because they had  no  valid  appeals  in  the  absence  of  an
    appealable decision being made against each of them by the Secretary of
    State.

 7. The respondent filed a rule 24 response on 1  November  2018  accepting
    the jurisdictional point upon which permission had alone been granted.

 8. At the hearing before us, Mr Mills, who represented  the  Secretary  of
    State, accepted that Judge Lever had been wrong to purport to determine
    appeals in respect of the appellant's wife and daughter as they had  no
    valid appeals as the Duty Judge had already determined.

 9. Mr Bhuiyan, who represented the appellant, invited us to strike out the
    appeal decision in relation to the appellant's wife and  daughter.   He
    did not seek to pursue the appeal on any further ground before  us  and
    indicated that matters had now been raised by the appellant which might
    form a fresh claim.

10. In our judgment, the only appeal before Judge Lever concerned  that  of
    the appellant.  There were no valid appeals brought by the  appellant's
    wife and daughter as no appealable decisions had been made  in  respect
    of them.

11. Judge Lever's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on all grounds
    stands - and it was not challenged before us.  But, for  the  avoidance
    of doubt, to the extent that Judge Lever purported  to  determine  (and
    dismiss) appeals brought by the appellant's wife and daughter,  he  had
    no jurisdiction to do so as no appealable decision  had  been  made  in
    respect of either of them.  To that extent,  therefore,  Judge  Lever's
    determination is not to be understood  as  determining  any  appeal  in
    respect of the appellant's wife and daughter.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                           Dated 29 May 2019









