


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/02844/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 26 September 2017            |On 2 October 2017               |
|Prepared on 27 September 2017   |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    H. M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant claimed asylum on 23 July 2015, having entered the
           UK unlawfully the previous day. That application was refused  on
           6 November 2015.
        2. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal was heard on  6  December
           2016 and it was dismissed by decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal
           Judge Head-Rapson promulgated on 29 December 2016.
        3. The Appellant was granted permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal on 15 March 2017 by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Doyle
           on the basis it was arguable that the decision was  inadequately
           reasoned. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 notice on 27 April 2017
           in response to that grant of permission, opposing it.  Thus  the
           matter comes before me.


      Error of Law?
        4. When the appeal was called on for  hearing  Ms  Brakaj  accepted
           that the grounds advanced two complaints. First that  the  Judge
           had failed to give examples of the vague and evasive answers the
           Appellant was thought to have given, and had failed to put  such
           behaviour to him to allow him to answer that perception.  Second
           that the Judge had given inadequate reasons  for  preferring  to
           give weight to a report  from  Amnesty  International  over  the
           content of a webpage taken from the Wikipedia site. As a result,
           it was argued, the decision was  inadequately  reasoned  to  the
           extent that the Appellant was unable to see why his  appeal  had
           been dismissed.
        5. In my judgement these complaints are in  reality  no  more  than
           disagreements with the Judge's conclusions,  and  assessment  of
           the weight that could be given to the evidence. The decision may
           be relatively brief, but it is quite clear to the reader why the
           Judge reached the conclusion that she did.  The  Judge  had  the
           benefit of seeing the  Appellant  give  evidence,  and  she  was
           plainly unimpressed not simply by his demeanour, but the content
           of the answers he gave to the questions he was  asked.  She  was
           not obliged to set out each and every example that  led  her  to
           that conclusion, it was sufficient to set out her conclusion  to
           that effect. Nor was there any obligation upon her  to  formally
           put to the Appellant the  proposition  that  he  had  given  the
           impression  of  being  vague  and  evasive  and  offer  him  the
           opportunity to answer that. Moreover there is no obvious  reason
           why the Judge should have placed greater weight upon the content
           of a webpage said to have been taken  from  the  Wikipedia  site
           rather than a report prepared by AI. It was plainly open to  her
           to make the assessment of weight  of  the  documentary  evidence
           placed  before  her  that  she  did,  and  that  assessment  was
           adequately reasoned.
        6. In the circumstances I am  satisfied  that  notwithstanding  the
           grant of permission the grounds identify  no  arguable  material
           error of law. The Judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  must
           therefore stand.





   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  29
      December 2016 did not involve the making of an error  of  law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 27 September 2017


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 27 September 2017
