
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02671/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2019                    |On 21 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     RG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Johnrose, Broudie Jackson & Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                   DECISION AND REASONS (given ex tempore)

      1. I have made an anonymity order because this decision refers to  the
         Appellant's asylum claim.

      2. The  Appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FtT') Judge Mark Davies sent on 23 May 2019,  dismissing
         her appeal on asylum grounds.



Background

      3. The appellant's claim can  be  summarised  as  follows.   In  early
         October she witnessed a car chase / police altercation  outside  of
         her apartment in Iran and over the course of the next  three  hours
         filmed various clips as to what took  place  in  the  street.   She
         claims that these included  a  person  being  shot  as  well  as  a
         'mopping up' operation.  Although she recorded five different video
         clips, these do not directly reveal  the  precise  nature  of  what
         happened over the course of  the  three  hours.   Nonetheless,  the
         appellant claims that she shared these video clips with her  family
         via WhatsApp.  Shortly after that when she was not at home but  her
         sister was, the family members of a  man  involved  in  the  police
         operation visited the home and asked if  anything  had  been  seen.
         The sister told these people  about  the  video  and  provided  the
         appellant's number.  Days later, the  Etelaat  came  to  the  house
         looking for the appellant.  She was not home at the time as she was
         staying at her mother's house.  Her husband  was  arrested  at  his
         place of work and shortly after  this,  the  appellant  decided  to
         leave Iran.

      4. That summary of the claim is set out in considerably more detail in
         the appellant's responses to the asylum interview and in a  witness
         statement dated 15 April 2019.  The respondent refused  the  asylum
         claim for detailed reasons set out in a letter dated 7 March  2019.
         The appellant appealed against this  decision  to  the  FtT,  which
         heard her appeal on 7 May 2019.

Appeal proceedings

      5. The  FtT  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  made  adverse
         credibility findings.  The FtT did not accept that she  provided  a
         credible account and dismissed the appeal for those reasons.

      6. The appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal ('UT') relying upon two  grounds  of  appeal.   The  first
         ground submits that the FtT  failed  to  take  account  of  footage
         within the video clips showing that there was a police  car  within
         view which supported the  appellant's  claim.   The  second  ground
         deals with the credibility findings more directly  and  makes  four
         discrete points, which I shall deal with in more detail later.

      7. Although permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  FtT,  it  was
         granted by UT Judge Lindsley in  a  decision  dated  9  July  2019.
         Judge Lindsley said this:

             "The  grounds  of  appeal  contend  in  summary  as   follows.
             Firstly, that it was not rationally  open  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal to find at paragraph 62  of  the  decision  that  the
             Etelaat was not involved with the shooting on the  appellant's
             video clips where they contain a police car.  Secondly,  there
             is a failure to give clear and adequate reasons  the  findings
             at paragraphs 63 and 64 conflict as to whether it was accepted
             that the appellant did give this footage to her family.  There
             was a  full  description  as  to  how  this  happened  in  the
             appellant's statement and there is a failure  to  engage  with
             this at paragraph 66 of the decision.  There is also a failure
             to give adequate reasons for the conclusion that  the  Iranian
             authorities would not  feel  threatened  by  the  material  at
             paragraph 72 of the decision given what is set out at pages 55
             to 60 of the appellant's  bundle.    There  is  a  failure  to
             identify  the  alleged  inconsistencies  in  the   appellant's
             evidence at paragraph 74 of the decision.  The  second  ground
             is arguable.   It  is  arguable  that  the  decision  contains
             insufficient reasoning in light of  the  evidence  before  the
             First-tier Tribunal.  The first ground seems less wrong but it
             may be argued."

      8. The respondent has relied upon a Rule 24 notice dated 17 July 2019,
         which deals in the main  with  the  first  ground  of  appeal.   In
         relation to the second ground of appeal this is said:

             "In regards to the alleged inconsistencies as  to  whether  or
             not the appellant showed the video to her family, the  IJ  was
             entitled to note the  inconsistency  in  her  claim  that  she
             videoed the incident as it was so  unusual  yet  also  claimed
             that these incidents happened all the time in Iran."

Hearing

      9. At the hearing before me, Ms Johnrose relied upon  her  grounds  of
         appeal and at my invitation focused upon  submissions  relevant  to
         the second ground of appeal.  In response, Mr Bates relied upon the
         Rule 24 notice and took me through  the  decision  to  support  his
         submission that it was adequately reasoned.

Error of law discussion

     10. I begin by dealing with the second  ground  of  appeal  because  as
         noted by Judge Lindsley when granting permission to appeal, this is
         the stronger ground.  It is divided into four parts which I propose
         to deal with in turn.

     11. It is firstly submitted that [63] and  [64]  of  the  decision  are
         inconsistent with one another.  At [63] the  judge  said  this  (my
         emphasis), "She may have passed these phone clips to her family  or
         intrinsically they are not  particularly  interesting."   The  very
         next line in [64] reads as follows:

             "It is not credible that the appellant would have passed these
             phone clips to her family members via WhatsApp when she stated
             incidents like this took place all the time and  therefore  it
             is surprising that her family would have any interest in  such
             an incident."

     12. Mr Bates submitted that there was  no  real  inconsistency  between
         these two paragraphs because [63] was  dealing  with  the  inherent
         plausibility of passing on the video clips whereas [64] was dealing
         with credibility.  The difficulty with this submission is that  the
         rejection  as  based  on  credibility  in  [64]  turns  solely   on
         plausibility.  The judge did not consider  it  plausible  that  the
         appellant would have passed on the video clips on  the  basis  that
         they would not have held any real interest  to  anyone  because  as
         claimed by the  appellant  these  sorts  of  incidents  took  place
         regularly  in  Iran.   I  therefore  conclude  that  there  is   an
         unexplained  discrepancy  on  a  core  aspect  of  the  appellant's
         account.

     13. I have noted the observations in the Rule 24 notice that  incidents
         involving the authorities targeting  civilians  adversely  in  this
         manner might be well  publicised  in  Iran  and  might  take  place
         regularly.  However, that does not necessarily mean that  they  are
         witnessed by ordinarily civilians in the public sphere on a regular
         basis, and the apparent plausibility  of  the  appellant's  actions
         must be viewed in this light.

     14. Second, it is contended that where the judge said at [66]  that  it
         is unbelievable that the appellant's 14-year-old sister would  pass
         information to the family members of the  man  that  was  shot,  he
         failed to take into account the detailed evidence set  out  in  the
         appellant's   witness   statement   explaining   the    surrounding
         circumstances.  The appellant's witness statement says this:

             "17. The following day I went out shopping my sister was  home
                  alone  because  she  did  not  start  school   until   the
                  afternoon.  My sister later explained  to  me  that  three
                  people had come to the door asking if anyone had seen  the
                  events of the previous day.  It appears that these  people
                  are  going  door  to  door  looking  for  anyone  who  had
                  witnessed the events of the previous  day.   These  people
                  explained that their brother  had  been  shot  and  no-one
                  knows anything about what happened and when they have been
                  to the police station the police have denied any knowledge
                  about this.  They were crying and very upset.

             18.  My sister was moved by these people.  She wanted to  help
                  them.  She told them that her sister  had  witnessed  this
                  event and she had filmed the event.  My sister  agreed  to
                  forward the film footage to them she  also  gave  them  my
                  phone number.

             19.  My sister was 14 years old at the time and she would  not
                  have realised the effect that her actions would have on my
                  life.

             20.  When I returned from shopping my sister was not home  but
                  when she  returned  from  school  she  told  me  what  had
                  happened.  I was upset about this and I asked her why  she
                  had done this.  I told her that she  should  have  checked
                  with me first.  My sister explained that the  family  were
                  very upset and crying and she wanted to help  them.   When
                  she told me that she had also given them my phone number I
                  was scared that they would call me and want  me  to  be  a
                  witness or ask me to make a report.

             21.  I waited for my husband to return from work and explained
                  what had happened.  I decided I was going to go  and  stay
                  with my mother for a while so I'd be out of  the  way  and
                  could not be drawn any further to this matter."

     15. When finding the sister's actions  to  be  implausible,  the  judge
         failed to add  address  or  engage  with  the  claimed  surrounding
         circumstances as set out in the witness  statement.   At  [67]  the
         judge asks the two  rhetorical  questions:  how  would  the  family
         members of the men who were shot be aware that  the  appellant  had
         taken a video?  Why would the sister not contact the appellant, who
         had her mobile phone with her,  before  providing  any  information
         regarding the incident?  The answers to both of these questions are
         found  within  the  appellant's  witness  statement  itself.    The
         appellant explained in that statement that the  family  members  of
         the men were not aware that the appellant had  taken  a  video  but
         became aware having gone door to door looking for  anyone  who  had
         witnessed the events of the day.  As  to  the  credibility  of  the
         sister providing information without speaking to the appellant, the
         appellant herself indicated within  the  statement,  that  she  was
         surprised at her sister's behaviour and deeply upset about it,  but
         explained that her sister was young,  naive  and  was  particularly
         moved by how upset the family were and that explained her  actions.
         Those explanations have not been engaged with by the judge.

     16. The third matter relates to the plausibility of the entire account.
          At [72] the judge said this:

             "I cannot accept that the Iranian authorities  are  reasonably
             likely to have an adverse interest in  the  appellant  on  the
             basis she has put forward.  There is no  reason  for  them  to
             believe  that  the  appellant  had  any  connection  with   an
             opposition group.  There is no reason for them to feel in  any
             way threatened by the film clips that the appellant had  taken
             if  indeed  the  Iranian  authorities  were  involved  in  the
             incident which the appellant had filmed."

     17. The judge failed to consider the plausibility  of  the  appellant's
         account in the context of the country background evidence  relevant
         to Iran.  It is well-known that the Iranian authorities react  with
         a heavy hand to any person who is perceived to  have  acted  in  an
         anti-regime manner and that extends to those who  in  any  way  are
         perceived  as  supporting  anti-regime   groups.    The   appellant
         explained in her witness statement why the authorities  would  view
         her adversely even though the film clip did  not  show  the  actual
         shooting or any actual direct nefarious activities.  She said  this
         within her witness statement:

             "27. Around two weeks before the incident that I filmed  there
                  had  been  a  march  by  the  leaders  of  the  regime  to
                  commemorate the Defence Holy Week which is an annual event
                  in Ahwaz connected to the Iran/Iraq war and there had been
                  a terrorist attack which had been blamed on the  Monafegin
                  group.  The authorities claimed that the man I filmed  had
                  been part of the Monafegin group.  Following the terrorist
                  attack the authorities have arrested numerous  people  and
                  many people have been executed.

             28.  This is how the authorities react in  Iran.   If  there's
                  any kind of attack the regime then  will  arrest  numerous
                  people in order to  quash  any  possible  rebellion.   The
                  authorities were claiming I was connected with this  group
                  and therefore I  was  wanted.   Their  news  report  about
                  events in Ahwaz during this time where women and  children
                  were arrested along with intellectuals and activists so  I
                  could have been included in these arrests.

             29.   My  husband  was  beaten  and  ill-treated  during   his
                  detention.

             30.  After his release he called  me  and  told  me  what  had
                  happened and he warned  me  that  I  needed  to  leave  my
                  mother's address immediately because I was in  danger  and
                  the  authorities  would  be  able  to  locate  me  at   my
                  mother's."

     18. The appellant has explained that her claim  was  not  based  merely
         upon the recording itself but upon  her  fear  that  she  would  be
         perceived  by  the  authorities  to  have  a  connection  with  the
         Monafegin group.  That aspect of her claim does not appear to  have
         been considered by the judge in any detail.  The judge did  mention
         that there is no reason for the authorities  to  believe  that  the
         appellant had any connection with an opposition group.  That is not
         accurate.  There was a reason for the authorities to  believe  that
         she was connected - she would have been perceived  to  have  helped
         the  family  members  of  a  person  perceived  to  be  within  the
         opposition group.  Although the link was not direct  and  might  be
         tenuous, in the  eyes  of  the  Iranian  authorities  that  can  be
         sufficient.   Had  the  judge  taken  into  account   the   country
         background evidence and considered the plausibility of the  account
         in that context, then his reasoning on credibility  may  have  been
         different.

     19. The final point raised in the second ground relates to [74] of  the
         decision, where the judge says that the appellant had not explained
         the inconsistencies in her evidence but then goes on to describe or
         summarise implausibilities in  that  evidence.   When  I  asked  Ms
         Johnrose what inconsistencies there  were,  she  acknowledged  that
         there was an inconsistency relating to the date that the  appellant
         left Iran and that there was an  inconsistency  raised  within  the
         respondent's decision letter regarding the gathering of  statements
         in  the  aftermath  of  the  event  that  led  to  the  appellant's
         departure.  The former reason does not appear to have troubled  the
         judge and the latter reason is not referred to at  all  within  the
         decision even though there were two statements from the interpreter
         and  the  immigration  caseworker  within  the  appellant's  bundle
         explaining why there was no discrepancy at all regarding the taking
         of statements.  In these circumstances, it difficult  to  ascertain
         which inconsistencies the judge was referring to.

     20. When these four matters are viewed cumulatively I am satisfied that
         the reasons provided for making an adverse credibility finding  are
         inadequate and/or unsupported  by  the  witness  statement  of  the
         appellant and the country background evidence.  The  second  ground
         of appeal identifies material errors of law, justifying the setting
         aside of the FtT's decision.  Having  reached  that  conclusion,  I
         need not address ground one.

Disposal

     21. The findings of fact need to be remade completely.  That is  likely
         to involve  a  detailed  fact-finding  exercise,  including  cross-
         examination that is best done in the FtT bearing in mind  paragraph
         7.2 of the Practice Direction.

Decision

     22. The FtT's decision contains a material error of law and it  is  set
         aside.

     23. The appeal is remitted to the FtT where the decision will be remade
         de novo by a FtT Judge other than Judge Mark Davies.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  UTJ  Plimmer                                             Date:   16
August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

