
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/02648/2017

                                                 PA/02617/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 May 2018                            |On 11 May 2018                    |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                              Fatemeh Hosseini
                               Javad Hosseini
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants:        Mr Chris Boyle, with Halliday Reeves Law Firm,
solicitors
For the respondent:        Ms Rhona Patterson, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellants appeal with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against the respondent's  decision
   to refuse them international protection under the Refugee  Convention  or
   humanitarian protection  grounds,  but  allowing  them  on  human  rights
   grounds, with regard to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  HC395
   (as amended) and Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

2. The appellants are a mother and her 24 year old son,  ethnic  Hazaras  of
   Afghan origin,  but  neither  was  born  in  Afghanistan:  the  principal
   appellant was born in Iraq, and the second appellant was  born  in  Iran.
   The principal appellant is a single head of  household,  having  divorced
   her Pakistani husband after the birth of the second appellant.

3. The appellants assert that they are  stateless.  The  respondent  treated
   the appellants as citizens of Afghanistan.

Background

4. The principal appellant was born in Iraq in  1976  to  parents  who  were
   both Afghan citizens.  Her grandparents were all Afghan citizens, but the
   principal appellant's father had left Afghanistan  long  before  she  was
   born, to live in Iraq.  The principal appellant continued to live in Iraq
   until her father died in 1992, when she would have been 16 years old.

5. The principal appellant then moved to Iran,  where  she  lived  with  her
   maternal grandparents.  Her brother was also living in  Iran.   While  in
   Iran, the  principal  appellant  met  and  married  a  Pakistani  citizen
   husband.  The second appellant, her son, was born there in 1994, but  the
   marriage  failed  and  the  parties  are  now  divorced.   The  principal
   appellant only ever had a temporary residency  permit  in  Iran,  as  her
   mother's dependent.  Neither she nor her son ever lived in Pakistan.

6. In 2015,  the  principal  appellant's  brother  was  involved  in  a  car
   accident in Iran.  She thinks that the driver of  the  other  car  was  a
   member of Sepah, part of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps  in  Iran.
   The principal appellant says that she and her son would be at  risk  from
   Sepah if returned to Iran now.

7. On 25 April 2015, the appellants  were  deported  to  Afghanistan.   They
   were  admitted,  and  spent  5  days  in  Afghanistan  before   returning
   clandestinely to Iran, where they stayed with the  principal  appellant's
   maternal aunt in Tehran for about 2  months,  before  leaving  to  go  to
   Turkey on 22 November 2015.

8. The appellants spent about 5 months  in  Turkey,  then  took  a  boat  to
   Greece, from where they travelled by  van  and  lorry,  arriving  in  the
   United Kingdom on 5 September 2016 clandestinely, and claiming asylum the
   next day, 6 September 2016.  The appellants say  they  cannot  return  to
   Afghanistan because they are not Afghan citizens.

9. The respondent considered the question  of  nationality  of  Afghanistan,
   Iraq, Iran and Pakistan in turn, concluding that the  appellants  had  or
   were entitled to claim Afghan citizenship, but that there was no risk  of
   persecution to them in any of those countries.

10. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11. The First-tier Tribunal had the benefit of expert reports from Dr  Fatah
   (regarding the appellants documents) and Ms Sheri Laizer,  regarding  the
   risk to the appellants as 'unwarranted Afghans in Iran', their  inability
   to access Iraq as the principal appellant had lost her  right  to  reside
   there when  her  father  died,  and  the  risk  to  them  as  Hazaras  in
   Afghanistan.

12. At [79] in his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  that  the
   appellants had not discharged the burden of proof on them  of  satisfying
   him that they were not Afghan citizens and he proceeded on the basis that
   they were of Afghan nationality.

13. The Judge found that anywhere in Afghanistan,  all  of  which  would  be
   internal  relocation  for  them  as  they  had  never  lived  there,  the
   appellants would be regarded as incomers, since they were farsi  speakers
   and had not grown up there.  At [81], he found that neither appellant was
   enough of an insider to be able to integrate into Afghanistan, given that
   they had spent only 5 days in that country, following  deportation,  that
   they had no family or other support in Afghanistan,  and  that  resources
   there were already strained.

14. The Judge found at [85] that both appellants were  outside  the  country
   of their nationality,  whichever  country  that  might  be  and  that  in
   Afghanistan they would form part of a minority  group,  'the  very  large
   number of Afghans the Iranians are deporting' and that the government  of
   Afghanistan was facing significant difficulties in providing support  for
   that group. He accepted that there was significant discrimination against
   the Hazara in Afghanistan, but below the level of persecution, and  that,
   even having regard to their individual circumstances, the  risk  of  harm
   also did not meet the test in Article 15 of the  Qualification  Directive
   2004/83/EC, including Article 15C thereof.

15. He also found that there was no risk of persecution  to  the  appellants
   in Iraq or Pakistan.  As regards Iran, and having regard to the  evidence
   of Ms Laizer about mass deportation of Afghans  from  Iran,  he  did  not
   consider Iran to be a viable destination for removal, since they would be
   identifiable on arrival as persons who had previously  been  deported  to
   Afghanistan, which would be likely to be repeated, perhaps with detention
   and maltreatment on arrival.

16. The Judge allowed the appeals.  He did so at  [94]  only  on  Article  8
   grounds,  although  under  Decision,  the  allowing  of  the  appeals  is
   unqualified.

17. The appellants appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  This is, in  effect,  an
   'upgrade' appeal, seeking international protection instead  of  leave  to
   remain on private and family life grounds.

Permission to appeal

18. The relevant paragraph of the grounds of appeal is as follows:

         "The First-tier Tribunal Judge does not appear  to  have  made  any
         findings as to why the appeals have  not  been  allowed  under  the
         Refugee Convention. He has  simply  stated  at  paragraph  89  'The
         appeals are dismissed in terms of the Refugee  Convention'  and  at
         paragraph 93 'The appeals are  dismissed  in  terms  of  the  other
         relevant ECHR Articles' and has not gone  on  to  consider  whether
         there would be a breach of Article 3 ECHR to return the  appellants
         to Afghanistan, a country which he has accepted they are  nationals
         of [sic]."

19. Permission to appeal was granted (out of time but  with  a  satisfactory
   explanation for the delay), on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to make  any  clear  finding  as  to
   whether the appellants or either of them are stateless, that he failed to
   make a clear finding as to whether they were citizens of Afghanistan,  or
   whether Article 3 ECHR would be breached if  they  were  to  be  returned
   there.

Rule 24 Reply

20. In reply, the respondent noted that at  [79],  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge appeared to accept that the appellants were  Afghan  citizens,  and
   that any failure to make a finding on the risk of  persecution  in  their
   most recent country of habitual residence was immaterial to  the  outcome
   of the appeal.   The Judge had considered paragraph 15C of the Refugee or
   Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations
   2006 (as amended) but had rejected  the  contention  that  any  provision
   thereof applied to these appellants.

21. The respondent contended that the consideration of Article  3  ECHR  was
   subsumed in that consideration, and that there was a finding, accepted by
   the respondent, that the appellants had not challenged the finding by the
   First-tier Tribunal that there were  'no  obstacles  to  integration'  in
   Afghanistan.  The possibility of return to Iran, Iraq  and  Pakistan  had
   also been considered properly, the appellants obviously being entitled to
   claim nationality in a number of countries.

22. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

23. The parties' submissions at the Upper Tribunal hearing are  set  out  in
   my record of proceedings and do not take matters much  further  than  the
   grounds of appeal and the grant above. The Secretary  of  State  accepted
   that there would be obstacles to integration in Afghanistan.  She had not
   challenged the Judge's decision  to  allow  the  appeal  under  paragraph
   276ADE and Article 8 ECHR.

24. This appeal therefore concerns only whether the appellants are  entitled
   to  the  enlarged  support  available  to  those  entitled  international
   protection under  the  Refugee  Convention,  humanitarian  protection  or
   Article 3 ECHR.

25. For the appellants, Mr Boyle accepted that neither Afghanistan nor  Iran
   permits dual citizenship: in order for the appellants to be  entitled  to
   Iranian citizenship, they would have to have shown that they  could  meet
   its requirements and that they had renounced any other  citizenship  they
   held.

Afghan citizenship laws

26. The refusal letter sets out the Afghan citizenship laws, in the form  of
   a summary prepared by www.multiplecitizenship.com which the Secretary  of
   State does not dispute, extracted the Official Gazette of the Ministry of
   Justice for the Republic of Afghanistan, March 19, 1992:

         "CITIZENSHIP: Citizenship laws are based upon the Official  Gazette
         of the Ministry of Justice for the Republic  of  Afghanistan  dated
         March 19, 1992.

         BY BIRTH: Birth  within  the  territory  of  Afghanistan  does  not
         automatically  confer  citizenship.  Exception  is   a   child   of
         unknown/stateless parents.
         BY DESCENT: Child whose mother or father is a  citizen,  regardless
         of the country of birth.
         MARRIAGE: Foreign national who marries a citizen of Afghanistan  is
         granted citizenship upon application.
         BY  NATURALIZATION:  Afghan  citizenship  may  be   acquired   upon
         fulfillment  of  the  following  conditions:  Person  was  born  in
         Afghanistan and has resided continually in  country  for  at  least
         five years.
         DUAL CITIZENSHIP: NOT RECOGNIZED. Exceptions: A former  citizen  of
         Afghanistan, who fled the country due to political  instability  or
         war and has acquired new citizenship, may still  hold  "unofficial"
         Afghan citizenship. This is recognition that  those  who  fled  the
         country might some day want to return as  Afghan  citizens  without
         losing new citizenship.
         The Afghani spouse  of  a  foreign  national  is  not  required  to
         renounce  Afghan  citizenship  unless  demanded  by  the   spouse's
         country.

         LOSS OF CITIZENSHIP:
         VOLUNTARY:  Voluntary  renunciation  of   Afghan   citizenship   is
         permitted by law. Contact the  Embassy  for  details  and  required
         paperwork. The  following  persons  are  not  allowed  to  renounce
         citizenship: Person who has continuing financial obligations to the
         government or other institutions. Person who has been convicted  of
         a crime  and  sentenced  to  jail.  Persons  involved  in  national
         security, whose loss to the country might endanger Afghan security.


         INVOLUNTARY: The following  is  grounds  for  involuntary  loss  of
         Afghan citizenship: Person voluntarily acquires foreign citizenship
         and does not fall under the exempted status described  under  "Dual
         Citizenship." Persons concerned with dual  citizenship  should  not
         assume their Afghan citizenship was lost by default. Embassy should
         be contacted and citizenship formally renounced. "

27. The appellants did not seek to advance the full version  of  the  Afghan
   citizenship laws, or indeed the laws of Iraq, Iran or Pakistan concerning
   citizenship.  It is the appellants  who  bear  the  burden  of  proof  in
   relation to their actual or putative citizenship.

Discussion

28. The principal appellant's case is that  her  parents  were  both  Afghan
   citizens.  In that case, she herself is Afghan by descent, 'regardless of
   the country of birth' and so is  the  appellant,  because  the  principal
   appellant's citizenship passes to him.  On that analysis, these claimants
   are not stateless.

29. The next point to note is that Afghanistan law does not allow  for  dual
   citizenship except for those who have  fled  the  country  and  taken  up
   tactical second  citizenships,  but  may  wish  to  return  some  day  to
   Afghanistan without losing such  citizenships.   There  is  also  express
   provision that the Afghan spouse of a foreign national is not required to
   renounce her Afghan  citizenship  unless  the  spouse's  country  demands
   renunciation.  The principal appellant's brief marriage  to  a  Pakistani
   citizen  would  therefore  not  have  operated  to  renounce  any  Afghan
   citizenship she held.

30. The summary states that otherwise, renunciation must be done  expressly;
   that 'persons concerned with dual citizenship  should  not  assume  their
   Afghan citizenship was lost by default'; and that the Embassy  should  be
   contacted and  citizenship  formally  renounced,  if  that  is  what  the
   appellant wishes to do.

31. I treat the appellants as Afghan citizens.   They  are  not,  and  never
   have been, stateless, nor have they renounced their  Afghan  citizenship.
   It is quite clear that their nationality is Afghan.

32. The appellants may have  been  ordinarily  resident  in  Iraq  (for  the
   mother) and Iran (for both of them) but they never had any right to  live
   in either country  and  there  was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal  on  which  a  potential  right  of  re-entry,  still  less   of
   nationality,  in  either  country,  could  be  constructed.   The  second
   appellant,  as  the  son  of  a  Pakistani  father,  may  have  had  some
   entitlement to  Pakistani  citizenship  but  the  evidence  on  that  was
   vanishingly slight.

33. Nor is it right to say  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  no
   findings as to why  the  appeals  were  not  allowed  under  the  Refugee
   Convention.  There are adequate findings on that question, in relation to
   each of the countries under consideration.   In  particular,  in  finding
   that Article 15 is not met, the Judge did engage with the Article 3  ECHR
   test (see Articles 15(a) and 15(b)).  If that test is not  met,  and  the
   Refugee Convention test is not met,  the  appellants  could  not  succeed
   under Article 3 ECHR.

34. For all of the above reasons, these appeals are dismissed because  there
   is no material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

35. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Date:         10 May 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
