
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  PA/02047/2015
                                                               PA/02821/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 22 August 2019                    |
|Decision given orally                |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                   (1)  FB
                                   (2)  Eb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S McTaggart, Elliot-Trainor Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As this appeal involves children I make an order for anonymity pursuant
    to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    prohibiting  disclosure  of  any  matter   that   may   lead   to   the
    identification  of  the  appellants  and   other   parties   to   these
    proceedings.  Any breach may lead to contempt proceedings.

 2. The appellants, daughter and mother, who were born  in  1978  and  1956
    respectively, are citizens of Brazil.  Their appeals  are  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox who for reasons given in  his
    decision dated 19 February 2018 dismissed  their  appeals  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision  refusing  their  protection  claims  for
    reasons set out in letters dated 12 October 2015  and  17  March  2016.
    Those letters also dealt with the human  rights  aspects  in  play  for
    these appellants as well the children of the first appellant G, who  is
    now an adult, and J, who was born in the UK and has been  here  for  10
    years.

 3.  The  judge  set  out  the  appellants'   immigration   histories   and
    circumstances as follows:

         "6.  The  Appellants'  immigration  history  is  as  follows.   The
             Appellants are  in  effect  a  family  unit.   They  are  from
             Anapolis  in  Brazil.   They  have  extended  family   members
             remaining there.  The first Appellant  claims  that  12  years
             ago, or thereabouts, her son's father, Carlos,  used  to  beat
             her when she was living with him and her son.  She  claims  to
             have reported this to the police  on  two  occasions.   Police
             officers came to speak of him.  In 2008, when the family  were
             in Dublin, the first Appellant claims that her  son's  father,
             Carlos threatened her and said that if she did not  stay  with
             him, he would kill her.  It is also  maintained  that  he  has
             been in various relationships one of which  she  claims  is  a
             marriage.

         7.   She further claims that when Carlos is on the  phone  speaking
             to their son, he will ask to speak to the first Appellant  and
             threaten her.  She also claims  that  he  abuses  her  on  the
             telephone.  The last time that he is claimed to have done this
             was in January 2015.  She claims not to know what Carlos  does
             for a living now.  She is not in touch with him.

         8.   The Appellant claims  that  her  daughter's  father  lives  in
             Switzerland.  He has claimed that if she returns to Brazil  he
             will take their daughter away.  He has made this thread  [sic]
             on three occasions. The last  occasion  he  did  this  was  in
             November 2014.  She claims never to have  discussed  returning
             to Brazil with her daughter's father.   She  claims  that  her
             daughter's father does not help with the daughter's  life  and
             has never contacted her.

         9.   The first Appellant has maintained that she does not  want  to
             return to Brazil or be forced to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,
             because she cannot provide the same level of education for her
             children in Brazil, as she can in the  UK.   She  also  claims
             that her daughter's medication is expensive in Brazil.

         10.  The first Appellant fears return to Brazil as her son's father
             will try to kill her and her daughter's  father  will  try  to
             take her daughter away from her.

         11.  The second Appellant is the mother  of  the  first  Appellant.
             She mirrors her daughters claim in the detail of her  account.
             She has claimed that her daughter was in a  relationship  with
             Carlos Passos Curado for five years, during which  time  their
             son [G], a dependent upon the  first  Appellant's  claim,  was
             born.  The second Appellant claims that the  relationship  was
             turbulent, and Carlos would regularly  threaten  to  kill  the
             first Appellant, and her daughter would come to stay with  her
             when they argued.  In the alternative it is claimed  that  the
             threats to kill her daughter only began when the  relationship
             had ended.

         12.  The second Appellant claims that 10 years  before  her  asylum
             interview the first Appellant had discovered that  Carlos  was
             involved in selling illegal drugs and this caused her  to  end
             the relationship.  Carlos had gone to the  second  Appellant's
             house on several occasions and said that he would kill her, no
             matter how long it took.  It  is  claimed  that  her  daughter
             ended the relationship with Carlos and she and  her  son  left
             Brazil approximately 12 years prior to the second  Appellant's
             asylum interview.  This would suggest that the first Appellant
             left Brazil in and around 2003.  Neither  the  first  and  the
             second Appellant have returned  to  Brazil  since  that  time.
             They both claim to fear Carlos.

         13.  The second Appellant gives an alternative version of events to
             that recorded above, in that, Carlos and the  first  Appellant
             went  to  live  in  Portugal  together  before  travelling  to
             Northern Ireland, in and around  2007.   The  purpose  of  the
             visit was to visit Carlos's mother who used  to  live  in  the
             United Kingdom.  It is claimed that after 56 months in the UK,
             Carlos returned to Brazil, unable to force the first Appellant
             to accompany him.

         14.  An alternative claim has also been made that Carlos has  never
             been to the UK to visit his son.  The  second  Appellant  also
             claims of [sic] prior to  her  departure  from  Brazil  Carlos
             asked her to help him re-establish his relationship  with  the
             first Appellant.  The second Appellant refused to do so.   She
             did not agree that they should  be  in  a  relationship.   She
             claims Carlos told her that he was  aware  that  she  did  not
             approve of the relationship and that if  the  first  Appellant
             refused to return to the relationship he would kill the second
             Appellant and her husband.  The second Appellant claims to  be
             estranged from her husband.  He is an alcoholic and has abused
             her.

         15.  It is claimed that the threats made by Carlos were reported to
             police on two occasions at two different police stations.   It
             is claimed the police did not do anything to help her.

         16.  In November 2009 she claims she travelled to Ireland to  visit
             the first Appellant and help her following the  birth  of  her
             second child, Jennifer, in and around March 2009.   The  first
             Appellant asked her mother to remain at  [sic]  with  her  and
             help with the children.  She agreed to do this.

         17.  The second Appellant fears that  if  she  were  to  return  to
             Brazil, that Carlos would carry out his threats to kill her."

 4. After a survey of the evidence, the judge directed himself in  respects
    of aspects of the case including a concession  that  the  appeals  were
    proceeding on the basis of the human rights claims only.  He reached  a
    number of conclusions and finally explained at [65] as follows:

         "65. On the evidence before  me  today  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Appellants  have  not  provided   any   credible   basis   for
             challenging the assertions, analyses and  conclusions  in  the
             Respondent's refusal  letters.   On  the  evidence  before  me
             today,  I  am  satisfied  those   assertions,   analyses   and
             conclusions  are  valid  and  tenable  and  I  reach   similar
             conclusions myself  [sic]  like  reasons.   I  find  that  the
             Appellant's failure to claim asylum when they could have first
             claimed while in Portugal and The Republic of Ireland, as well
             as in the UK, without a satisfactory  explanation,  undermines
             the credibility of the Appellant's claim to have come  to  the
             United Kingdom to escape  persecution.   That  credibility  is
             further undermined by the inconsistencies and implausibilities
             in the story, examples of which I have referred to  above  and
             more fully outlined in the Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal
             letters.  I find therefore that the core  of  the  Appellants'
             account of persecution lacks credibility and is a  fabrication
             designed to gain access to the United Kingdom."

 5. The judge continued at [66] and [67] :

         "66. On the evidence before me today [sic] am  satisfied  that  the
             Appellants are economic migrants and  have  not  come  to  the
             United Kingdom to seek international protection.

         67.  In light of the above conclusions, I find  that  the  decision
             Appealed against which would not cause the United  Kingdom  to
             be in breach of the law or  its  obligations  under  the  1950
             Convention."

 6. The grounds of challenge remind the reader that the  asylum  claim  was
    not pursued and the appeal proceeded  under  Article  8  only.   It  is
    contended that the judge had failed  to  apply  Appendix  FM  and  Rule
    276ADE to his consideration (ground one).  The reference  that  he  had
    made to Devaseelan  was  irrational  as  there  had  been  no  previous
    determination by a judge.  Furthermore, the judge had erred  materially
    in failing to have regard to the provisions of section 117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  in  the  light  of  the
    submissions  made  to  the   effect   that   there   were   "qualifying
    children"(ground two).  In addition, it is  contended  that  the  judge
    failed to adequately deal with an expert report by Dr  Bratten  (ground
    three).    Furthermore,   other   areas   are   identified,   including
    consideration of Zambrano which had not been advanced at any stage.  It
    is argued that the judge appeared  not  to  have  understood  that  the
    youngest dependant had been born in Northern Ireland and had lived  her
    entire life there (ground four).

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but granted on renewal to the Upper Tribunal by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker.

 8. Submissions began with the candid observation by  Mr  Diwnycz  that  Mr
    McTaggart might well be pushing an open door particularly in the  light
    of the reference  to  Devaseelan.   Mr  McTaggart  agreed  the  summary
    grounds that I have set out above.  He argued that the first  appellant
    fell to be considered under Appendix EX1 as referred to in [56] of  the
    relevant refusal letter based on the elder of the two  children  having
    lived in the United Kingdom for seven years and being a minor when  the
    application was made to the Secretary of State.

 9. I consider that Mr Diwnycz  was  correct  to  express  as  he  did  his
    position in relation to ground one.  The approach of the judge  to  the
    Rules as set out in [36] of his decision appears to have  been  on  the
    basis that he was stopped  from  considering  this  aspect  further  by
    reference to Devaseelan.  It is not clear why the judge thought this to
    be the case.  Mr McTaggart accepted that the elder of the two  children
    was an adult by the time of the hearing but the younger child had  been
    in the United Kingdom for more than seven years by that date  and  fell
    for consideration under these provisions.

10. As to the second ground which required considerations of reasonableness
    with reference to in particular the younger of the two children, having
    regard to her age at the time of the hearing, the only reference in the
    decision by the judge to this test appears in [55] as follows:

         "55. With regard to the Zambrano argument the position is that  the
             Immigration Rules are the first  port  of  call  for  such  an
             application.  The Appellants and their dependents cannot  meet
             the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is   not
             unreasonable or unfair, in the balancing  exercise  to  expect
             them to return to  Brazil  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence
             regarding    insurmountable    obstacles    or     exceptional
             circumstances which  would  make  it  too  difficult  for  the
             children."

11. It is difficult to understand why the judge considered that Zambrano is
    relevant to the issue in this case.  Furthermore, the judge appears  to
    have regarded the test of reasonableness to be  one  which  required  a
    proportionality exercise hence his reference to balance, which  is  not
    provided for in section 117B(6).  Although Mr McTaggart argued that the
    best interests of the youngest child had not been considered,  in  [47]
    the judge explained in respect of the elder of the two children, and  I
    quote:

         "47. With regard to Jennifer's medical condition she is on standard
             frontline   treatment   for   her   thyroid   problem.     Her
             grandmother's  condition,   which   Jennifer   inherits,   was
             originally diagnosed in Brazil  and  treated  there.   Medical
             facilities are available to Jennifer upon return.  There is  a
             suggestion that this may have to be paid for but there  is  no
             objective material put before me today to  indicate  how  much
             this would be, whether it would be prohibitively expensive  or
             difficult to obtain."

    And he continued at [48]:

         "48. ... There are no circumstances before me today  that  he  [the
             elder of the two children] should depart from the family  unit
             under any circumstances".

12. It is not clear why the judge was considering the best interests  of  a
    child who had become an adult by the time of the hearing.   In  respect
    of the younger of the two children,  the  best  that  can  be  said  in
    respect of "best interests" appears in [50] of the decision:

         "50. ... The younger dependant is still in  primary  school.   They
             must accompany their parent (the first Appellant) in order  to
             provide the greatest comfort and support to them."

    I accept however Mr Diwnycz's submission that  this  may  be  taken  in
    substance to be the judge's "best interests" consideration.

13. The third ground of challenge related to treatment of the expert report
    by Dr Bratten, an Educational Child and Adolescent Psychologist, on the
    two children.  The judge referred to the report in [34] of his decision
    and summarised its essence in terms that as to the  elder  of  the  two
    children, there  will  be  adverse  consequences  for  his  educational
    vocational progress if removed.  The judge noted Dr Bratten's  findings
    in relation to the younger child, and then  proceeded  to  identify  as
    crucial not just the potential  removal  and  its  impact  but  whether
    similar services, treatment, medication, clinical and educational input
    and the like are available to them upon return to Brazil.  He  observed
    that there did not appear to be any  investigation  into  the  services
    available to children if returned to Brazil undertaken by  Dr  Bratten,
    and concluded that as a consequence, "less weight must be attributed to
    the report's findings and conclusions".   There is no  indication  that
    Dr Bratten had expertise of matters in Brazil and to my mind the  judge
    clearly erred by marginalising the report and its findings by reference
    to that absence.

14. In dealing  with  the  final  challenge  (ground  four),  I  accept  Mr
    McTaggart's argument that the judge appeared to have proceeded  on  the
    misconception that the younger of the two children had been brought  to
    the United Kingdom.  This is betrayed in [29] of his decision in  which
    he referred to the children not being held:

         "29. ... accountable for the acts, omissions, errors  or  otherwise
             of the first Appellant and  to  a  lesser  extent  the  second
             Appellant for  being  brought  to  Europe  (Portugal  and  the
             Republic of Ireland) and thereafter to the United Kingdom."

15. In his short submissions, Mr Diwnycz explained  that  he  had  had  the
    opportunity of going through the decision and considered that the  only
    thing that could  be  said  in  its  defence  related  to  the  judge's
    conclusions on the "best interests".  He readily acknowledged the error
    by the judge as to basis on which the younger of the two  children  was
    in the United Kingdom and furthermore, he considered the  decision  was
    coloured by the judge's application of section 8 of the 2004 Act to the
    Article 8 analysis.  He accepted that the judge materially erred and  I
    consider that he was correct to do so.

16. Accordingly, I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox.
     The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  its  further
    consideration by a differently constituted tribunal.


Signed                                  Date 19 August 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


