


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: PA/02382/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8th January 2018                          |On 11th January 2018             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     R K
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:     Ms J Bond instructed by Freemans solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  RK.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




   1. In a decision promulgated on 5th  October  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge Morgan allowed RK's appeal against a decision  of  the  SSHD  to
      refuse her  protection  claim.  The  SSHD  sought,  and  was  granted,
      permission to appeal on the grounds that it was arguable;
   i)  The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in  finding  there  was  a
      lack of sufficiency of protection against non-state agents; there  was
      no evidence to suggest the entire police force was corrupt  and  there
      was no evidence to suggest that the need for medical treatment renders
      RK more vulnerable;
  ii) The First-tier Tribunal judge failed to address the binding  authority
      of GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40.
            Background




   2. RK arrived in the UK on 16 April 2013  with  a  visit  visa.  She  was
      arrested on 19th September 2014 at Heathrow Terminal 5  attempting  to
      leave the UK for Canada on a false British passport with  her  partner
      MS. On 8th October 2014, she was convicted at Isleworth Crown Court of
      possession of false identify documents with intent  and  sentenced  on
      15th October 2014 to 16 months imprisonment.  She  claimed  asylum  on
      23rd  December  2014,  after  having  been  served  with  a  "stage  1
      deportation decision". I assume this is notification of  an  intention
      by the SSHD to deport her and a request for reasons  why  she  thought
      she should not be deported; a copy of that  document  is  not  in  the
      papers before me.


   3. The basis of RK's protection claim is that she fears being  killed  by
      her parents, her former boyfriend and those who brought her to the UK.
      She also relies upon her medical condition and fears an early death if
      removed to India - she has renal failure and undergoes kidney dialysis
      three times a week. For reasons set  out  in  a  decision  dated  23rd
      February 2017, RK's protection and human rights claim was refused. The
      SSHD did not challenge the credibility of RK's  account  but  asserted
      that there was both sufficiency of protection and she could internally
      relocate; there was adequate health care available for her condition.


   4. Before the First-tier Tribunal the SSHD accepted  the  credibility  of
      RK's claim and relied upon firstly, the availability of sufficiency of
      protection and internal relocation and,  secondly,  that  her  medical
      condition did not meet the  high  threshold  required  to  sustain  an
      Article 3 health claim.


            The First-tier Tribunal decision


   5. In a short decision, the First-tier Tribunal judge noted that the SSHD
      accepts that women in India form a particular social  group  and  that
      gender based  violence  against  women  at  the  hands  of  family  or
      community members is widespread; that 'honour killings' are widespread
      and that RK had been disowned by her family. The  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge found RK to have a


                  22......genuine fear of honour killing at the hands of her
                  family and that this subjective fear is  well  founded  in
                  the context of the country evidence in respect  of  India.
                  It may well be that, as the [SSHD] asserts,  that  if  she
                  was the subject of  an  honour  killing  the  perpetrators
                  would be prosecuted by the Indian State. This is of little
                  assistance  to  [RK}  and  I  find  that  there   is   not
                  sufficiency of protection in the particular  circumstances
                  of her case. I also find that internal relocation would be
                  unduly harsh given  that  she  would  be  a  single  woman
                  without support  and  unable  to  afford  the  life-saving
                  dialysis treatment she needs to survive."


            Error of law


   6. The SSHD asserts that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred because he
                  "totally ignored the evidence relied on  in  the  decision
                  letter paragraphs  24-38  [that]  there  is  no  objective
                  evidence that [RK]  cannot  seek  protection  against  non
                  state agents".
            The SSHD disputed findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
            because there is
                  "no evidence to suggest the entire Indian police force  is
                 corrupt"
            and there is
                  "no evidence to suggest that  lone  women  are  unable  to
                  relocate within India"
            and that the
                  "need for medical treatment without more"
            does not render RK  vulnerable;  the  SSHD  asserts  the  judge
            failed to address paragraphs 39-52 and 61-80  of  the  decision
            letter.


   7. Paragraphs 24-38 of the decision  letter  set  out  and  describe  the
      "Horvath test", the structure of India's  police  force;  quotes  from
      various reports on the effectiveness  of  India's  police  forces  and
      their susceptibility to corruption. The evidence was  that  there  had
      been an increase in crimes against women being reported although there
      was a reluctance by women to report crimes  because  of  the  lack  of
      guarantees of adequate shelter and access to livelihoods. The evidence
      was that so called 'honour killings' were a societal problem and  that
      individual women were reluctant to make complaints to the police.  The
      evidence was that
                      "    ...A victim of domestic violence deals primarily
                      with a protection officer and has a  right  to  legal
                      aid, shelter and access  to  medical  care,  although
                      there  have  reportedly  been  limitations   in   the
                      effectiveness  of   the   law   due   to   restricted
                      implementation, as well as corruption.  Women  facing
                      imminent and life-threatening violence have often had
                      to rely solely on police aid."


            The reasons for refusal letter refers to  the  availability  of
            government run  and  non-government  run  hostel  accommodation
            where working women can live for up to three  years  and  there
            are programmes that are designed to assist  marginalised  women
            accessing the labour market. The  reasons  for  refusal  letter
            refers to India and not the village RK comes  from  but  it  is
            reasonable  to  conclude,  given  there  are  less   than   900
            shelters/hostels for single women in India, that  there  is  no
            such hostel or shelter in her  village.  RKs  medical  problems
            require dialysis three times a week  and  personal  care  after
            dialysis. Were it not for the imminent threat of being  killed,
            that treatment and that care would be expected to be  paid  for
            and provided by her family. The protection  actually  available
            to a person in the position of RK does not extend to that;  the
            police do not provide round the clock protection;  dialysis  is
            not available or accessible through the system of  hostels  and
            protection to and from  hospital  is  not  available  from  the
            police.


   8. Even though the First-tier Tribunal judge failed  to  address  in  the
      decision the evidence that was before him in the reasons  for  refusal
      letter and failed to give reasons for reaching his  decision,  had  he
      done so the outcome would inevitably have been the same  -  RK  cannot
      access sufficiency of protection in her home area.


   9. Paragraphs 39 to 52 of the reasons for  refusal  letter  set  out  the
      evidence  relied  upon  by  the  SSHD  in  connection  with   internal
      relocation. It covers the difficulties  single  women  have  accessing
      housing, employment and the social  and  societal  stigma  they  face.
      There is reference to hostels not providing adequate access to  health
      care. Paragraph 49 identifies that RK is fearful of  being  traced  if
      she relocates but notes that although  she  was  contacted  by  mobile
      phone she experienced no harm and there  was  no  evidence  those  she
      feared had the ability to trace her physical  whereabouts.  The  judge
      does not address that. RK is unable to work, requires  dialysis  three
      times a week and requires personal care after each  dialysis  session.
      The judge found that


                      22....internal relocation would be unduly harsh given
                      that she would be a single woman without support  and
                      unable to afford the life-saving  dialysis  treatment
                      she needs to survive.


            Were it not for the threat of being killed, RK would  have  the
            support she requires  to  avoid  death  from  lack  of  medical
            treatment. She is unable to access that treatment. The evidence
            in the reasons for refusal  letter  and  in  the  CIG  includes
            evidence of lack of adequate access  to  medical  care.  Again,
            although the judge fails  to  provide  any  reasoning  for  his
            conclusion, it is inevitable that had he done so he would  have
            concluded that  the  combination  of  the  lack  of  access  to
            adequate  accommodation,  employment  and  medical   care   (as
            evidenced in the CIG) renders internal relocation in  her  case
            unduly harsh because it will lead to her death.


  10. There is no material error of law by the First-tier Tribunal judge  in
      his findings that there is  no  sufficiency  of  protection  and  that
      internal relocation  would  be  unduly  harsh.  It  follows  that  his
      decision to allow the protection claim is not infected by error of law
      and stands.


  11. Paragraphs 61 to 80 address the availability of medical  treatment  in
      India from the perspective of an Article 3 health case.  Although  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  judge   allowed   the   protection   claim,   he
      nevertheless goes on to consider RK's claim  in  terms  of  Article  3
      health. He fails to address GS and does not identify how RK meets  the
      high threshold, merely stating that she does. There is a plain lack of
      reasons and no justification for allowing the appeal on these grounds.
      However, as MS Bond submitted, there was no  need  for  the  judge  to
      consider Article 3 health; RK's case was not argued as a  health  case
      and if she is recognised as a refugee any  such  claim  would  in  any
      event fall away. Therefore, although the judge erred  in  law  in  his
      decision as regards Article 3 health, such error is immaterial  and  I
      do not set the decision aside on that basis.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside  the  decision.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands namely RK's protection appeal is allowed.


                                    Date 10th January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
