
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02988/2019 [t]


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 24 May 2020                       |On 27 May 2020                       |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                              A P A (SRI LANKA)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          ORDER AND DIRECTIONS [T]


Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of [initials] who is the subject  of  these  proceedings
or publish or reveal any information which would be likely to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.
Order and Directions (T)

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse  him  international  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention, humanitarian protection or leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. By a decision dated 5 November 2019, I set aside the First-tier Judge's
    decision for inadequacy of reasons, in particular his failure  to  have
    regard to the appellant's status as a vulnerable person, his  treatment
    of the medical evidence, to which  the Judge applied his  own  negative
    perception of the appellant's evidence (the  Mibanga  error),  and  his
    failure to deal with a patent Article 1F exclusion issue.

 3. The appeal was listed for remaking in the Upper Tribunal  on  13  March
    2013 but was adjourned because of the COVID-19 pandemic.   On  6  April
    2020, Mr Steven Kotas for the  Secretary  of  State  filed  a  position
    statement indicating that the Secretary of  State  would  not  rely  on
    exclusion under Article 1F as she continued to reject  the  appellant's
    account of his first, second and third  arrest  and  detention  in  Sri
    Lanka,  and  his  diaspora  activities.    Mr  Kotas  agreed  with  the
    appellant's position that mere membership of the LTTE  is  insufficient
    to warrant exclusion: The Secretary of State invites the Upper Tribunal
    to rehear the appeal on the basis that Article 1F is not in issue.

 4. Having regard to the overriding objective, it is now time  to  progress
    this appeal. Having regard to the Pilot Practice  Direction  and  UTIAC
    Guidance Note no 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally of  the
    view that the forthcoming hearing in this appeal requires a  full  face
    to face oral rehearing.

 5. The appeal will therefore be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing afresh on the earliest convenient date.

Directions

 6. I therefore give the following directions for  the  future  conduct  of
    this appeal:

 a) This appeal will be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to  be
    fixed.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     24 May 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
