
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02316/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th December 2017                         |On 22nd January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                            Salem Naser Al Osaimi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is  a  Kuwaiti  Bidoon  born  on  26th  June  1951.   The
    Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK on 30th September  2016  and
    claimed asylum on that date.  The  Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was
    dismissed by the Secretary of State on 20th February 2017.  It  is  the
    Appellant's claim that on return he would be killed or detained by  the
    Kuwaiti authorities as he is a Bidoon  that  took  part  in  a  protest
    asking for Bidoon rights.  Further he contends that he has  evaded  the
    authorities since they released him from detention on condition that he
    would  supply  them  with  information.    The   Secretary   of   State
    acknowledged and accepted that the  Appellant  was  a  Kuwaiti  Bidoon.
    What he did not accept was  that  the  Appellant  was  an  undocumented
    Bidoon.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Hillis on 3rd April 2017.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 20th April 2017 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed  on
    all grounds.

 3. On 20th April 2017 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  It was accepted in those Grounds of Appeal the sole issue in
    the appeal was whether the Appellant was or  was  not  an  undocumented
    Bidoon.  It was acknowledged by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  if  the
    Appellant was able to establish that he was an undocumented Bidoon then
    the appeal would be allowed.  It was contended in the Grounds of Appeal
    that the judge had recognised the standard to which the  Appellant  had
    to establish that he was  an  undocumented  Bidoon  was  to  the  lower
    standard but however he had  failed  to  apply  that  standard  in  the
    decision.  It had been noted that the Appellant's nephew Nasir Ali  had
    been granted refugee status as  an  undocumented  Bidoon  but  that  at
    paragraph 30 the judge had concluded that  background  information  did
    not support the fact that ALL extended family members were undocumented
    Bidoons.  It was contended that the  judge  had  erred  in  failing  to
    explain why the Appellant could not as  a  result  be  an  undocumented
    Bidoon.

 4. On 4th September 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman (sitting as a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal) granted permission to appeal.   Judge
    Chapman noted that there were  effectively  five  assertions  that  the
    judge had materially erred in law:-

      1) In failing to apply the lower standard of proof that the  Appellant
         had to establish that he is an undocumented Bidoon.

      2) In failing at paragraph 30 to explain why the Appellant  could  not
         be an undocumented Bidoon given that his  nephew,  Nasir  Ali,  had
         been granted refugee status in such circumstances.

      3) In concluding, absent any  evidential  basis,  that  the  Appellant
         flushed  his  wife's  and  family's  passports  in  the  toilet  at
         Heathrow.

      4) In failing to give the Appellant the benefit of he doubt  in  light
         of the limited  documentary  evidence  rather  than  rely  on  some
         inconsistencies on the fact that the Appellant's wife did not  give
         evidence.

      5) In focussing on the issue of the passports when  the  focus  should
         have been on whether the Appellant had a security card.

 5. It is with regard to this fifth ground that  Judge  Chapman  considered
    that there was arguable merit in that the country guidance decision  of
    NM made clear that the material document when assessing whether or  not
    a Bidoon is documented or undocumented is a security card and that  the
    judge made no findings of fact on this fundamental issue.

 6. On 2nd October the Secretary of  State  responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24 pointing out that the judge did  not  accept  that
    the Appellant's account regarding the disposal of the passports and the
    judge was entitled to reject the Appellant's  explanation  and  clearly
    had stated the reason for doing so.  It  is  on  that  basis  that  the
    appeal comes before me to determine whether or not there is a  material
    error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The
    Appellant appears by his instructed Counsel Mr Karnik.   The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mrs Petterson.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Karnik submits that the judge focuses on the issue of  the  passport
    and that he should have looked at the documentary evidence relating  to
    the Appellant's purported security card and that this would have been a
    relevant analysis rather than focussing on the passport  in  the  event
    that he was considering country guidance.  He submits that the  judge's
    finding at paragraph 36 is curious  (Counsel's  phrase)  and  that  the
    focus should therefore have been on country  guidance  and  what  makes
    somebody undocumented.  He also considers  that  the  finding  made  at
    paragraph 34 was speculative.

 8. Mrs Petterson points out that the  judge  did  give  consideration  and
    noted the position with regard to the security card.   She  points  out
    that if the judge  concluded,  as  he  had,  that  the  Appellants  had
    passports this is important because without some  sort  of  status  the
    Appellant would not have been in a position to get them.  She takes  me
    to paragraphs 32 and 33 of the judge's decision and submits that it was
    open to the Appellant as he so wished to put  in  documentary  evidence
    regarding his passport.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. Mr Karnik in his submissions indicate the judge makes no  reference  to
    the country guidance authority of  NM.   I  have  read  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision and I  agree  with  Mr  Karnik's  submission.
    However against this it  is  the  contention  made  forcefully  by  Mrs
    Petterson firstly  that  it  was  open  to  the  Appellant  to  put  in
    documentary evidence regarding his passport  and  secondly  it  is  her
    submission on behalf of the Secretary of State that in order to  obtain
    a passport the Appellant must have had an ID  card  and  therefore  the
    judge had made correct findings.

12. The whole issue comes down one of credibility.  This is an  experienced
    judge who has given careful consideration  to  the  following  aspects.
    Firstly the evidence of the Appellant's nephew and the contention  that
    as a blood relative he was also an undocumented Bidoon.  The judge  has
    addressed this issue at paragraph 30 and  made  findings  that  he  was
    entitled to that not all extended family members would be  undocumented
    as much would depend on whom each member of the family has married.

13. Secondly, the judge thereinafter goes into detail with  regard  to  the
    factual basis relating to the mutilated passports found in  the  toilet
    at Heathrow.  The judge considers this at paragraphs 32 to 33 and makes
    findings at paragraphs 34 to 40 that he was entitled to.  The judge has
    in fact given very full and detailed consideration of  this  issue  and
    the fact that he has made no specific reference to the country guidance
    authority  does  not  mean  that  he  has  not  given  due  and  proper
    consideration to the law and made findings that he was not entitled to.

14. In such circumstances I am satisfied that there is no material error of
    law disclosed in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  the
    submissions made amount to  little  more  than  disagreement  with  the
    findings by the judge.  Consequently the correct approach  is  to  find
    that there is no material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no material error  of
law and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 19 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 19 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
