
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Number: PA/02814/2019     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 January 2020                | On 10 January 2020              |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                               GUO QIANG NONG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lam, instructed by Sparrow & Trieu Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Chinese national who was born on 20  February  1970.
    He appeals against a decision which was issued by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Freer on 27  August  2019,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of his protection and human rights claims.

Background

 2. The appellant was born in Vietnam to  Chinese  parents.   When  he  was
    around eight years old, he and his parents fled from the Vietnam War as
    'Boat People' and returned to China.  He lived in China  from  1978  to
    1997, at which point he moved to the Gambia to work as a  chef.   After
    four years in Gambia, he moved lawfully  to  Ireland,  where  he  lived
    until May 2002.  He then entered the UK unlawfully, on  board  a  coach
    from the Republic  of  Ireland.   He  remained  in  the  UK  unlawfully
    thereafter.  He was encountered and given Temporary Admission in  2010.
    In 2013, he made an unsuccessful application for leave to  remain.   He
    was listed as an absconder  in  2016.   On  22  October  2018,  he  was
    encountered at Belfast Docks, at  which  point  he  was  detained.   He
    claimed asylum on 10 January 2019.   Following  interviews  which  took
    place in January and February 2019, his claim  for  asylum  (which  was
    based primarily on his adherence to the Christian faith)  was  refused.
    He appealed against that refusal to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appeal came before Judge Freer ("the judge")  on  14  August  2019.
    The appellant was represented by Mr Lam of counsel, as  he  was  before
    me.  The respondent was represented by a Presenting Officer.  The judge
    noted that the appellant wished to rely only on  human  rights  grounds
    before him, and that he did not seek to contend  that  his  removal  to
    China would place the UK in breach  of  its  international  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention: [5].


 4. At [9]-[28], the judge described the evidence  before  him.   At  [29]-
    [32], he recorded the submissions made by the representatives.  At [33]-
    [41], the judge made the following findings.  He did not  consider  the
    appellant to have been a persuasive witness: [33].  He gave  weight  to
    the evidence given by one of the witnesses, who  was  able  to  confirm
    that the appellant had been in Sheffield from May  2016  to  May  2019:
    [34].  He was also able to accept that the appellant was in the UK from
    2005 to 2008 although he considered there to be an 'evidential gap'  in
    relation to  the  period  2008  to  November  2010:  [35].   The  judge
    described the appellant's asylum claim as an 'exaggerated legal  claim'
    which had not been pursued before  him:  [36].   There  was  inadequate
    evidence to show that the appellant was unable to find work  in  China:
    [37].  Despite the presence of a large extended family,  there  was  no
    evidence of a family life in the UK:  [38].   The  appellant  could  be
    financially supported by his sister or the large extended family in the
    UK in the event that he was returned to  China:  [39].   The  appellant
    would be able to pursue his Christian  worship  in  China:  [40].   The
    appellant could not establish that he would encounter very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration to China: [41].


 5. The judge then turned to Article 8 ECHR.  He did not consider that  the
    appellant had established continuous residence in the UK for either  20
    years or 14 years (which period used to suffice to  receive  settlement
    under the Immigration Rules): [42].  It was not clear to the judge  why
    the appellant could not return to the Gambia: [43].   The  judge  noted
    that the appellant was said by the  respondent  to  have  made  various
    applications from the Republic of Ireland in the period  2002-2004  and
    he noted that the appellant had entered the UK unlawfully at some point
    between 2004 and 2010: [45]-[46].  Considering  the  vagueness  of  the
    evidence, the judge considered that he was only able to find  that  the
    appellant had 'been here at most for about  13  or  14  years  but  the
    continuity thereafter is not  clearly  established.':  [47].   Had  the
    judge been able to  find  that  the  appellant  had  been  continuously
    present in the UK for more than fourteen years, he would have  found  a
    'tapering down' of the public interest 'on the basis that 14 years used
    to be good  enough':  [47].   Considering  the  extent  of  the  public
    interest in the appellant's removal,  the  appellant's  removal  was  a
    proportionate course: [48]-[54].

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. A  single  ground  of  appeal  was  advanced  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  It was submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  a
    mistake regarding an established and objectively verifiable fact as  to
    the appellant's  length  of  residence.   There  were  two  sources  of
    incontrovertible evidence which showed that the appellant  had  entered
    the UK in 2002 and had remained here since.  There was a stamp from the
    Irish authorities showing that he had left the Republic in May 2002 and
    his UK medical records showed that he had been in  regular  receipt  of
    NHS services since that time.  The judge had  overlooked  all  of  that
    evidence in concluding that the appellant had only been in the  UK  for
    thirteen or fourteen years.  Had he turned his mind to  that  evidence,
    the judge would have accepted that the appellant had been in the UK for
    seventeen years and this difference was material, it was submitted,  to
    the assessments undertaken in relation to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

 7. At the outset of the hearing before me, I asked Mr  Jarvis  whether  he
    had seen the  appellant's  medical  records.   I  asked  that  question
    because I had located these records separately from the  bundles  filed
    by  the  respondent  and  the  appellant.   There  was   a   manuscript
    endorsement on the top of this separate bundle, indicating that it was,
    or had been, Annex P of the  respondent's  bundle.   Mr  Lam  helpfully
    indicated that the papers I was showing to Mr Jarvis were actually  the
    same documents as appeared at Annex P,  albeit  that  they  were  in  a
    slightly different order.  Mr Jarvis required a little time to consider
    these documents, which I duly gave him.

 8. After Mr Jarvis had considered the medical records, I considered  their
    significance with the assistance of the advocates.  I did  so  because,
    as the judge had noted, it had been  said  by  the  respondent  in  the
    letter of refusal and  on  the  front  page  of  her  bundle  that  the
    appellant had been in the Republic of Ireland between  2002  and  2004.
    There were documents in the respondent's bundle  which  indicated  that
    the appellant had made UK Work Permit ("UKWP") applications  in  Dublin
    in 2003.  I asked Mr Lam whether it was said by the appellant  that  he
    had been in the UK when these applications were made, or whether he had
    actually been in Eire at the time.  Mr Lam confirmed, on  instructions,
    that the appellant's case was that he had been in the UK from May  2002
    onwards and that it had been incorrectly stated to UKWP that he was  in
    Eire at the time.

 9. I asked Mr Jarvis whether he was  prepared  to  accept  that  this  was
    indeed the case.  Having considered the UK medical records  with  care,
    Mr Jarvis indicated that he was prepared to accept  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that the appellant had been in the UK from May 2002 onwards.
     He noted that the medical records showed that the appellant  had  been
    in receipt of regular care from the NHS from 2002 onwards.  It was more
    likely than not that the appellant had  been  in  the  UK  during  this
    period, and that the suggestion that he had been  in  the  Republic  of
    Ireland  between  2002  and  2004  had  been  a  falsehood.    In   the
    circumstances, Mr Jarvis felt constrained to accept that the judge  had
    proceeded on a factually incorrect footing when he concluded  that  the
    appellant had not  shown  continuous  residence  since  May  2002.   As
    matters stood before the judge in August 2019, Mr Jarvis accepted  that
    the appellant had been continuously resident in the UK  for  more  than
    seventeen years.  He accepted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    concluding  otherwise,  since  that  conclusion  was  contrary  to  the
    established and objectively verifiable facts.

10. I had considered the medical evidence with some care in advance of  the
    hearing and was  able  to  indicate  immediately  that  I  accepted  Mr
    Jarvis's concession in this regard.  I then turned to Mr Lam to ask him
    to outline how it was said that the error of law into which  the  judge
    had fallen was material to the outcome.

11. Mr Lam made three submissions.  He submitted, firstly, that  the  error
    into which the judge had fallen had coloured his assessment of  whether
    there were very significant obstacles to the appellant's re-integration
    to China.  Whilst he had not sought to advance any  separate  criticism
    of the judge's analysis of that question at  [36]-[41],  it  was  clear
    that the appellant's length of residence in the UK was relevant to  the
    question of his re-integration to his country of nationality.   It  was
    to be recalled in that connection, submitted Mr Lam, that the appellant
    had lived a somewhat nomadic life and was not simply returning  to  the
    country in which he had always lived prior to his entry to the UK.   He
    had been born in Vietnam and had  lived  in  five  different  countries
    during his life.

12. Mr Lam's second submission was that the judge's error was  relevant  to
    the wider Article 8 ECHR assessment, since length of residence  in  the
    expelling country was  always  a  relevant  consideration  in  such  an
    assessment.  Where, as here, the judge had proceeded on a false footing
    as to the length of residence in the host state,  the  Article  8  ECHR
    decision was necessarily flawed as a whole.  Thirdly, as a separate but
    related submission, Mr Lam noted that the judge had  proceeded  on  the
    basis that there would be a 'tapering down' of the public  interest  in
    the event that the appellant could establish more than fourteen  years'
    continuous unlawful residence.  Since that length of residence had  now
    been established, it necessarily followed that the  balancing  exercise
    undertaken by the FtT was vitiated.  If, as was clearly shown to be the
    case, the appellant had been present in the UK  for  considerably  more
    than fourteen years, the public interest in the appellant's removal was
    significantly reduced.

13. Mr Lam submitted that the correct course, in the  event  that  I  found
    there to be a material error of law, was for the appeal to be  remitted
    to the FtT for rehearing afresh.  I asked whether there was any  reason
    why that course was necessary, when the facts had either been found  by
    the FtT or were agreed by the parties, and Mr Lam  submitted  that  the
    appellant should be given the opportunity of having a  further  hearing
    at which oral evidence could be called.

14. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis submitted that the error of  law
    which was accepted to have occurred was not material to the outcome and
    that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal fell to be dismissed.



Discussion

15. It is  regrettable  that  the  judge  fell  into  error  regarding  the
    appellant's length of residence in the United Kingdom.   It  was  clear
    that the respondent had assumed, as a result of the  WPUK  applications
    to which I have referred, that the appellant had been in  the  Republic
    of Ireland when those applications were  made.   Equally,  however,  it
    should have been clear to the judge - as  a  result  of  the  extensive
    medical records - that there was  cogent  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant was in the United Kingdom between 2002 and 2004.  There is no
    reference to that evidence in the judge's decision.  It appears  simply
    to have been overlooked, leading the judge to embark on a  fact-finding
    enquiry which is now accepted on all sides to  have  been  unnecessary.
    It is clear beyond doubt that the  appellant  was  receiving  extensive
    assistance from the NHS from 2002 onwards.  He was plainly in the UK at
    that time, and Mr Jarvis now quite properly accepts that  he  has  been
    continuously resident in the UK since May 2002.

16. As I have recorded above, Mr Lam submitted that the judge's error as to
    the appellant's length of residence was material to the outcome of this
    appeal for three reasons.  For the reasons  which  follow,  however,  I
    come to the clear conclusion that the error was not a material one.  In
    reaching that conclusion, I bear firmly in mind what was said by Hooper
    LJ (with whom Tuckey and Rix LJJ agreed) at [15] of IA (Somalia) [2007]
    EWCA Civ 323; [2007] Imm AR 685: "in public law cases, an error of  law
    will be regarded  as  material  unless  the  decision-maker  must  have
    reached the same conclusion without the error."

17. Mr Lam submitted that the judge's error as to the appellant's length of
    residence  vitiated  his  assessment  of  whether   there   were   very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration into China.   It  is  to  be
    recalled, however, that the judge  made  relatively  detailed  findings
    about the circumstances to which the appellant would  be  returning  in
    China.  He concluded, as I have  recorded  above,  that  the  appellant
    would be able to find employment  there;  that  he  would  be  able  to
    practise his faith in  China;  and  that  he  would  in  any  event  be
    supported by his network of family support in the UK.  The grounds make
    no complaint about any of this analysis.  The judge's approach  was  in
    accordance with the holistic enquiry required by Kamara  [2016]  4  WLR
    152 and Parveen [2018] EWCA Civ 932 and, as Mr Lam was  constrained  to
    accept in his realistic submissions, it is difficult  to  quantify  how
    this analysis can properly be said  to  be  tainted  by  the  erroneous
    calculations as to length of residence.  In my judgment, the assessment
    was not tainted in any way, and the judge would have reached  precisely
    the same conclusion under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) if he had  understood
    chronology correctly.

18. Mr Lam's second submission is rather more meritorious.  Recalling  that
    an individual's length of residence in the host country is one  of  the
    factors to which the ECtHR has  regularly  made  reference  in  such  a
    context (Uner v The  Netherlands  (2007)  45  EHRR  14,  at  [57],  for
    example), he submits that it cannot be said with  confidence  that  the
    judge would have come to the same decision on Article  8  ECHR  if  the
    correct length of residence in the  UK  had  been  understood.   Again,
    however, I do not see how the additional period of residence would have
    made a difference to the judge's assessment in this specific case.   It
    is not said, for example, that some important event took  place  during
    the  period  of  residence  which  the  judge  discounted.   The  judge
    concluded that the appellant has no  family  life  in  the  UK  but  he
    accepted that there was a protected private life.  He took  account  of
    the appellant's family members in this country and the other aspects of
    his private life but he concluded that the private  life,  such  as  it
    was, was outweighed by the public interest in the appellant's  removal.
    Had the judge correctly understood the appellant's length of residence,
    the essential components of the enquiry  would  have  been  same.   The
    outcome would, to my mind, have certainly been the  same  even  if  the
    judge had taken account of  the  three  years  of  additional  unlawful
    residence and reliance on the NHS.  As Mr Jarvis noted in  his  concise
    submissions, the statutory presumption (Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58; [2019]
    1 WLR 5536 refers, at [49]-[50]) would be that the private life accrued
    during such unlawful residence would be given little weight  and  there
    are no particularly strong features of  the  appellant's  private  life
    which begin to displace  that  presumption,  even  if  the  appellant's
    length of residence is correctly understood.


19. Mr  Lam's  third  submission  was  made  in  reliance  on  the  judge's
    conclusion that the  appellant  would  be  placed  in  an  advantageous
    position if it was to be held that he had accrued more  than  14  years
    continuous lawful residence.  Mr Lam reminded me of what had been  said
    about 'near miss' cases at [54]-[58] of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387;
    [2016] 1 All ER 706.  On analysis, however, Mr Lam accepted  that  this
    could not properly be said to  be  a  'near  miss'  case  of  the  kind
    considered by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) or by the Supreme Court
    in MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10; [2017] 1 WLR 771.  The reality, even on
    the correct calculation, is that the appellant remains  more  than  two
    years short of the  twenty  years'  continuous  residence  required  by
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules.  There is no  proper
    basis for  a  submission  that  the  appellant  is  so  close  to  that
    requirement that there  is  a  reduction  in  the  weight  which  would
    ordinarily be attached to immigration control considerations.

20. Correctly understood, the point taken by the judge (and adopted  by  Mr
    Lam) was not that the appellant was close to twenty  years'  residence.
    It was that the appellant would be in a better position under Article 8
    ECHR if he could establish that he met  the  old  requirement  for  ILR
    under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  The judge proceeded  on
    the basis that there would be a 'tapering down' of the public  interest
    if the appellant could establish such a  length  of  residence  because
    such a period 'used to be good enough'.

21. As I suggested to Mr Lam  at  the  hearing,  this  conclusion  was  not
    related to any 'near miss' principle; it is simply an invocation of the
    position which previously existed under the Immigration Rules.   As  Mr
    Lam eventually accepted, that was straightforwardly  an  error  on  the
    part of the judge.  The Immigration Rules are to  be  applied  as  they
    stand at the date of hearing unless  the  contrary  intention  appears:
    Odelola [2009] UKHL 25; [2009] 1 WLR 1230.  The Immigration Rules  were
    amended so as to remove the relevant part of paragraph 276B as long ago
    as 9 July 2012.  The appellant had only accrued ten years' residence in
    the UK at that time and the fact that he has subsequently accrued  more
    than fourteen years is of no significance to the assessment required by
    Article 8(2) ECHR whatsoever.  In law, there is certainly no  'tapering
    down' of the public interest when an  individual  crosses  a  threshold
    which previously existed in the Immigration Rules.  It is not clear why
    the judge proceeded on that basis but it is clear that he was in  error
    in doing so.  The appellant cannot claim  any  such  advantage  in  the
    scales  of  proportionality  by  accruing  more  than  fourteen  years'
    unlawful residence.


22. It is for these reasons that I accept the submission made by Mr Jarvis.
     Whilst the judge erred  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  length  of
    residence, the outcome in the appeal would have been the same  but  for
    that error.

23. I add this.  I asked Mr Lam at the conclusion of his  submissions  what
    relief he sought in the event that I agreed with him that  the  judge's
    error was material to the outcome of the appeal.  He submitted that the
    correct relief was a hearing de  novo  before  another  judge.   Had  I
    decided that the judge's error was material to the outcome, I would not
    have acceded to that submission.

24. As I have set out at some length,  the  judge  made  relevant  findings
    regarding the appellant's circumstances in the  UK  and  on  return  to
    China.  It was not suggested before me that these primary findings were
    in any way flawed, or that matters had moved on.  The only error was as
    to the appellant's length of residence.  Had I  found  there  to  be  a
    material error, I would have proceeded to remake the  decision  on  the
    appeal on the correct factual footing.  Had  I  done  so,  the  outcome
    would have been the dismissal of the appeal.   Although  the  appellant
    has family here, he does not enjoy a protected family life  with  them.
    Although he is able to speak some English and is not a burden on public
    funds, there is a cogent  public  interest  in  his  removal.   He  has
    remained in the UK unlawfully for many years and  has  taken  extensive
    advantage of the NHS, a fact which speaks cogently  in  favour  of  his
    removal: Akhalu [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC).  He employed repeated  deception
    (as to his place of residence) in the applications he made to  WPUK  in
    2002-2004.  There are no particularly strong features  of  his  private
    life which are capable  of  outweighing  the  presumption  that  little
    weight should be attached to his private life.  Had I been with Mr  Lam
    on the question of whether the judge erred  materially  in  law,  there
    would have been no reason to convene a further hearing, whether  before
    the FtT or the UT, because the findings of fact already made would have
    mandated the dismissal of the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law but that error was not material to  the
outcome of the appeal.  The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  accordingly
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                               06 January 2020
