
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02254/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 October 2019                      | On 26 November 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                     HN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Aitken, Counsel, instructed by Warwick Vesey
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 17 May 1994.  He applied for
asylum in this country on the basis that he feared persecution upon his
return to Vietnam on grounds of his religion (Catholicism) and political
opinion (anti-government activism).  He arrived in this country initially
claiming to be a child born on 17 May 2002.  He was placed into the care of
a local authority but subsequently absconded.  He later approached the
police, and then claimed asylum on 1 May 2018.

Factual background

The appellant's asylum claim was refused by the respondent, and his appeal
against that refusal was dismissed by Judge Joshi of the First-tier
Tribunal in a Decision and Reasons promulgated 27 June 2019.   The judge
summarised the appellant's claim in these terms, at [4] and [5] of his
decision:

         "The appellant lived in Quynh Nogoc village, in Quynh Luu district
         in Vietnam with his family. He was brought up as a strict Catholic.
         His parents were farmers and his father worked at the parish and
         taught Catholic teachings to children.

         The appellant attended demonstrations against a church being
         destroyed. After the first demonstration the police sent papers to
         his house asking him to report. After the second demonstration the
         police visited his house again asking him to report. He refused to
         do so. The appellant continued to organise and attend
         demonstrations. On 14 February 2017 he along with others were
         beaten up by the authorities, but managed to escape arrest. Rather
         than going home he went to Saigon city and then fled knowing that
         the police had visited his home."

The judge made a number of findings concerning the appellant's claimed
Catholicism and anti-government activism in Vietnam.  He found that the
appellant lacked credibility.  The operative findings of the judge are set
out at [38] to [48] of his decision.  The judge writes that he did not
consider the appellant's claim to be Catholic to be consistent with the
simple facts about Christianity ([43]).  He was unable to provide answers
concerning essential details of the faith.  The judge also considered that
the appellant's travel through various safe countries prior to his arrival
here was a factor that harmed his credibility.

Permission to appeal

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor granted permission to appeal on the sole
ground that the judge had failed to consider some Facebook posts made by
the appellant in Vietnamese which were critical of the government and of
its programme of destroying some church buildings.  The appellant's
additional grounds of appeal relating to the challenges to the primary
findings of fact reached by the judge were not granted permission to appeal
and it follows that the unchallenged, or the final findings of fact of the
First-tier Tribunal against which this appeal is now set against are that
he is not a Catholic, that he has not engaged in anti-government protests
and that he has not otherwise come to the attention of the authorities in
Vietnam.

Discussion

Mr Aitken submits that the judge failed to have regard to the social media
materials which may be found at pages 54 to 65 of the appellant's bundle
from the First-tier Tribunal.  There is superficial force in this
submission, in the sense that the judge does not deal in any way with the
content of the materials, or their impact upon the appellant's risk profile
upon his return.

The judge, however, was clearly aware of the existence of these materials.
At [12] of the decision, the judge noted that there had been a skeleton
argument submitted by Mr Aitken.  I have viewed a copy of that skeleton
argument, which clearly refers at [81] and [82] to the Facebook materials
and the background materials which, it was submitted, exposed the appellant
to a risk of harm.  In addition, at [15] of the decision the judge
specifically noted that there had been Facebook posts with translations
that had been included in the appellant's bundle.  At [16] the judge said,
"I took into account all of the evidence whether or not mentioned
specifically in these reasons".

The Facebook posts were sur place materials, generated during the
appellant's time in this country.  Any risk said to arise from the
appellant's engagement in anti-government activities in this country must
be viewed against the background of his now dismissed claims to have been
an anti-government Catholic activist in Vietnam.

Mr Aitken stated in his skeleton argument at [81], "it is submitted that
these activities [the Facebook posts] will heighten the risk that the
appellant will face upon his return to Vietnam."  At [48] the judge reached
the following global conclusion in relation to the appellant's risk upon
his return:

"I have had regard to the objective evidence particularly the reports from
Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International to show that Catholics are
regularly harassed and intimidated in Vietnam.  However, I find that the
appellant is not Catholic and did not come to the adverse attention of the
authorities and is therefore not at risk in return."

In my view, given the judge clearly stated that all relevant materials had
been considered and in light of the findings that were adverse to the core
of the appellant's case, there was no material before the judge which would
have merited a finding that the appellant would be subject to some form of
analysis or scrutiny upon his return.  There was no evidence demonstrating
that the appellant would for some other reason come to the attention of the
authorities.  It was not reasonably likely that they would have any
interest in him, on the judge's analysis, so it is difficult to see how the
Facebook materials could heighten the risk he would face.  There was no
underlying risk which was at jeopardy of being heightened on account of the
Facebook materials.  The appellant was refused permission to appeal to
challenge the judge's findings of fact, and, as such, those findings of
fact stand.

I queried with Mr Aitken whether there is any authority concerning the
approach of the authorities in Vietnam upon the return of a failed asylum
seeker at the border, for example whether the often-quoted term "pinch
point" of the border can be applied in this context, or whether there is a
"hair trigger" reaction which the appellant is likely to face in the event
of adverse social media material being found.  Mr Aitken said that he was
not aware of any authority.

Mr Aitken relied to a number of materials in the appellant's bundle from
the First-tier Tribunal in support of the proposition that the appellant
would be at risk on account of the social media posts alone.  I do not
consider those materials to demonstrate that the appellant will be at risk.

The Human Rights Watch World Report 2019, the relevant extracts of which
may be found at pages 6 and 7 of the bundle, states at the second
unnumbered paragraph on page 7:

"Activists questioning government policies or projects, or seeking to
defend local resources or land, face daily harassment, intrusive
surveillance, house arrest, travel bans, arbitrary detention, and
interrogation.  Thugs, apparently collaborating with police, have
increasingly launched physical attacks against activists with impunity."

On the same page the Human Rights Watch Report states,

         "Vietnamese rights bloggers face regular harassment and
         intimidation.  Officials often arrest political critics for their
         posts on the internet."

Mr Aitken submits that the risk faced by bloggers extends to mere users of
social media, and the occasional posters of critical material, such as this
appellant.  In addition to the above materials, he relied upon an Amnesty
International press release at pages 37 to 38.  It states, in relation to
activists, that they have been targeted "purely for their peaceful
activism" and they have "merely used social media to express opinions that
the authorities do not like - namely by supporting the protection of human
rights and social justice in the country."

In my judgment, these materials do not assist the appellant.  They relate
to individuals who would have some form of profile with the authorities in
Vietnam or who have otherwise engaged in some form of activism.  There is
nothing that was in the materials before the First-tier Tribunal which
could have merited a finding that there was a real risk of the appellant
coming to serious harm on account of the limited range of Facebook posts
which are copied at pages 54 to 65 of the bundle.  The materials featuring
in those pages are limited and are vague high level criticisms being made
by a person who, as found by the judge below, had not engaged in any in-
country activism, has no profile with the authorities, and is not otherwise
at any risk from them upon his return.

For these reasons, I do not consider that the judge erred by not giving
specific and additional attention to the issue of the Facebook posts in the
decision, given the findings of fact which have not been the subject of a
successful challenge I have already outlined and secondly, in light of the
background materials which suggest that there is a degree of risk faced by
bloggers of a certain profile or prominence in the country.

For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
the making of an error of law and this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

The anonymity direction which was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  remains
in force.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed Stephen H Smith                           Date 21 November 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


