
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02149/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 29 March 2021                     |
|Working Remotely by Skype for        |                                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 18 March 2021                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Bartram, Migrant Law Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (BM).  A failure to  comply  with
    this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. For convenience, although this is an appeal by the Secretary of  State,
    I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia who  was  born  on  10  February
    1991.  He arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely  on  3  September
    2017.  On 5 September 2017, he claimed asylum.  That claim was  refused
    on 31 January 2018 and his subsequent appeal was dismissed by the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Lloyd) on  29  August  2018.   The  appellant  was
    subsequently refused permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. On 4 December 2019, the appellant made further submissions  in  respect
    of his asylum claim.  He claimed to be at risk on return to Ethiopia as
    a result of his political opinion, as a member of the Oromo  Liberation
    Front ("OLF").  In relation to his claim, he now relied upon additional
    evidence from three witnesses.  One of those witnesses  ("B"),  claimed
    that he had visited the appellant's mother in  Ethiopia  and  had  been
    given two documents from the Bedeno District Police dated 7 March  2017
    and 24 March 2018 which supported the appellant's  claim  that  he  was
    wanted by the Ethiopian police as a result of his political activities.



 5. On 19 February 2020, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Adio on 21 July 2020.  The appellant again  relied  upon
    the evidence of three witnesses supporting his activities with the  OLF
    and, in the case of "B", the obtaining  of  the  two  police  documents
    which the appellant relied upon before the judge.

 7. In his determination, Judge Adio accepted that the documents relied  on
    were reasonably likely to be genuine and that  the  evidence  from  the
    witnesses, in particular "B" who had (he claimed) brought the documents
    back when he had visited  the  appellant's  mother  in  Ethiopia,  were
    plausible  and  consistent  with  the  background   material.    As   a
    consequence, the judge accepted the appellant's  involvement  with  the
    OLF and that he was wanted  by  the  Ethiopian  police.   Applying  the
    country guidance decision in MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007]
    UKAIT 0030, Judge Adio accepted that the appellant would be of interest
    to the Ethiopian authorities on return and would be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution because of his political opinion.  As a consequence,  Judge
    Adio allowed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under  Art  3
    of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal essentially on three grounds.

 9. First, the proceedings had been unfair as a  number  of  documents  had
    been submitted by the appellant's representative on the morning of  the
    hearing and the judge refused the Presenting Officer's application  for
    adjournment permitting him only a limited  time  to  consider  the  new
    evidence.

10. Secondly, the judge had been wrong to accept the  authenticity  of  the
    police documents as there was no evidence provided of the translator of
    those documents and his requisite qualifications.

11.  Thirdly,  the  judge  had  failed  to  engage  with  the  respondent's
    submission that  the  provenance  of  the  documents  was  called  into
    question because the appellant had not explained  how  these  documents
    were provided to his mother, when one was addressed to his wife and  at
    the hearing before Judge Adio no reference had been made  to  his  wife
    when Judge  Lloyd,  in  the  earlier  hearing,  had  not  accepted  her
    evidence.

12. On 25 August 2020, the First-tier Tribunal  (UTJ  Martin)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission  to  appeal.   That  permission  was  not
    limited but the judge, in particular, commented that it  was  "arguable
    that the judge had erred in accepting the documentary evidence  without
    proper consideration of its provenance or translation".

13. In response to directions sent out by the UT, on  8  October  2020  the
    Secretary of State made further submissions in support of her appeal.

14. The appeal was listed at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on  18  March
    2021 sitting remotely.  The hearing  was  joined  by  Mr  Diwyncz,  who
    represented the Secretary of State, and Mr Bartram, who represented the
    appellant, by Skype for Business.  Although there were  some  technical
    difficulties, Mr Bartram linked into the hearing both by Skype (for the
    video connection) and by telephone (for the audio connection).

15. Both representatives made oral submissions and Mr Bartram relied upon a
    skeleton argument which he  had  submitted  to  the  UT  prior  to  the
    hearing.

Discussion

    The 'Fairness' Point

16. Mr Diwyncz first relied upon, what he characterised as, the  'fairness'
    point.  He submitted that the  Presenting  Officer,  having  sought  an
    adjournment in order to read and prepare the documents submitted on the
    morning of the hearing by the appellant, had unfairly  been  denied  an
    adjournment of the hearing but had, instead, only been given  a  period
    of time on the  day  in  order  to  read  the  documents.   Mr  Diwyncz
    acknowledged the practicalities of  a  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

17. Mr Bartram accepted that he had submitted a number of documents on  the
    morning of the hearing at 11.30 a.m.  The hearing  had  been  adjourned
    until around 1.45-1.50 p.m.  The Presenting Officer's  note,  which  Mr
    Diwyncz consulted, indicated that he had been  given  one  and  a  half
    hours to prepare but, in fact, discounting any period  for  lunch,  the
    hearing took  place  some  two  hours  and  twenty  minutes  after  the
    documents  were  obtained.   Mr  Bartram  pointed  out  that  the   new
    documents, rather than documents which were already in the respondent's
    bundle or related to the earlier appeal proceedings, ran to five  pages
    together with background documents in a bundle which, on  the  face  of
    it, is around 122 pages.  The five page bundle consists of the  letters
    of support from the  three  witnesses  together  with  the  two  police
    documents including translations.

18. I do not accept Mr Diwyncz's  submissions  that  the  proceedings  were
    unfair.  It is worth noting that, following the adjournment granted  to
    the Presenting Officer to consider  the  new  documents,  there  is  no
    suggestion that the Presenting Officer sought further time or indicated
    that he  had  been  unable  adequately  to  prepare  by  reading  those
    documents.  No reference is made to any such submission in para  18  of
    Judge Adio's decision where he deals with this issue.

19. As Mr Bartram submitted, the central  issue  in  this  appeal  was,  of
    course, the appellant's credibility and his  reliance,  in  particular,
    upon the two police documents as  supporting  his  claim  that  he  was
    involved with the OLF and of interest to  the  Ethiopian  police.   The
    documents relating to that were largely those in the  appellant's  five
    page bundle and, upon which, it is clear from the judge's determination
    the Presenting Officer made detailed submissions.

20. Likewise, there is nothing in the determination  to  suggest  that  the
    Presenting Officer was not able to make adequate submissions concerning
    the background material and whether it justified a  departure  from  MB
    which was the governing country guidance decision.

21. If the Presenting Officer  considered,  after  having  been  granted  a
    period to prepare the new material, that he was not in  a  position  to
    proceed it might be expected that he would have raised the matter again
    with Judge Adio, as he would have been entitled to be, when the hearing
    reconvened at 1.45/1.50 p.m.  He did not do so and,  it  would  appear,
    therefore he considered that he had had sufficient time to prepare.  In
    these circumstances, I am not persuaded that  it  was  unfair  for  the
    judge not to grant the initial adjournment but to give  the  Presenting
    Officer time to prepare and, having  done  so,  to  continue  with  the
    hearing without any objection  then  being  raised  by  the  Presenting
    Officer that the time given was, in fact, insufficient.

22. For these reasons, therefore, I reject the first ground upon which  the
    Secretary of State seeks to challenge the judge's decision.

    The 'Translation' Point

23. Turning now to the second ground, under the Procedure Rules  applicable
    in the First-tier Tribunal, any document provided to the  Tribunal  not
    in English (apart from documents in Welsh) "must  be accompanied by  an
    English Translation"  (The  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  (SI  2014/2604,  rule
    12(5)(b)). The same rule in substance applies  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (see The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698),
    rule 13(6)).

24. During the course of the hearing, I drew to the parties' attention  the
    relevant provision in the Practice Directions for the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers (as amended, dated 13  November  2014)  concerned  with
    trial bundles and  documents  that  have  been  translated.   Paragraph
    8.2(b) the Practice Direction states:

         "The best practice for the preparation of bundles is as follows:

         ....

         (b)  where the document is not in the  English  language,  a  typed
             translation of the document  signed  by  the  translator,  and
             certifying that the translation is accurate, must be  inserted
             in the bundle next to  the  copy  of  the  original  document,
             together with details of the identity  and  qualifications  of
             the translator; ...."

25. Of course, this sets out "best practice" and is not mandatory,  in  the
    sense that a failure to follow it will necessarily amount to  an  error
    of law.  However,  the  provision  of  a  translation  is,  of  course,
    required under the Rules.  The need for the  typed  translation  to  be
    signed by the translator and certified as  accurate,  including  giving
    details of his or her identity and qualifications, goes to the heart of
    the issue of whether a judge can rely upon a translation as an accurate
    representation in the English language of the contents of the  document
    in question.  It is only if the translation can be relied  upon  as  an
    accurate translation that the document can properly be assessed  and  a
    view taken as to whether or not it is genuine or, at least, a  document
    which can be relied upon by the judge in reaching his  findings  in  an
    appeal.  The Practice Direction  does  not,  necessarily,  have  to  be
    followed in precise form - only in  substance.   But,  the  information
    which para 8.2(b) refers to must, in the usual case, be provided  to  a
    judge if the reliability or authenticity of a document is in issue  and
    must be considered by a judge in translation.  Absent such  information
    properly evidenced, unless a translation is conceded by both parties to
    be accurate, a judge is very unlikely to be in a position  properly  to
    determine whether  the  original  document  is  authentic  or  reliable
    because he or she cannot be satisfied that the translation is reliable.



26. In this appeal, the two police documents both in their original and  in
    translation are found in the appellant's five page bundle.  Mr  Bartram
    accepted in the course of his submissions that the translated documents
    had been translated by a person in  Ethiopia  whom,  he  told  me,  was
    acceptable  to  the  legal  aid  authorities  and  was  qualified.   He
    indicated that he thought he had provided  the  qualifications  of  the
    translator to the judge as he had received them from the translator  by
    email.  However, he could not be certain of that and there  appears  to
    be no record of such a document in the Tribunal's  file.   He  accepted
    that the translations did not on their face authenticate, and there was
    no supplementary document which authenticated,  the  translation  under
    the signature of the translator.

27. Neither of the translations indicates who was the translator, what  (if
    any) were his qualifications and there is no  authentication  that  the
    contents of the documents have been accurately translated.  Mr  Bartram
    told the judge, as I understand it, that the translator was appropriate
    and qualified.  He also told me that the translator was  acceptable  to
    the legal aid authorities.  This, however, is not  the  evidence  from,
    and about, the translator  which  the  judge  needed  in  order  to  be
    confident that  the  translations  are  accurate  translations  of  the
    original documents relied upon by the appellant.

28.  The  judge  placed  significant  weight  upon   these   documents   as
    establishing the credibility of the appellant's  claim.   He  concluded
    that they were "reasonably likely to be genuine" (see para 46).  It  is
    not  entirely  clear  what  the  judge  meant  when  he  said,  in  the
    immediately following sentence in para 46:

         "I take into account the fact that Mr Bartram as  a  solicitor  has
         stated he organised the translation of the documents and whilst the
         weight might be less as Practice Directions were not  followed  the
         contents of the letters support the appellant's claim".

29. The contents of the letters, of course, only "support  the  appellant's
    claim" if the translations are accurate.  Whether or not the judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the documents were reliable required  him  to
    be satisfied as to the reliability of the  translations.   True  it  is
    that the Practice Directions were not followed but how it could be said
    that the judge gave less weight to them as a result,  is  not  easy  to
    fathom.  He gave the documents significant weight  by  concluding  that
    they were reasonably likely to be genuine.  However,  despite  what  he
    was told by Mr Bartram, the judge did not have the  necessary  material
    concerning the translator, his or her qualifications and,  importantly,
    the translator's authentication that the  translations  were  accurate.
    It may be that all of this material was (and is) available and  can  be
    provided at a further hearing of the appeal but it was not  put  before
    the judge.

30. In my judgment, the judge was not entitled to rely upon the  translated
    documents, and conclude that the  original  documents  were  reasonably
    likely to be genuine,  since  the  translations  (which  was  the  only
    evidence upon which he could rely as to the contents of the  documents)
    were not established to be reliable.  Despite Mr Bartram's  suggestion,
    in  the  course  of  his  submissions,  that  the  documents  were  not
    necessarily material to the outcome of the appellant's  appeal,  it  is
    plain on reading the judge's determination that  these  documents  were
    central to his conclusion that the appellant's claim was  credible  and
    that, therefore, he was at risk on return  to  Ethiopia.   The  judge's
    error of law in  relying  upon  these  documents,  in  the  absence  of
    translations upon which he could rely, makes his  positive  credibility
    finding unsustainable.

    Other Grounds

31. In the light of that conclusion, it is not necessary  to  consider  the
    respondent's third ground of  appeal.   I  should  also  note  that  Mr
    Diwyncz specifically eschewed any reliance upon the point  raised,  not
    in the grounds of appeal but in the subsequent submissions made by  the
    respondent, that the judge erred in law by failing to depart  from  the
    country guidance decision in MB in the light of more recent  background
    evidence.  Mr Diwyncz accepted that he was not entitled  to  rely  upon
    this point, not raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  and  upon  which
    permission to appeal had, therefore, not been granted.

32. However, for the reasons I have given, the judge  materially  erred  in
    law in reaching his positive credibility finding and in concluding that
    the appellant had established a real risk of persecution on  return  to
    Ethiopia because of his political opinion.  The  judge's  decision  and
    findings cannot stand.  The decision has to be re-made and none of  the
    judge's findings can be preserved.

Decision

33. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 3  of  the  ECHR
    involved the making of a material error of law.  That  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

34. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Adio.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               22 March 2021


