
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02860/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st March 2019                            |On 28th March 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    [R s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, of Counsel instruction by L&L Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth is recorded
    as [~] 1991. On 2 March 2016 he claimed international protection  as  a
    refugee on the basis of perceived connection with the  LTTE  such  that
    were he to be returned to Sri Lanka his life would be at risk from  the
    authorities.

 2. On 14 February 2018 the Respondent refused the Appellant's  application
    and he appealed. On 25 October 2018 his appeal was heard  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Cary, sitting at Taylor House. Judge  Cary,  in
    his Decision and Reasons, which runs to 100 paragraphs,  dismissed  the
    appeal both on international protection and on human rights grounds.

 3. Not content with that decision, by Notice, dated 22 November 2018,  the
    Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
    application made to the First-tier Tribunal, dated  28  November  2018,
    was refused but a renewed application was made to the Upper Tribunal by
    Notice dated 13 December 2018 resulting in permission  being  grant  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam. She granted permission on all grounds.

 4. It is important to the background of  this  appeal  to  note  that  the
    Appellant had been diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia with  lack
    of capacity. The Appellant proceeded with a litigation friend  but  did
    not himself give oral evidence at  his  appeal.  Evidence  was  however
    received from the litigation friend Mr Suandaralingham  together  with,
    and importantly, medical evidence. The principal medical  evidence  was
    from Dr Andres Izquierdo-Martin FRCSEd FRCEM, Consultant  in  Emergency
    Medicine whose report is  dated  20  June  2018  who  reported  on  the
    scarring upon the Appellant's body. There was also  a  report  from  Dr
    Robin Lawrence MA MRCP MRCPYCH, General Adult Psychiatrist whose report
    is dated 24 June 2018 later supplemented by a report dated  11  October
    2018.

 5. At the core of the Appellant's case, taken from his  witness  statement
    dated 22 August 2018, was the contention that his  father  had  been  a
    staunch LTTE supporter whose whereabouts had not been known since 2002.
    After reports were filed with a view to trying to find the  Appellant's
    father, threats were received from the Sri  Lankan  authorities.  On  3
    December 2010 the Appellant, on his case,  was  arrested  and  kept  in
    detention for three months during which he  suffered  ill-treatment  at
    the hands of the authorities before being released on condition that he
    should report every two weeks. With the help of an agent the  Appellant
    left the country. It was further his case that he was advised by family
    members to  make  his  way  to  Canada.  He  was  provided  with  false
    documentation.  Eventually  the  Canadian   authorities   removed   the
    Appellant to Sri Lanka where arrived he on 14 July 2013. The  Appellant
    was arrested by the Sri Lankan authorities and detained for  about  two
    and a half years during which time he was tortured. Again, with the use
    of false documents, on 8 February 2016, he was able to leave Sri  Lanka
    eventually  arriving  in  the   United   Kingdom   where   he   claimed
    international protection.

 6. Part of the reasoning  of  Judge  Cary  in  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    account was the absence of evidence of the Appellant ever  having  left
    the United Kingdom in 2013 and in particular nothing from the  Canadian
    or US authorities supporting the Appellant's  contention  that  he  was
    removed to Sri Lanka as he contented. I refer here to paragraph  62  of
    the Decision and Reasons.

 7. As a general proposition I observe that, "absence of  evidence  is  not
    evidence of absence." However  relevant  to  the  considerations  which
    arise in this appeal is the absence of what a judge might  consider  to
    be evidence that could have been easily obtainable. In TK  (Burundi)  v
    SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 the Court of Appeal held that where there  were
    circumstances in which evidence corroborating the appellant's  evidence
    was easily obtainable, the  lack  of  such  evidence  must  affect  the
    assessment of the appellant's credibility. It  followed  that  where  a
    judge in assessing credibility relied on the fact  that  there  was  no
    independent supporting evidence where there should be and there was  no
    credible account for its absence, he committed no error of law when  he
    relied on that fact for rejecting the account of the appellant.

 8. In her submission to me, Ms Anzani accepted that if  it  were  open  to
    Judge Cary to find that the Appellant was not in Sri Lanka in 2013 then
    the appeal fell away, and it was further accepted that was the starting
    point therefore.

 9. There were six grounds of appeal.

    Ground 1: The Judge misdirected himself and  made  unreasonable  and/or
    irrational findings when assessing Dr Izquierdo-Martin's report and the
    Appellant's credibility.

10. Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  reported  on  the  scarring.  In  his  report  he
    identified four scars: one on the back, two on the upper limbs, and one
    on the lower limbs. He refers to the Istanbul Protocol adopted  by  the
    General Assembly of the United Nations on 4 December  2000  (Resolution
    55/89) which provided as follows:

         "187...For each lesion and for the overall pattern of lesions,  the
         physician should indicate a degree of consistency  between  it  and
         the attribution given by  the  patient.  The  following  terms  are
         generally used:

          a) Not consistent:  The lesion could not have been caused by  the
             trauma described:

          b) Consistent with: The lesion could  have  been  caused  by  the
             trauma described, but it is non-specific and  there  are  many
             other possible causes;

          c) Highly consistent: The lesion could have been  caused  by  the
             trauma described, and there are few other possible causes;

          d) Typical of: This is an appearance that is usually  found  with
             this type of trauma, but there are other possible causes;

          e) Diagnostic of: This appearance could not have been  caused  in
             any other way than that described.

         188...Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of all  lesions  and
         not the consistency of  each  lesion  with  a  particular  form  of
         torture that is important in assessing the torture story..."

11. Dr Izquierdo-Martin noted to what each of the scars was  attributed  by
    the Appellant.   Dr Izquierdo-Martin was of the opinion that in respect
    of three scars the appearance  and  pattern  was  typical  of  injuries
    caused by being unwillingly and deliberately beaten  with  long  narrow
    blunt implements as described by the Appellant. He went on to  consider
    alternative causes. The remaining scar is described as consistent  with
    having been deliberately caused but it was  accepted  that  alternative
    causes might have been a skin  infection  or  other  inflammatory  skin
    condition. The possibility of accidental injury  was  considered  as  a
    possibility. Self-inflicted injury was thought to be very  unlikely  in
    view of the position of the scar. As to the age of the scars, there was
    no doubt in the opinion of Dr Izquierdo-Martin that they were more than
    six months old and consistent with being more than two years old.

12. It is of note that the description of, "typical" is the second  highest
    in the assessment of attributions and therefore worthy of  considerable
    respect in the overall assessment of credibility.

13. In the grounds, at paragraph 8, objection  is  taken  to  Judge  Cary's
    analysis of Dr Izquierdo-Martin's report and in particular to paragraph
    64 of the Decision and Reasons where he stated, "None of  the  relevant
    scars identified by Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  fall  within  the  diagnostic
    category referred to in the Protocol." Whilst the use of the descriptor
    "typical", rather than "diagnostic", left open the possibility of other
    causes, the approach of the judge, it was submitted,  was  to  put  the
    standard of proof too high.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  in  this
    jurisdiction the judge is to consider whether there is a  "real  risk".
    It is the "lower standard" that is to be applied.

14. Still further it is submitted that Judge Cary had  misdirected  himself
    at paragraph 64 when saying that Dr Izquierdo-Martin's  report  was  of
    "limited  value"  when  assessing  the  Appellant's  credibility.   The
    submission was that although  at  paragraph  40  of  his  Decision  and
    Reasons, Judge Cary referred to the guidance in  JL  (Medical  reports-
    credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 IAC, he did not properly  apply  it.
    Paragraph 32 in the case of JL reads as follows:

         "Further, to say that it is  not  for  a  medical  expert  to  make
         credibility assessments can amount to a failure to recognise that a
         medical report, even if it may be of  limited  value,  is  evidence
         independent of the claimant's evidence: see R (on  the  application
         of AM). As stated by Rix LJ at [30] of this judgment:


             "If an independent  expert's  findings,  expert  opinion,  and
             honest belief (no one suggested that her belief was other than
             honest) are to be refused the status of  independent  evidence
             because, as must inevitably happen, to some extent the  expert
             starts with an account  from  her  client  and  patient,  then
             practically all  meaning  would  be  taken  from  the  clearly
             important policy that, in  the  absence  of  very  exceptional
             circumstances suggesting otherwise,  independent  evidence  of
             torture  makes  the  victim  unsuitable  for  detention.  That
             conclusion is a  fortiori  where  the  independent  expert  is
             applying  the  internationally  recognised  Istanbul  Protocol
             designed for the reporting  on  and  assessment  of  signs  of
             torture. A requirement of "evidence" is  not  the  same  as  a
             requirement  of  "proof",  conclusive  or  otherwise.  Whether
             evidence amounts to proof, on any  particular  standards  (and
             the burden and standard of proof in asylum cases are not high)
             is a matter of weight and assessment"."


15. I observe however that at paragraph 33 in JL, not referred  to  in  the
    grounds, the Upper Tribunal adopted the observations of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in the case of SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155 at [21]:

         "Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to be given to expert  (or
         indeed any) evidence is a matter for the  trial  judge...A  judge's
         decision not to accept expert evidence does not involve an error of
         law  on  his  part,  provided  he  approaches  that  evidence  with
         appropriate care and gives good reasons for his decision."

16. Criticism is made in the grounds on the basis of  the  submission  that
    although Dr Izquierdo-Martin had  given  independent  evidence  of  the
    cause of the scars, Judge Cary was silent on the point.

17. It was open to Judge Cary to note and take into account  that  none  of
    the relevant scars fell within,  "the  diagnostic  category".   It  was
    true. Judge Cary was required to  evaluate  the  overall  risk  to  the
    Appellant. The scarring to the Appellant,  and  more  particularly  its
    causes, were essential to the overall  evaluation  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility. It is clear, that without more,  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  had
    identified a real risk  that  the  scarring  had  been  caused  as  the
    Appellant contended. The  need  to  give  significant  weight  to  that
    evidence became all the more important however in  the  context  of  an
    Appellant who might have been suffering from mental illness.

18. A further point taken in the course of submission was that at  the  end
    of paragraph 64 Judge Cary had written:

         "It is clear that if I find after paying due regard to the  medical
         evidence that the Appellant's account of how he came to be  scarred
         by torture is  implausible  I  do  not  have  to  come  up  with  a
         definitive alternative account of how the scarring occurred".

19. That is superficially true, but the assessment of credibility  requires
    an holistic view of the evidence. The judge needed to  stand  back  and
    look at it from various angles, and apply the lower standard  of  proof
    as it applies to a vulnerable appellant (see paragraph 210 of the UNHCR
    Handbook and Guidelines on  Procedures  and  Criteria  for  Determining
    Refugee  Status),  against  background  material  supportive   of   the
    circumstances  in  which  the  Appellant  contended  he  sustained  his
    injuries, (and I refer here not  only  the  medical  evidence  but  the
    material going  to  the  Sri  Lankan  government's  attitude  to  those
    associated with the LTTE) and  at  least  consider  the  likelihood  of
    alternative causes, even if not specific in the finding  of  what  they
    were. No one had suggested, for example, that they were self-inflicted.



    Ground 2: Irrationally and/or unreasonable rejection of  Dr  Lawrence's
    evidence without adequate reasoning

20. Repeating the submissions in relation to Ground One, it  was  submitted
    that Judge Cary  erred  in  the  manner  in  which  he  approached  the
    psychiatric report of Dr Lawrence and in particular in finding,  as  he
    did, at paragraph 58 of the Decision and Reasons that  the  Appellant's
    psychosis could have been caused by other events and not torture.

21. I repeat the observations made above with respect to the  treatment  of
    expert evidence in a case such as this.

22. At paragraph 58 of the Decision and Reasons Judge Cary  notes  that  Dr
    Lawrence in his consideration of other causes goes on to say:

         "That would seem to suggest that there could well be  other  causes
         for the Appellant's symptoms other than the  treatment  he  alleges
         received from the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  particularly  as  the
         Appellant was born and brought up in a warzone and  did  not  leave
         Jaffna  until  near  the  end  of  the  hostilities   between   the
         authorities and the LTTE. The Appellant told Dr  Lawrence  that  he
         has seen "terrible things" and that he slept in a bunker  and  seen
         at least one  dead  body.  Indeed  Dr  Lawrence  accepts  that  his
         reaction to a  helicopter  flying  overhead  "was  consistent  with
         trauma associated with having lived in a war zone"."

23. The concern here is that the approach of  Judge  Cary  to  the  medical
    evidence was to look at it piecemeal, instead of part of a  package  of
    evidence pointing in a particular direction.  Whilst  true  that  there
    were other possible causes and the Appellant had seen terrible  things,
    what was the impact on the evidence of the scarring be "typical" of the
    attribution given to it  by  the  Appellant  taken  together  with  the
    psychiatric evidence? Add to that the background material, to  which  I
    have referred.

24. Judge Cary appears to have had his  focus  on  other  causes  when  the
    question was whether there was  a  real  risk,  having  regard  to  the
    totality of the evidence, that the injuries contended for  were  caused
    in the manner in which the Appellant described?

25. In his first report  Dr  Lawrence  also  had  regard  to  the  Istanbul
    Protocol. The differential diagnosis in the first report was  that  the
    Appellant was suffering from a psychosis, possibly secondary depression
    and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. In the alternative, there could  be
    schizophrenic psychosis. He was of the view that it was highly unlikely
    that the Appellant  was  simulating  his  symptoms.  After  considering
    alternative causes Dr Lawrence came to the view  that  the  explanation
    given by the Appellant was consistent with symptoms  of  Post-Traumatic
    Stress Disorder and consistent with a  diagnosis  of  major  depressive
    episodes which had created a psychosis. The risk of suicide was said to
    be low. He went on to say that in his view the Appellant did  not  have
    capacity, at the time  of  writing  the  report,  to  understand  court
    proceedings and, at the time  of  writing  his  report,  delusions  and
    hallucinations  rendered  him  unfit  to  face  cross-examination.  The
    "consistency"  of  the  symptoms  corroborated  the  finding  that  the
    scarring was "typical" of the manner of attribution.

26. The second report which is in fact a  letter  dated  11  October  2018,
    focussed on capacity. In that second letter, Dr Lawrence stated:

         "If  I  may  be  allowed  to  express  my  opinion  concerning  the
         credibility of his story, this man  has  a  definite  diagnosis  of
         schizophrenia. It is unusual and unlikely and  very  difficult  for
         anybody with schizophrenia to  deliberately  dissimulate.  Patients
         with schizophrenia are generally honest, although their account may
         vary from day  to  day,  these  are  not  deliberate  untruths  but
         reflections of the change in mental state.

         In  the  case  of  this  particular  man,  he  was  certainly   not
         malingering, it would have been impossible for him to know  and  to
         tell me about the  symptoms  he  has  which  give  him  a  definite
         diagnosis of schizophrenia, unless he was experiencing it  and  his
         mental state is consistent with the generality of  his  description
         of what happened to him in Sri Lanka."

27. Judge Cary  noted  an  apparent  unexplained  shift  in  Dr  Lawrence's
    evidence. Judge Cary was critical  of  Dr  Lawrence,  and  I  refer  to
    paragraph 57 of the Decision and Reasons wherein it was  observed  that
    the definite diagnosis of schizophrenia followed an earlier  report  in
    which it was said there was no firm diagnosis.

28. I am of the view that Judge Cary was too willing to  hold  against  the
    weight of the evidence as a whole, this apparent shift,  which  on  one
    view was no shift at all. In a Court of Law or a  Tribunal,  the  facts
    are often what the judge finds them to be. It is for that reason that a
    charge of murder may fail in  the  Crown  Court,  but  the  same  facts
    contended for might be established in civil proceedings.  To so  easily
    dismiss the substance of this expert's, report because of this apparent
    shift was unfair to the Appellant. If the judge was so concerned by it,
    he should have considered causing  enquiries  to  be  made,  especially
    given the vulnerability of the Appellant being contended for.

29. In expanding upon the submissions made under  this  ground,  Ms  Anzani
    invited me to find that the Judge had erred in stating that, "The  more
    a diagnosis is dependent on assuming that  the  account  given  by  the
    Appellant is to believe, the less likely it is that significant  weight
    will be attached to it."

30. Whilst Judge  Cary  was  right  to  go  on  to  say  that  it  was  his
    responsibility to assess the Appellant's credibility in  the  light  of
    all the evidence including any medical report, it was the case that  Dr
    Lawrence had explained that  persons  suffering  from  the  Appellant's
    psychosis were unlikely to be able to make up their symptoms.

31. Whilst Judge Cary was entitled to be concerned about how it was that Dr
    Lawrence was able to say in his letter of  October  that  there  was  a
    definite diagnosis of schizophrenia when  in  fact  that  was  not  the
    opinion expressed in the earlier report was something which Judge  Cary
    was entitled to observe. However, whether the Appellant  was  suffering
    from schizophrenia or a psychosis was still said to be  such  that  the
    Appellant required the  help  of  the  local  CMHTT  and  whatever  the
    symptoms, they were not symptoms, on the evidence which it  would  have
    been possible for the Appellant to make up.

32. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  said
    that it was arguably unclear what the Judge made of the evidence of  Dr
    Lawrence and how it impacted on the assessment and credibility. I  have
    already observed that Judge Cary was  critical  of  Dr  Lawrence.  With
    respect to Upper Tribunal Judge Mc William, reading  the  Decision  and
    Reasons as a whole it would appear that Judge  Cary  gave  very  little
    weight to the report of Dr Lawrence.

33. At paragraph 17 of Ms Anzani's Skeleton Argument, she said:

         "Dr Lawrence is a Consultant Psychiatrist. His conclusions were not
         simply based on taking the Appellant's account at face  value.  His
         conclusions followed  expert  examination  and  assessment  of  the
         Appellant. He applied the Istanbul Protocol. Contrary to  what  was
         said by Judge Cary, Dr Lawrence did consider other causes for  what
         has been observed and the possibility of  simulation.  Dr  Lawrence
         rejected the possibility of simulation  of  symptoms  and  provided
         cogent reasons for the same, it is submitted  that  greater  weight
         ought to have been attributed to his findings, and/or at  the  very
         least, clear reasons given for rejecting them."

34. As to the weight to be given to the report that was generally a  matter
    for Judge Cary, but I agree that effectively to have dispensed with the
    evidence altogether as appears to have been done by Judge Cary and give
    it so little weight was not adequately explained. It is  clear  reading
    the decision as a whole that Judge  Cary  has  rejected  Dr  Lawrence's
    evidence on the basis that he appears to have accepted  at  face  value
    what the Appellant was saying to him. I  do  not  see  how  that  would
    significantly affect the expert opinion that the  Appellant  (i)  would
    not be able to make up his symptoms; (ii) was mentally  ill  and  (iii)
    had symptoms consistent with their attribution.

    Ground 3: Judge Cary's findings at [61] as to ongoing interest  in  the
    Appellant's father following the cessation of hostilities are  at  odds
    with the objective evidence

35. It was submitted that  Judge  Cary  made  an  unreasonable  finding  at
    paragraph 61 of his determination by rejecting the Appellant's  account
    that the authorities would have been interested in him because  of  his
    father's links to the LTTE. It is suggested that  Judge  Cary  did  not
    have sufficient regard to Counsel's skeleton argument  wherein  it  was
    submitted that the UN Country Evidence highlighted that the Sri  Lankan
    authorities were interested in anyone with links to the LTTE no  matter
    how remote or indirect and that this confirmed the credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account to have been arrested after the  cessation  of  the
    war because of his father's links to the LTTE.

36. Standing alone this ground might be said to amount to no  more  than  a
    disagreement  with  findings  of  fact.  Further  and  importantly  the
    observation of Judge Cary that it made no  sense  for  the  Appellant's
    family to report the Appellant's father's disappearance to the  police,
    if he were connected with the LTTE, becomes a  stronger  point  against
    the  Appellant  the  more  it  is  established  that  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities are interested in anyone with a link to the LTTE no  matter
    how remote or indirect. But that  evidence  was  not  to  be  taken  in
    isolation. A question that Judge Cary ought to have asked in the  light
    of the medical evidence was  how  reliable  was  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant given his mental health issue?  What  was  the  core  of  the
    claim? It is to be  remembered  that  Dr  Lawrence  had  opined  that,"
    Patients  with  schizophrenia  are  generally  honest,  although  their
    account may vary from day to day, these are not deliberate untruths but
    reflections of the change in mental state."

    Ground 4: Judge Cary erred in misstating the Appellant's evidence

37. The  submission  under  this  ground  was  that  Judge  Cary  had  made
    unreasonable credibility findings by rejecting the credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account to have been tortured in Sri Lanka on the basis  of
    a mistake of fact and peripheral  matters  which  did  not  affect  the
    credibility of the Appellant's core.

38. At paragraph 50 of the Decision and Reasons, Judge Cary noted  that  in
    the asylum interview  the  Appellant  had  said  that  his  father  had
    disappeared and that his  family  subsequently  moved  from  Jaffna  to
    Colombo after the army had  tried  to  arrest  him  in  2008.  That  is
    repeated at the end of paragraph  61  (not  paragraph  62  as  said  at
    paragraph 27 of the Grounds) but in any event that  the  Appellant  was
    living in Colombo is repeated at paragraph 67. However, it is submitted
    that at no time did the Appellant say that  the  family  had  moved  to
    Colombo. The point is taken that the Judge held against  the  Appellant
    at paragraph 67 that the Appellant was contending that he was receiving
    treatment in Jaffna when his family  were  living  in  Colombo.  It  is
    contended that the Appellant had never said that his family  had  moved
    to Colombo only that he had.

39. There is merit in this point and Ms  Isherwood  for  the  Secretary  of
    State did not point to any evidence which justified  the  finding  that
    the Appellant's family had moved with him to Colombo.

    Ground 5: Judge Cary erred in rejecting the Appellant's claim  to  have
    left the United Kingdom in 2013

40. Ms Anzani did not expand upon this to any significant degree before me.
    However, the point is taken that the Appellant would have been  subject
    to administrative removal. It was the Appellant's  case  that  he  left
    using false documents with no leave to enter Canada  or  Martinique  so
    that any investigation made by the  Appellant's  representatives  would
    not have been fruitful in any event. It was submitted that  the  Judges
    rejection of the Appellant's account of leaving on false  documentation
    was not adequately reasoned.

41. If the Appellant's evidence were approached through the prism of a well
    person one can see how Judge Cary came to the view he did, but  if  one
    applies the lower standard of proof to a person with established mental
    health issues then it becomes all the more important to be  circumspect
    when approaching the evidence as a whole.

    Ground 6: Judge Cary erred in his assessment of risk on return

42. In looking at the overall credibility assessment and the fifth ground I
    was asked again to have regard to the acceptance of Judge Cary  of  the
    submission made by the Presenting Officer at the hearing in the  First-
    tier Tribunal that neither the US nor the Canadian authorities had  any
    biometric details relating to the Appellant. There was said  to  be  no
    evidence that the Appellant had ever left the United  Kingdom  in  July
    2013 as claimed and that his solicitors appear to have made no  attempt
    to verify any part of the journey and made no attempt  to  liaise  with
    the authorities in Canada or Martinique if that is where the  Appellant
    ultimately ended up before  his  removal  to  Sri  Lanka.  I  refer  to
    paragraph 62 of the Decision and Reasons. It is  submitted  that  there
    would not have been any such evidence available and that  is  therefore
    unfair to hold that against the Appellant.



Analysis

43. The attack on the weight given to the medical evidence must be seen  in
    the light of the mental illness of the Appellant. The extent  to  which
    the Appellant was mentally ill was  therefore  an  extremely  important
    finding to be made by the Judge. The more the  Appellant  was  mentally
    ill the more unreliable such evidence as he gave, albeit third-hand, to
    the Tribunal.

44. Reading the Decision and Reasons it is clear that Judge  Cary  did  not
    think much of Dr Lawrence's evidence. However, I come to the view  that
    Judge Cary too easily dismissed it and  gave  it  insufficient  weight.
    The evidence was to be read together with the  other  medical  evidence
    and background material which together offered support to the  core  of
    the case being advanced by the Appellant.

45. Whilst I am confident  that  Judge  Cary  did  not  mean  to  give  the
    impression that he was focussed on why the appeal should be  dismissed,
    rather than asking if there were substantial grounds for believing  the
    Appellant, standing back and reading the  Decision  and  Reasons  as  a
    whole, it does come across that way.

46. I come to the view that Judge Cary fell into error by  looking  at  the
    pieces of evidence in isolation; the one from the  other,  rather  than
    weighing the evidence in favour of the Appellant as a piece and  taking
    an holistic view when he ought also, having given appropriate (by which
    I mean more) weight to the medical evidence and due  allowance  to  the
    medical condition when considering the core of the Appellant's  account
    as advanced on his behalf. What is not clear from reading the  Decision
    and Reasons is the  extent  to  which  Judge  Cary  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was ill.

47. That the scarring was found by Dr Izquierdo-Martin to be more than  two
    years old did not necessarily mean, that the injuries  were  caused  in
    2013 to 2016 as suggested by  the  Appellant  but  the  weight  of  the
    evidence certainly pointed to there being a real risk of that being the
    case.

48. For all the reasons set out above, I find that the  Decision  of  Judge
    Cary cannot stand and must be set aside because of the  various  errors
    in the approach to the evidence identified.

Remaking

49. Little is to be gained from  remitting  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and neither party suggested that I should take that course.

50. I take the view looking at the totality of the evidence that it  points
    very heavily in the Appellant's favour. It  will  be  appreciated  that
    whilst the standard of proof is the lower standard, I find that even if
    the standard were higher, still I would have found that  the  Appellant
    has made out his case. That the scarring was, at least in part  typical
    of what one would expect to  find  having  regard  to  the  Appellant's
    account from an expert, whose expertise has not been challenged  is  to
    be given considerable weight.

51. Contrary to the view of Judge Cary, I take the view that  the  evidence
    of Dr Lawrence finding, as he did that the appellant was mentally  ill,
    whether schizophrenia or psychosis was also evidence deserving both  of
    respect and considerable weight.

52. The background material supported the Appellant's account. I accept too
    that certain aspects of the evidence given by the  Appellant  might  be
    unreliable but there is medical evidence which explains why that  might
    be the case.

53. On the absence of evidence of the appellant having  come  into  contact
    with the Canadian, US or authorities of Martinique, I accept  that  the
    argument could be made for better evidence on that point but overall, I
    give the Appellant the benefit of the doubt on that evidence given that
    I otherwise accept that as to the core of the Appellant's  account  the
    evidence is made out.

54. For the avoidance of doubt I find that  the  Appellant  as  established
    that he is known to the authorities in Sri Lanka and that were he to be
    returned he would be at risk, even at the airport on  arrival  or  soon
    after arrival. In coming to  that  view,  I  have  had  regard  to  the
    guidance in GJ and others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).



Notice of Decision

The appeal is to the Upper Tribunal is allowed. The decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is set aside and remade such that the  Appellant's  appeal  on
international protection grounds (as a refugee) is allowed.  It  necessarily
follows that the appeal is allowed also on human rights grounds (Articles  3
and 8)


Signed                              Date 25 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker



