
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02605/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Oral decision given following hearing     |On 31 July 2017                   |
|On 18 July 2017                           |                                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     mar
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chelvan, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh who claims to have been  born
    in 1976.  He entered this country with entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student in June 2011 and was granted leave until August 2012.
     Prior to the expiry of that leave he made an application to remain  in
    this country on the basis of his family and private  life  in  the  UK,
    which application was refused.  He thereafter made a number of  further
    applications and also brought judicial review proceedings.  He was made
    the subject of reporting conditions but absconded.

 2. Eventually, having been in this country unlawfully for some  years  and
    having avoided apprehension  by  the  respondent,  he  was  encountered
    working unlawfully in an Indian restaurant in  January  2017.   He  was
    arrested and detained and then on 8 January 2017 he claimed asylum  for
    a number of reasons, including claiming, it would seem  for  the  first
    time, that he would be at risk on return to Bangladesh because he was a
    gay man.  As the appellant was taken to  Harmondsworth  and  placed  in
    immigration custody, the investigating officers were  obliged  to  have
    regard to the Home Office guidance as  to  how  detained  appeal  cases
    should be dealt with.  The guidance provided  by  the  respondent  "for
    deciding asylum claims in detention" states as follows:-

         "Once an applicant is  transferred  to  the  relevant  IRC,  a  DAC
         officer will conduct an induction interview within a day  of  their
         arrival.  The purpose of the induction interview is to ascertain if
         the applicant needs  assistance  from  a  publically  funded  legal
         representative or if they have instructed a firm privately".

 3. It is accepted on behalf of the respondent that the templates for  this
    interview do not contain questions to demonstrate  that  this  guidance
    has been complied with, and indeed it is the applicant's case  in  this
    appeal that the guidance was not in fact complied with and he  was  not
    at that stage (and on his case at any stage) informed of his  right  to
    at least seek to be represented under public funding  (which  would  at
    some stage require him to satisfy both a means and merits  test).   Had
    the template interview contained questions which were  consistent  with
    the guidance, it  might  have  been  possible  for  the  respondent  to
    establish that he was in fact asked whether or  not  he  wished  to  be
    assisted by a publicly funded legal representative, but  in  the  event
    the respondent is unable to establish that the  guidance  was  complied
    with.  The nearest that the respondent can come to this is that in  his
    asylum  interview  itself  the  question  was  asked  "Name  of   legal
    representative/firm" to which the answer is written in  ink  "Applicant
    stated rep not attending".  It is not  clear  from  this  whether  that
    means that the applicant was saying that he was  represented  but  that
    the rep was not attending, or whether he was not  represented  at  all.
    The appellant's instructions to his Counsel representing him  today  is
    that he had been represented privately the previous day with respect to
    an application for temporary release, which application had been funded
    by friends, but although the appellant may have had some representation
    at some time, it cannot be said on the basis of this  answer  that  the
    respondent can establish  he  was  ever  told  of  his  right  to  seek
    representation under a public funding certificate.   The  template  for
    interviews ought to be consistent with the guidance and until such time
    as it is, difficulties like this might arise again because where it  is
    said on behalf of an applicant that guidance has not been followed,  it
    is important that where possible the respondent is able to show if this
    is the case (as it should be) that this allegation is not correct.

 4.  In  the  event,  a  decision  was  subsequently  made  rejecting   the
    appellant's  claim;  there  were  inconsistencies  within   his   case,
    including as to when he first appreciated that he was a gay man,  which
    discrepancies (amounting to some years) are matters which  need  to  be
    explained, but that is not a matter for this Tribunal today.

 5. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence sitting at Harmondsworth on
    4 April 2017.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated two weeks later he
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The   appellant   now   appeals,
    permission having been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge C A  Parker
    and the matter is before me.

 6. In the course of his arguments on behalf of the appellant,  Mr  Chelvan
    stated that  it  was  only  24  hours  before  this  hearing  that  his
    instructing solicitors were provided with copies  of  the  Home  Office
    bundle and it was only at that stage that it became apparent that there
    was no evidence from the record of interviews held with  the  appellant
    that the respondent had in fact followed her guidance. Although many of
    the arguments made within the skeleton argument prepared on  behalf  of
    the appellant and within the grounds of appeal may lack obvious  merit,
    this appeal, in my judgement, turns on one important  issue,  which  is
    whether or not the judge made a procedural error by refusing  to  grant
    the appellant, who was representing himself, an  adjournment  in  order
    first of all to give him time in which to  seek  further  evidence  (it
    should not be forgotten that he was in custody at the time),  but  more
    importantly, to enable him to seek legal representation.

 7. I note, although this fact is not necessarily central to  my  decision,
    that  the  appellant  is  represented  today  under  a  public  funding
    certificate  and  so  clearly,  at  some  stage,  somebody  must   have
    considered that both the means and the merits tests  were  sufficiently
    satisfied that representation should be  provided  at  public  expense.
    Having considered carefully the decision made by Judge  Lawrence,  even
    though he makes a number of  findings  which  had  the  appellant  been
    represented would appear to be fully  reasoned  (the  discrepancies  in
    particular are large), nonetheless it does not appear that at any stage
    the appellant was asked during the hearing whether he had been  advised
    of his right  to  seek  public  funding  for  his  representation.   At
    paragraph 4 the judge states that the appellant has made no  effort  to
    trace potential witnesses "or instruct solicitors to trace  them".   He
    goes on to say that "In the light of these I find the adjournment would
    not serve the appellant intends  (sic)".   He  then  says  that  "As  a
    consequence I refused the application to adjourn".

 8. Although the judge gives what on their face appear sustainable  reasons
    for disbelieving the appellant, in particular  the  inconsistencies  in
    his evidence which had been referred to in the refusal letter,  at  the
    very  least,  if  the  appellant  had  been  legally  and   competently
    represented,  an  attempt  would  have  been  made  to  clarify   these
    inconsistencies if it was possible to do so; it does  not  appear  that
    any such attempt was made during the course of this  hearing.   As  the
    respondent cannot show that the appellant was ever advised of his right
    to seek public  funding,  the  fact  that  so  far  this  unrepresented
    appellant has not done all he might have  done  to  prepare  his  case,
    carries rather less weight than it might have done.

 9. This is, however weak, an asylum claim and one in which  the  appellant
    (with regard to another aspect of the claim) had  some  injuries  which
    were not inconsistent with the claim that he was making.  The judge  at
    the very least, in my judgement, before rejecting the  application  for
    an adjournment ought to have made enquiries as to whether the appellant
    had ever been advised of his right to seek representation by  means  of
    public funding which, after all, was what the Home Office guidance says
    he ought to have been advised about.  I find that the  judge's  failure
    even to enquire as to whether this guidance  had  been  followed  is  a
    procedural error which is  sufficiently  serious  as  to  amount  to  a
    material irregularity and for this reason (however weak his  claim  may
    arguably have been) the appellant was denied the opportunity of  having
    a fair trial at which his case was properly put.

10. In these circumstances I must set aside Judge Lawrence's  decision  and
    the decision will have to be remade.

11. It is agreed in these circumstances on behalf of both parties that  the
    appropriate course is that this appeal be remitted to Taylor House  for
    rehearing by any judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N  M  K
    Lawrence and I so order.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge N  M  K  Lawrence  and
remit this appeal for rehearing at Taylor House  by  any  judge  other  than
Judge N M K Lawrence.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date:     25 July 2017

