
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02722/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th July 2016                             |On 25th July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                     RM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Haywood, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant RM is a national of Sri Lanka who arrived in  the  UK  on
    25th November 2012 and claimed asylum upon arrival.

 2. She was interviewed by the Respondent on two  occasions  and  following
    those substantive interviews, the Respondent on 3rd November 2014, made
    a decision excluding her from refugee status under  Article  1F(a)  and
    1F(c) of the Refugee Convention.  It  was  accepted  however  that  her
    removal to Sri Lanka would contravene Article 3  ECHR  and  accordingly
    she was granted restricted leave to remain valid until 2nd May 2015.

 3. On 30th April 2015 the Appellant submitted an in time  application  for
    further leave to remain. By a decision dated  27th  October  2015,  the
    Respondent maintained her decision to exclude the  Appellant  from  the
    Refugee Convention under Article 1F(a) only (conceding Article 1F(c) no
    longer applied), but granted  a  further  period  of  restricted  leave
    to27th April 2016. It is  against  that  decision  that  the  Appellant
    appeals.

Appellant's Claim and Background

 4. The Appellant's claim in summary is that she is an  ethnic  Tamil  from
    the Trincomalee District of the eastern province of Sri Lanka.   It  is
    accepted that she assisted the LTTE from about the end of December 2002
    at a time when she regarded them as  the  sole  representative  of  the
    Tamil people.  In May 2004 she formally joined the LTTE, was  taken  to
    Samboor for a  month  and  a  half's  training  and  followed  this  by
    specialist training to become an intelligence operative.

 5. After her training she returned to her village and started studying for
    her A levels.  She  provided  the  LTTE  with  information  about  army
    movements in her village and following the LTTE split from  the  Karuna
    Group, also provided intelligence  about  members  of  that  group  and
    members of the public who were giving information about the LTTE to the
    Sri Lankan Army or to the Karuna Group.

 6. In 2007 the Sri Lankan Army gained control of the eastern province  and
    the Appellant lost contact with the LTTE.  She  returned  to  her  home
    village and continued studying.  In 2011 she was arrested at  her  home
    by Sri Lankan Army intelligence officers and  detained  for  ten  days.
    She was not charged but she was  interrogated  in  detention,  tortured
    including being raped and sexually abused.  She was eventually released
    from detention but was required to report weekly to the police  and  to
    inform them if she intended to leave her home area.

 7. In November 2011, the Appellant claimed that her father was  beaten  to
    death so she went to live with her uncle in Trincomalee.  In  May  2012
    she stopped reporting to the police and in July 2012 she  was  informed
    by telephone that her mother and sister had  died  after  being  burned
    alive when the family home was deliberately set on fire.

 8.  The  Appellant  was  arrested  once  again  by  Central   Intelligence
    Department on 3rd October 2012 and again tortured and raped.  Her uncle
    secured her release.  He arranged for her to leave Sri  Lanka  and  she
    travelled to the UK arriving on 25th November 2012 and claimed asylum.

FtT Hearing

 9. The Appellant's appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on  8th  and
    16th March 2016.  That tribunal heard evidence from the  Appellant.  It
    was common ground that in appeals such as this one the Respondent  bore
    the  burden  of  proving  that  the  Appellants   activities   in   the
    intelligence wing of the LTTE brought her within the exclusion  clauses
    of the Refugee Convention. In coming  to  its  decision  the  FtT  made
    several findings  and  concluded  that  the  Respondent  had  correctly
    excluded the Appellant from the Refugee Convention. In  particular  the
    FtT found that it disbelieved the Appellant  when  she  maintained  her
    stance that she was unaware of what happened to those  people  she  had
    informed against and further she was unaware of whether or not the LTTE
    hearings followed due process. The  FtT  concluded  that  even  if  the
    Appellant was not a witness to war crimes, it was not credible that she
    was unaware that war crimes were being committed by both the  LTTE  and
    the Sri Lankan forces.  The appeal was dismissed.

Permission to appeal/error of law hearing

10.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  FtT's   decision.
    Permission was refused initially but granted on a  renewed  application
    before the Upper Tribunal.  Several grounds were put  forward  but  for
    the purposes of this decision, I  need  only  highlight  two  of  those
    grounds.

11. The first is that the  FtT  misapplied  the  burden  of  proof  in  its
    findings about the fairness or otherwise of the LTTE court  system  and
    processes. Secondly following on from that, it failed  to  make  proper
    and adequate findings on whether the Appellant was aware that the  LTTE
    courts did not afford due process. That erroneous approach tainted  the
    findings made on credibility  to  the  extent  that  the  decision  was
    unsustainable.

12. I find I am satisfied that the FtT's decision reveals such errors  that
    the decision must be set  aside.   I  now  give  my  reasons  for  this
    finding.

13. It is common ground that in an Article 1F case,  the  Respondent  bears
    the burden of proving that the activities complained  about  bring  the
    Appellant within the exclusion clauses of the  Refugee  Convention  and
    those activities have to be narrowly and restrictively construed.   The
    judge indeed acknowledged this at [25]  and  again  at  [69].   Despite
    these acknowledgements, it is plain from a reading of  the  text,  that
    from [65] to [68] the  judge  has  clearly  reversed  the  burden.   In
    particular at [65] the judge notes:

         "I find that there is little evidence that  the  LTTE  conducted  a
         separate  legal  system  in  areas  under  its  control  which  met
         international minimum standards of  a  fair  trial.   There  is  no
         evidence for example that the judicial system had  legally  trained
         prosecutors or that defendants were  allowed  legal  representation
         from qualified lawyers or that defendants were allowed to  see  the
         evidence against them and challenge  that  evidence  through  legal
         representation.  Nor is there any  evidence  that  the  judges  who
         presided over the LTTE hearings were themselves legally qualified".



    As the grounds seeking permission point out, since the Respondent bears
    the burden of proof, it was for the Respondent to show that  the  court
    system was unfair and did not meet international minimum standards, not
    for the Appellant to adduce evidence that it was fair.   This  has  led
    the FtT into error in its approach to the evidence before it.

14. Likewise but equally important is the question of whether the  FtT  has
    given proper reasoned findings showing the Appellant could even be said
    to be aware that  the  LTTE's  court  procedures  did  not  follow  due
    process.  There are no findings that I can see, which demonstrate  that
    the judge has properly considered this crucial point.

15. Throughout her two interviews the Appellant has consistently maintained
    that she did not have such awareness.  Whilst  it  is  correct,  as  Mr
    Walker pointed out,  that  the  judge  dealt  with  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's credibility, nevertheless  from  a  plain  reading  of  the
    decision, it has been dealt with  from  an  incorrect  standpoint.  The
    judge appears to have imputed  knowledge  and  awareness  of  the  LTTE
    court's procedures, simply on account of the fact  that  the  Appellant
    had been recruited to the intelligence division. There needs to be more
    than that to justify a finding of knowledge and intent.  I  find  there
    is no  adequate  reasoning  to  show  why  the  judge  disbelieved  the
    Appellant's account, consistently maintained that punishments were only
    imposed by the LTTE after "a formal hearing".

16. Since these issues are crucial and central to the Appellant's appeal, I
    find that the judge's decision cannot stand. I  set  it  aside  in  its
    entirety.

17. Both representatives were of the view that should I find  an  error  of
    law there will need to be a full rehearing. I agree since  findings  on
    the Appellants credibility or  otherwise  must  be  made.   Mr  Haywood
    submitted that any  rehearing  should  take  place  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, on account of the fact that the Appellant would need to  give
    evidence and it was appropriate that judicial fact-finding should  take
    place in that Tribunal.  Mr Walker however was  of  the  view  that  he
    would prefer the matter s stay in the Upper Tribunal.

18. On reflection because the original decision  has  been  set  aside  and
    because of the amount  of  judicial  fact  finding  necessary  in  this
    appeal, I consider it appropriate in fairness  to  the  Appellant  that
    this appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Beg)  for
    a fresh rehearing. No findings of fact are preserved from the  original
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby set  aside  for  error  of
law. This appeal is remitted to that Tribunal (not Judge Beg)  for  a  fresh
rehearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     21 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts


