
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02779/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th December 2018                          |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                  mr M.K.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Saeed, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 23rd April 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Onoufriou dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human rights claims.

 2. The Appellant sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds that it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    erred in his credibility assessment by applying the wrong  standard  of
    proof; had failed to fully consider the  background  material  in  this
    context; and had erred in his assessment of and reference  to  evidence
    relating to undocumented Bidoons.

 3. There was no Rule 24 response served by the Respondent.

Background

 4. The Appellant's case is that he is an undocumented Bidoon from  Kuwait,
    born on 24th June 1996.  He claims to have left Kuwait in October  2015
    by air and travelled either to an unknown country or, as later claimed,
    to Turkey.  He travelled on a false passport.  He says that he  arrived
    in France where he remained for some  months  before  entering  the  UK
    clandestinely on 25th May 2016.  He claimed asylum the  following  day.
    The Respondent refused the Appellant's claim on 9th February 2018.

 5. The Appellant's claim to asylum is that he fears that  if  returned  to
    Kuwait he  would  be  imprisoned,  and  assaulted  and  beaten  by  the
    authorities there.  He claims that his family were  not  registered  in
    the 1965 census because they were  in  the  desert  at  that  time  and
    despite  various  attempts  to  register  in  both   1996   and   2000,
    registration was refused because the family had not  been  included  in
    the  1965  census.   He  claims  he  was  arrested  for   attending   a
    demonstration and was kept in detention for  20  to  22  days.  He  was
    interrogated and ill-treated and was only released after he  agreed  to
    give information to the authorities about Bidoon activists.

 6. Following his release, his father arranged for him to stay with a close
    Kuwaiti friend working in the friend's stables.  He remained there  for
    about a year and a half.  The authorities then come looking for him and
    arrested his brother when they could not find  him.   His  brother  was
    detained for five to six days.  Following  this,  his  father's  friend
    arranged for a smuggler to bring him to the UK.

 7. The Respondent did not accept the credibility of the Appellant's claim;
    it was accepted that he is a Kuwaiti citizen but it  was  not  accepted
    that he was a Bidoon, nor an undocumented one.  The First-tier Tribunal
    Judge found that he agreed the Appellant was from Kuwait,  as  accepted
    by the SSHD, but also found that the Appellant had not established that
    he was an undocumented Bidoon.  He dismissed the appeal.


Onward Appeal

 8. The Appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  Although there are  four
    grounds seeking permission, in the main they take issue with the FtTJ's
    credibility findings.  The FtTJ acknowledged during the course  of  the
    hearing that the sole issue before him centred on whether the Appellant
    was an undocumented Bidoon and that credibility lay at the heart of the
    claim.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by FtTJ Hollingworth as follows:

         "1.  Under the heading of "Findings of Fact  and  Credibility"  the
             Judge in  referring  to  elements  advanced  in  the  case  in
             relation to  the  question  of  credibility  has  referred  at
             paragraph 36(4) to the aspect of the claim mentioned there not
             being impossible although the percentage chance must be fairly
             low for the reason  advanced.   Given  this  reference  it  is
             unclear as to the standard being applied by  the  Judge.   The
             Judge has referred to  the  extent  of  plausibility.   It  is
             arguable  that  a  fuller  consideration  of  the   background
             material was required in this context.  At paragraph 38 of the
             decision the Judge  has  referred  to  balancing  the  Judge's
             findings  regarding  the  Appellant's  credibility   and   the
             plausibility of his account "within the  objective  evidence".
             It is arguable  that  further  analysis  was  required  to  be
             demonstrated in this context given  the  significance  of  the
             Judge's findings in relation to plausibility."

    Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal discloses such error of law that it must be set
    aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

10. Before me Mr Saeed appeared on behalf of the Appellant and Mr Kotas for
    the Respondent.  Mr Saeed's  submissions  followed  the  lines  of  the
    grounds seeking  permission.   In  summary  he  said  that  the  FtTJ's
    findings on credibility are flawed.  The FtTJ has apparently applied an
    incorrect standard of proof [36.4], and has incorrectly formed the view
    that  inconsistencies  within  the  Appellant's  account,  which   were
    described by the judge as peripheral, when looked at cumulatively  went
    against the Appellant's credibility.   In  support  of  this  point  he
    referred me to paragraph 28 of HK and SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.

11. He continued his submissions saying that the judge's finding at [36.8],
    failed to take account of the Appellant's explanation for the delay  in
    his departure from Kuwait. The judge had therefore  made  unsustainable
    findings where he expressed disbelief  concerning  the  manner  of  the
    Appellant's departure from Kuwait International Airport.  Additionally,
    the judge failed to consider documentary evidence put  forward  showing
    that  undocumented  Bidoons  are  forced  to  work  illegally  and  may
    therefore receive assistance from charitable Kuwaiti citizens.

12. Finally the finding at 36.12 is contrary to  the  evidence  and  is  in
    error for failing to properly follow NM Kuwait  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00356
    (IAC) and HE Kuwait CG [2006] UKAIT 00051.

13. Mr Kotas in response submitted that there was no  force  in  the  first
    point made by Mr Saeed.  He referred to [29] wherein the judge properly
    set out and reminded himself of the appropriate burden and standard  of
    proof.  He submitted that the judge had also  referred  to  NM  as  the
    starting point in this case and clearly identified that the core  issue
    (and therefore the starting point) in this appeal was an examination of
    whether the Appellant had established he was a Bidoon,  rather  than  a
    Kuwaiti citizen.  The judge  had  gone  on  to  say  that  if  he  were
    satisfied that the Appellant was a Bidoon then the further issue before
    him was whether he was an undocumented Bidoon.  Mr Kotas said that this
    is  what  the  appeal  turned  on  and  consequently,  as   the   judge
    acknowledged, the Appellant's credibility lay at the heart of this.

14. He further submitted that the reference made to HK [28]  did  not  take
    the Appellant's case any  further;  rather  it  supported  the  judge's
    decision.  The guidance given in HK [28] said:

         "The ingredients of the story, and the story as a whole, have to be
         considered against the  available  country  evidence  and  reliable
         expert evidence, and other familiar factors,  such  as  consistency
         with what the Appellant has said  before  and  with  other  factual
         evidence (where there is any)."

15. Mr Kotas continued that so  far  as  the  judge's  finding  at  [36:11]
    concerning the airport security, this factor again  turned  on  whether
    the Appellant's  credibility  was  accepted.   The  same  consideration
    applied to the claim that he had been arrested following the attendance
    at the demonstration. The judge had referred to  the  CIG  report  when
    considering these matters and he was entitled to do so.  The judge  had
    assessed and evaluated overall credibility with reference  to  the  CIG
    report and made sustainable  findings.   The  criticisms  made  of  the
    decision amounted to no more than a series  of  disagreements  and  the
    appeal should therefore be dismissed.

16. At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    reasons.

Consideration

17. I deal first of all with the criticism made that the judge  appears  to
    have misapplied the correct standard of proof and thus his  credibility
    assessment, which relies upon an accumulation of "peripheral"  matters,
    is flawed.

18.  It  is  correct  that  the  judge  uses  the  terms  possibility   and
    plausibility, but I find I am satisfied that on a full reading  of  the
    decision, the judge kept the correct standard of  proof  in  mind.   He
    sets out fully the standard and burden of proof required in cases  such
    as this one [29].  The difficulty for this Appellant is that in  common
    with many claims of this nature, his claim turns on the credibility  of
    his own testimony.  The judge acknowledges this in [35].

19. This point was reinforced by Mr Kotas in his submissions.  In [36]  the
    judge sets out  numerous  examples  of  inconsistencies  found  in  the
    Appellant's account.  The judge found that these  inconsistencies  when
    looked at in the round led  him  to  conclude  that  the  core  of  the
    Appellant's story did not add up.  The judge  was  reinforced  in  this
    view when he looked at these inconsistencies in the context of the  CIG
    Report.

20. The CIG Report outlined that following the  demonstration  in  February
    2014, those arrests that were made were  of  the  organisers  and  main
    activists.  The Appellant by his own account was  a  mere  participant.
    He had gone along with two friends whom he had met and  who  encouraged
    him to attend.  The judge was therefore entitled to make a finding that
    as the Appellant was not an organiser or activist.  Consequently he was
    entitled to  disbelieve  the  Appellant's  account  that  he  had  been
    detained for 20 to 22 days, beaten and tortured and  released  only  on
    condition that he provide information about Bidoon activists.  This was
    claimed as the central driver to the Appellant leaving Kuwait.

21. That being so, the judge was entitled to disbelieve  the  remainder  of
    the Appellant's testimony, which was that he remained in Kuwait  for  a
    further year and a half and had left because the authorities  had  then
    come looking for him.

22. I am satisfied that a proper reading of the decision  showed  that  the
    judge has properly considered the nature of the claim as  presented  by
    the Appellant, the focus of which is very much upon what the  Appellant
    has to say.  It is apparent from a reading of the decision as  a  whole
    that an impermissible standard of  proof  has  not  been  adopted.   It
    follows that there is nothing to show that the  findings  made  by  the
    judge are not ones which were open to him to make.

23. Two further matters of concern were raised by Mr Saeed.  He  criticises
    the judge's findings concerning the likelihood of the Appellant evading
    the airport security system on departure.  I find that nothing turns on
    this criticism.  It is a finding made which is entirely consistent with
    the  CIG  Report  that  security  at  Kuwait  Airport  is  tight.   The
    Appellant's account of his exit from Kuwait has to be looked at in  the
    context of his whole story as to why he left.  In addition  there  were
    at least two accounts given by the Appellant himself of  which  country
    he flew into.  He firstly claimed he flew to  an  unknown  country  but
    later changed his story to say that he flew to Turkey.

24. The final point of concern raised by Mr Saeed is set out in  Ground  4.
    Mr Saeed describes this ground as his strongest point.  His argument as
    I follow it rests on the asserted failure of the judge to  have  regard
    to the evidence submitted on  the  Appellant's  behalf  concerning  the
    position of Bidoons who had not registered in  the  1965  census.   The
    Appellant's case is that his  grandfather  and  his  father  failed  to
    register in the 1965 census and thereafter were unable to  register  in
    1996 and 2000, on account of not being part of the  1965  census.   The
    FtTJ was referred to NM and to background documentation, in  particular
    a document entitled "Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada,  'Kuwait:
    Whether Bedoun residents who were included in the 1965 census are  able
    to obtain citizenship', 20 February 2012".  The judge it  is  said  has
    failed to grapple with the Appellant's evidence which was consistent in
    saying that because his father and grandfather failed  to  register  in
    the 1965 census they were thereafter unable to  register  in  1996  and
    2000.   However  I  find  that  paragraph  36.12  has  to  be  read  in
    conjunction with [37] and with [32], where the  judge  fully  sets  out
    paragraph 33 of NM.

25. The judge's remarks in 36.12 it seems to me, are reflective of  item  4
    in the head note of NM which states:

         "It must be assumed that Bidoon who did not register  in  1996  and
         2000, and hence did not obtain security cards, are as a consequence
         undocumented Bidoon, though this must be seen in the context of the
         evidence that most Bidoon carry security cards."

26. At [37] the judge referred to and took  into  account  the  Appellant's
    responses in interview, his own statement and the Respondent's case and
    concluded that it was highly unlikely that the Appellant's father would
    be able to secure stable employment and rent a property  over  a  large
    number of years without  a  security  card.   In  the  context  of  the
    Appellant's overall credibility this is a finding which was open to the
    judge.

27. Accordingly drawing all these factors together I find that the  correct
    standard of proof was applied and  that  the  FtTJ's  findings  on  the
    Appellant's credibility are ones which were open to him to make on  the
    evidence as a whole.  The grounds amount to no more than a disagreement
    with the findings made by the judge.  The grounds therefore disclose no
    material error requiring the decision to be set  aside.   The  decision
    therefore stands and this appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     21 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
