
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02003/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 May 2019                                 |On 7 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 BAHZAD [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Marwaha
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 4 March 2019, I found that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons for reaching that decision were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant is a male citizen of Iraq who was born on 1  May
         1995. He came to the United Kingdom in November  2016  and  claimed
         asylum.  By a decision dated 26 January  2018,  the  appellant  was
         refused asylum and he appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in
         a decision promulgation on 21 March 2018, dismissed the appeal. The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.    At  the  initial  hearing  in  the   Upper   Tribunal,   both
         representatives agreed that the judge had  erred  in  law  for  the
         reasons articulated in the grounds  of  appeal  at  [23-32].  These
         grounds deal exclusively with the availability of  internal  flight
         to the Independent Kurdish Region  (IKR).  Inter  alia,  the  judge
         wrongly believed that the appellant's home village is in  the  IKR,
         which the parties informed me it does not.

         3.   I set aside the decision of the judge. The appellant no longer
         seeks protection as a refugee as  his  representative  acknowledged
         (see decision, [62]). The only issue which remains to be decided is
         protection by way of humanitarian protection on Article 15  grounds
         because internal flight within Iraq would be impossible  or  unduly
         harsh. I shall remake the decision following a resumed  hearing  in
         Bradford on a date to be fixed. The  availability  of  Ms  Frantzis
         will be considered when fixing the date of the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         4.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The
         findings of fact are preserved save for those  findings  concerning
         the availability of internal flight within Iraq. The Upper Tribunal
         shall remake the decision following a resumed hearing  at  Bradford
         on a date to be fixed. (2 hours). If the parties seek to rely  upon
         fresh evidence, they may do so provided they send  copies  of  such
         evidence to each other and to the Upper Tribunal no later  than  10
         days before the resumed hearing."

 2. At the resumed hearing on 1 May 2019, the appellant  attended  but  did
    not give evidence.  His  counsel,  Ms  Marwaha,  helpfully  provided  a
    skeleton argument. Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the Secretary of State,
    did not seek to dispute the appellant's evidence that he has no  family
    support in Iraq (both his parents are dead), he  has  no  documentation
    which would enable him to obtain a CSID and there is no one in any part
    of Iraq who would vouch for him with a view to his obtaining a CSID.  I
    find that  those  facts  are  established  and,  applying  the  country
    guidance currently existing of AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944,  I  am
    satisfied that, upon return to  Baghdad,  the  appellant,  without  any
    necessary documents other than  the  emergency  travel  document  which
    would have been issued to him to enable his journey to Iraq,  would  be
    exposed to a real risk  of  destitution,  amounting  to  serious  harm.
    Consequently, I allow his appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  26
January 2018 is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.


Signed                              Date 1 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

