
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02703/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 January 2020                   |On 05 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 SARWAN [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aitken
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision which was promulgated on 11 April 2018, I found that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to  be
    set aside. My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, Sarwan [R], was born on 1 August 1988 and is  a
         male citizen of Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity.   He  appealed  to  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Burns)  against  a  decision  of  the
         respondent to refuse him international protection.  The decision is
         dated 24 February 2017.  The First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
         promulgated on  20  September  2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   I shall deal first with the challenges to the judge's findings
         on credibility.  The first ground of appeal challenges the decision
         on the basis that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons.   The
         judge did not accept as reliable documentary  evidence  adduced  by
         the appellant.  The judge observed [23] that the documents produced
         by the appellant  could  have  been  produced  easily  through  the
         internet.  Mr Aitken, who appeared  for  the  appellant,  submitted
         that it was not enough for the judge to observe that such documents
         were available on the internet; he had to  make  a  proper  finding
         that the documents were  not  reliable  and  give  reasons  for  so
         finding.

         3.   I disagree with Mr Aitken's submission.  A careful reading  of
         the decision reveals  that  the  judge  has  properly  applied  the
         principles contained in Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.   The  judge  has
         not considered the documents on their own but has  considered  them
         in the context of all the evidence, including the appellant's  oral
         testimony.   The  judge  has  quite  properly  observed  that   the
         appellant, after he had reached  the  United  Kingdom,  could  have
         taken  steps  to  obtain  other  documents   to   corroborate   the
         documentary evidence.  It was open to the judge to take  that  fact
         into account when assessing the evidence.  I find  that  the  judge
         has given  adequate  reasons  and  that  his  findings  as  to  the
         appellant's  credibility,  including   the   credibility   of   his
         documentary evidence, is sound.

         4.   The judge's assessment of risk on return is more  problematic.
         As  Judge  Canavan  observed  when  granting  permission,  it   was
         necessary for the judge, if he were to depart from existing country
         guidance, to show that there had been a durable change  in  country
         conditions and to give full reasons identifying the evidence before
         him as to why he  wished  to  depart  from  the  country  guidance.
         Whilst I accept that the judge has  stated  why  he  preferred  the
         evidence of the Secretary of  State  regarding  the  conditions  in
         Kirkuk to that adduced by the appellant, a problem arises over  the
         fact that the judge has referred to Kirkuk and Erbil (the de  facto
         capital of the IKR - Independent Kurdish Region) as  if  they  were
         one and the same place.  The judge states at [39], "I do not regard
         this [evidence adduced by  the  appellant  from  the  internet]  as
         reliable information about the situation which the appellant  would
         face on being returned to Kirkuk city or Erbil".  Later at [43] the
         judge refers to the appellant returning to  "Erbil/Kirkuk".   I  am
         not at all clear why the judge has used this  expression.   At  the
         time of his decision, those living in Kirkuk had been found by  the
         Upper Tribunal in AA to be exposed to Article 15(c)  harm.   Erbil,
         on the other hand, lying firmly within the IKR, was generally  safe
         for Kurds of Iraqi origin who were  able  to  reach  the  city  and
         obtain work or support there.  The position is complicated  by  the
         fact that the appellant has a civil  identity  card  (CSID).   This
         would be of no use to  him  in  Erbil  but  might  be  relevant  in
         assessing the risk which he might face in  Kirkuk  or,  indeed,  on
         internal flight to Baghdad.  The  judge's  repeated  references  to
         Erbil and Kirkuk as if the considerations  concerning  both  cities
         were the same has distorted his analysis.

         5.   In the circumstances, I  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         decision.  For the reasons I have given, the  judge's  findings  of
         fact as  regards  the  appellant's  credibility  and  that  of  the
         evidence which he has adduced shall stand.  The  only  issue  which
         remains to be  determined  is  that  of  risk  on  return  of  this
         appellant either to Kirkuk (his home area) or by  way  of  internal
         flight within Iraq.  It will  be  necessary  to  consider  internal
         flight  to  the  IKR  (Erbil)  and  also  whether  the   appellant,
         notwithstanding his Kurdish ethnicity, may, given that he possesses
         a CSID, reside safely in Baghdad.  The First-tier  Tribunal  should
         have considered these issues but did not do so.

         Notice of Decision

         6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 20 September 2017 is set aside.   The  findings  of  fact  shall
         stand save the judge's findings as regard the  risk  on  return  of
         this appellant to his home area or by  exercising  internal  flight
         within Iraq to the  IKR  or  to  Baghdad.   Those  issues  will  be
         considered further by the  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Lane) at a resumed hearing on the first  available  date  at  Field
         House (time estimate: 1.5 hours).

         7.   No anonymity direction is made."

 2. There has been a delay since the  promulgation  of  the  error  of  law
    decision which has been caused at  least  in  part  by  an  attempt  to
    determine the validity of an  identity  document  which  the  appellant
    brought to the United Kingdom and which remains in  the  possession  of
    the Secretary of State. In particular, I made a direction on 21 January
    2019 providing for the appellant to visit the Iraqi Embassy  in  London
    with a copy of the identity document certified by me (the Secretary  of
    State would not allow  the  original  to  leave  his  possession).  The
    appellant now claims that he has visited the embassy and therefore  the
    appeal has been brought back for a resumed hearing.

 3. The burden of proof is on the appellant. The  evidence  which  I  heard
    concerned the appellant's visit to the Iraqi  Embassy.  I  have  tested
    that evidence by reference to the standard of proof of the  balance  of
    probabilities. I heard evidence from the appellant himself who spoke in
    Kurdish Sorani with the assistance of an interpreter. I heard also from
    Mr [BS], a Kurdish Sorani/English interpreter employed by the appellant
    solicitors. Mr [S] accompanied  the  appellant  on  his  visit  to  the
    embassy. Mr [S] gave his evidence in English.

 4. Although there was a discrepancy as regards the length of time  at  two
    men spent at the embassy during their visit  on  6  August  2019,  both
    accounts  were  broadly  consistent.  I  discount  the  fact  that  the
    appellant indicated that the visit lasted somewhat longer than  Mr  [S]
    recalled. I accept that the appellant took with him the certified  copy
    of the identity document (which the parties agree is either a valid  or
    expired CSID) and that the officials at the embassy took no account  of
    the certified copy but told the appellant that they could not issue him
    with a valid identity document or passport.  I  accept  also  that  the
    officials told the appellant that they could not or  would  not  record
    their decision in writing. Given the nature  of  the  enquiry  and  the
    likely heavy volume of asylum seekers attempting  to  obtain  passports
    and identity documents from the embassy, I consider that it  is  highly
    likely that embassy officials have  taken  a  policy  decision  not  to
    provide written evidence of any rejected applications.

 5. The other area of evidence which was addressed at the  resumed  hearing
    concerned the appellant's claim that he has lost touch with his  family
    in Iraq. The appellant was cross examined on this issue by Mr Whitwell,
    who appeared for the Secretary of State. The appellant said that he had
    last had contact with his family in Iraq by  telephone  on  15  October
    2017, that is after the First-tier Tribunal hearing. Since  that  date,
    all attempts  which  he  had  made  to  contact  his  family  had  been
    unsuccessful. The appellant has contacted the Red Cross and has another
    appointment with that organisation in London in February.

 6. Mr Whitwell urged me  to  reject  the  appellant's  evidence  regarding
    contact with his family. The First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  findings,
    which I had preserved, to the effect that the  appellant's  account  of
    past events in Iraq was not accurate or truthful.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    should not, therefore, accept that face  value  the  appellant's  claim
    that he has lost contact with family members. There is  some  force  in
    that submission. However, the appellant has been  consistent  regarding
    the date following which he had lost contact with his family. That date
    is after the First-tier Tribunal hearing;  whilst  it  might  appear  a
    convenient coincidence that the appellant lost contact with his  family
    immediately after the hearing, he had  not  attempted  to  deceive  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge regarding his family contact even though  the
    absence of such contact might have proved to his advantage even at that
    stage  of  his  appeal.  I  take  into  account  also  the  fact   that
    communications between family members and friends within Iraq and  with
    those living abroad may well have been dislocated by  the  conflict  in
    that country over the past few years.  Moreover,  I  was  urged  by  Mr
    Whitwell to reject the appellant's appeal on the sole  basis  that  his
    claim to have lost contact this  family  should  not  be  believed.  Mr
    Whitwell did not challenge the appellant's account of his visit to  the
    embassy and he did not suggest that the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    obtain an identity card other than with the support and  assistance  of
    his family in Iraq. Without the ability to obtain such a  document  the
    appellant would be at real risk. Accordingly, since the success of  the
    appellant's appeal rests on this issue family contact  I  have,  whilst
    not for that reason giving the appellant  the  benefit  of  the  doubt,
    exercised particular caution in reaching my  findings.  On  balance,  I
    accept the appellant's claim that he is not currently in  contact  with
    his family. I find that he does not have any access to  (nor  does  the
    Secretary of State possess) any existing identity document  which  will
    assist him in Iraq. I find that he does not have  family  in  Iraq  who
    would be able to assist him  and  I  find  that  he  cannot  obtain  an
    identity document before he returns that country.

 7. I have  to  consider  whether  the  appellant,  having  the  particular
    characteristics which I have identified in [6] above, may return safely
    to Iraq. We now have the benefit of new country guidance (SMO, KSP & IM
    (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC)).  In
    the light of that guidance and background material relating to Iraq,  I
    have considered whether the appellant will be at risk and  return.  The
    Upper Tribunal at [386] noted:

         "There is no evidence before us  which  satisfactorily  establishes
         that a returnee who is not from Baghdad would be able to apply  for
         a CSID or an INID in that city.  Dr Fatah's oral evidence was  that
         only those from Baghdad would be  able  to  apply  for  replacement
         documents there.  The Danish Immigration Service report of November
         2018 records the Kafkaesque consequence of the requirement to apply
         for a replacement document in  one's  own  area  in  the  following
         paragraph:

             'In order for the IDPs to return, they must have  ID-documents
             that are issued in the areas of  origin.  If  they  have  lost
             their ID-documentation, they must travel back to the  area  of
             origin to have them re-issued. However, without  documents  it
             is very difficult to travel anywhere and pass the checkpoints,
             because people without documents  more  often  face  arbitrary
             arrests and detentions.'"

    Whilst individuals in the appellant's home area  or  Kirkuk  no  longer
    face an Article 15 risk of harm, my findings lead me to  conclude  that
    the appellant cannot obtain any identity  document  after  arriving  in
    Baghdad and that, without such a document, he would be unable to return
    to his home area. In addition, without an identity  document  (CSID  or
    the new INID) the appellant would be unable to obtain work in the  IKR,
    an area where  he  does  not  have  family  or  other  contacts.  As  a
    consequence, I find that, whilst the appellant may in theory be able to
    travel directly from the United Kingdom to the IKR on a laissez passer,
    it would be unduly harsh to expect him to live  there  given  his  very
    poor prospects in obtaining either work, support from third parties  or
    the local authorities or accommodation.

 8. I have considered  the  possibility  of  the  appellant  relocating  to
    Baghdad. No such possibility appears to exist for the appellant, a lone
    male Kurd without family or other support, in the light of the  country
    guidance of SMO at [48] of Section H:

         "Relocation to Baghdad.  Baghdad is  generally  safe  for  ordinary
         civilians but whether it is safe for a  particular  returnee  is  a
         question of fact in the individual case.   There  are  no  on-entry
         sponsorship requirements for  Baghdad  but  there  are  sponsorship
         requirements for residency.  A documented individual of working age
         is likely to be able to satisfy those requirements.  Relocation  to
         Baghdad is likely to be reasonable for Arab Shia and Sunni  single,
         able-bodied men and married couples of working age without children
         and without specific vulnerabilities.  Other individuals are likely
         to require external support, ie a support network of members of his
         or her family, extended family or tribe, who are willing  and  able
         to provide genuine support.  Whether  such  a  support  network  is
         available is to be considered with reference  to  the  collectivist
         nature of Iraqi society, as considered in AAH (Iraq)."

 9. In the light of what I say above, I find that the appellant would be at
    risk of Article 3 ECHR harm if returned to Iraq.  It  would  be  unduly
    harsh for him to relocate to the IKR. He would be at real risk of  harm
    in Baghdad in  the  light  of  the  characteristics  which  I  find  he
    possesses. He would not be able to obtain either  before  departure  or
    after arrival in Iraq any identity document which would enable  him  to
    travel to and live in his home area of Kirkuk notwithstanding the  fact
    that violence in that area is now significantly decreased. In the light
    of those conclusions, he is entitled to international protection.

Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 24 February 2017 is allowed on  human  rights  (Article  3  ECHR)
    grounds.




    Signed   Date 3 February 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
