

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02311/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester IAC                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27th July 2017                          |On 31st July 2017              |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     M S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Gunawal of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as MS. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands dismissed the appellant's appeal on
      Refugee Convention grounds against the decision refusing to  recognise
      him as a refugee, refusing him humanitarian protection or human rights
      protection.


   2. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal the  Refugee
      Convention decision in the following terms

             ....The grounds amounted to no more than a  disagreement  with
             the findings of the  judge  and  an  attempt  to  reargue  the
             appeal.  However,  a  careful  consideration  of  the  judge's
             decision revealed arguable errors of law  but  for  which  the
             outcome of the appeal might have  been  different.  The  judge
             made an arguable error of law amounting to a  misdirection  as
             to the applicable standard of proof in stating at paragraph 32
             of the decision, "It is as difficult for an appellant to prove
             that he is gay..." the  judge  arguably  applied  an  elevated
             standard of proof. The judge arguably  took  into  account  an
             irrelevant consideration when assessing the credibility of the
             appellant and his brother by appearing  to  accord  weight  to
             their apparent evasiveness the judge stating at  paragraph  32
             of the decision, "Both of them appeared  evasive  when  giving
             their evidence...". The judge arguably should not  have  taken
             into account their demeanour as it appeared to the judge, when
             assessing their credibility. The judge made an arguable  error
             of law amounting to a failure to  take  into  consideration  a
             relevant factor when assessing psychiatric evidence adduced on
             behalf of the appellant. When assessing credibility it was for
             the judge to assess the evidence in  the  round.  However,  at
             paragraph  41  of  the  decision  the  judge  stated,  "As  to
             psychiatric assessment it all depends on  the  credibility  of
             the appellant." The judge arguably arrived at a  finding  that
             the  appellant  had  not  been  a  credible   witness   before
             considering  the  psychiatric  evidence.  Arguably  the  judge
             should have considered the evidence as a composite  whole  and
             not sequentially as the judge appeared to do....

   3. Ms Gunawal submitted a skeleton argument which did  not  elaborate  on
      the grounds of appeal upon which  permission  had  been  granted.  The
      skeleton asserted that there had been  a  failure  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge to grant an adjournment to enable  a  detailed  medico-
      psychiatric report to be obtained. Ms Gunawal  acknowledged  that  the
      grounds seeking permission, which had been drafted by the advocate who
      appeared in the First-tier Tribunal, had not referred to this  alleged
      failure. She also acknowledged that there  was  no  reference  in  the
      judge's decision to a request for an adjournment having been made  and
      refused. She was unable to confirm whether an adjournment request  had
      been made at the First-tier Tribunal hearing because the advocate  who
      had appeared in the First-tier Tribunal had been away on  holiday  "in
      Africa" for the last 6 weeks;  she  repeatedly  referred  to  previous
      applications made by post and considered on the  papers  and  refused.
      Initially she did not wish to make an application to amend the grounds
      of  appeal  but  continued  to  rely  on  what  she  referred  to   as
      "discussions" that had taken place at  the  hearing  and  to  previous
      applications for an  adjournment  that  had  been  refused  on  paper.
      Eventually she formally sought permission to amend. In the absence  of
      a note or witness statement from the advocate who appeared before  the
      First-tier  Tribunal,  Ms  Gunawal's  inability  to  confirm  that  an
      application for  an  adjournment  had  been  made  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge and that there was no reference in  the  decision  that
      such an application had been made, I refused her permission  to  amend
      her grounds. I would comment that in the absence of an application for
      an adjournment, it cannot in this case, be an error of law on the part
      of the First-tier Tribunal judge not to grant an adjournment that  has
      not been requested.


   4.  Ms  Gunawal's  submissions  elaborated  on  the  grounds  upon  which
      permission had been granted.

        Ground 1


   5. Ms Gunawal submitted that the judge had failed to  apply  the  correct
      standard of proof. In support of this submission she  relied  upon  JB
      (Jamaica) [2013] EWCA Civ 666 (the incorrect citation was given in the
      grounds seeking permission) which states, as relied upon by her,

          29. A failure properly to comply with a policy relating directly
              to the exercise of a power to detain is sufficient of itself
              to render the detention unlawful: see R (Lumba) v Secretary
              of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 12, [2012] 2012
              1 A.C. 245 and R (Kambadzi) v Secretary of State for the Home
              Department [2011] UKSC 23, [2011] 1 WLR 1299. The matter does
              not end there, however, because there is also the question
              whether this was a claim which, in the light of all the
              information that should have been available, could ever have
              been regarded as one in respect of which a fair and
              sustainable decision could be made within about two weeks.
              Given the nature of the appellant's claim, I find it
              difficult to see how it could. Homosexuality is a
              characteristic that cannot be reliably established without
              evidence from sources external to the claimant himself. On
              the face of it, therefore, the appellant did need additional
              evidence to support his claim and since some of that evidence
              was likely to be available only in Jamaica or elsewhere
              abroad, it was likely that he would need additional time in
              order to obtain it. A failure to allow him that time was
              likely to lead (as in the event it did) to a decision that
              was neither fair nor sustainable.
   6. It is not clear either from her submissions or  from  the  grounds  of
      appeal how the judge erred in law. It has not been asserted  that  the
      judge failed to take  account  of  relevant  material  or  that  other
      material or evidence was awaited and relevant to the judge's  decision
      on whether  the  appellant  is  gay.  Although  Ms  Gunawal  said  the
      appellant needed external evidence she  did  not  identify  what  that
      evidence would be or how that affected the standard of  proof  applied
      by the judge.


        Ground 2

   7. It was submitted that the judge failed to accord  adequate  weight  to
      the father's and brother's evidence and  had  failed  to  give  proper
      reasons as to why that evidence was inadmissible - paragraphs  35  and
      36 of the First-tier Tribunal decision.

   8. It was not apparent to me that the judge had  concluded  the  evidence
      was inadmissable. He concluded their  evidence  could  not  be  relied
      upon. The judge considered the written evidence from the  brother  and
      the father, referred to the almost exact  same  wording  used  despite
      them being produced some seven years apart for  which  no  explanation
      was provided, referred to the lack of explanation how, if  the  father
      had disowned the appellant he would draft and provide an affidavit and
      continue to fund his studies. The judge considered the  oral  evidence
      of the brother which referred to matters which were not in his witness
      statement. He considered the oral evidence from the brother  that  the
      appellant had been seen kissing in a public park in the context of the
      appellant's own evidence that  he  wouldn't  go  to  Manchester's  gay
      quarter. The judge states that he found the brother was 'evasive' when
      giving evidence. It was submitted this was an inadmissible taking into
      account of demeanour. The judge acknowledged that evasiveness could be
      as a result of nervousness but oral evidence being given evasively  is
      not a matter of demeanour. It is an assessment by  the  judge  of  the
      willingness of an appellant to answer questions  put  during  a  court
      hearing.


   9. Ms Gunawal submitted the actual evidence should have been  taken  into
      account and that it was an error of law for the judge  to  assume  the
      brother would lie in court. It is not clear what she  meant  by  this.
      She did not identify evidence that had not been considered but  rather
      seemed to be submitting that the mere  fact  that  evidence  had  been
      produced meant that it should be  accepted  in  its  totality  by  the
      judge. The judge is required to assess the  evidence  before  him  and
      reach conclusions  on  its  reliability.  There  is  nothing  in  this
      decision to indicate that the judge had the preconceived view that the
      brother would lie to support  the  appellant.  With  the  greatest  of
      respect to Ms Gunawal, the judge assessed the evidence  given  by  the
      father and the brother in the context of the  evidence  given  by  the
      appellant. The judge considered the contradictions in the evidence and
      reached a conclusion that the evidence of the brother and  the  father
      could not be relied upon as supporting the appellant's claim  that  he
      was gay. Such a conclusion was a conclusion plainly open to him on the
      evidence before him.

        Ground 3

  10. Ms Gunawal submitted that the judge failed to assess  the  appellant's
      evidence properly and in particular, that if he returned to  Pakistan,
      where everyone knew of his sexuality, he would be forced to work as  a
      sex worker or dancer. Again, with the greatest respect to Ms Gunawala,
      the judge did consider this aspect of the appellant's claim. The judge
      recorded the appellant's evidence to this effect in paragraph 4, 5,  6
      and 8. He refers again to that evidence in paragraph 37 and refers  to
      it being inconsistent with the 'objective' evidence. The fact that  an
      appellant makes an assertion does not require a judge  to  accept  the
      assertion.

        Arguable errors of law raised in the grant of permission

  11. Although not  pleaded,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  who  granted
      permission identified what he said were arguable  errors  of  law.  In
      particular, he stated that the reference by the judge in paragraph  32
      to

             "it is as difficult for an appellant to prove that he is gay"


        arguably indicated the judge had applied the incorrect standard  of
        proof. The full sentence in the judge's decision reads


             "It is as difficult for an appellant to prove that he  is  gay
             as it is for the respondent to prove that he is not"


        This is not an issue of burden or standard of proof but a statement
        of fact.  JB,  relied  upon  by  the  appellant,  makes  plain  the
        difficulties of proving such an innate characteristic. The judge is
        merely reflecting that.


  12. The grant of permission also states it is arguable the judge failed to
      consider the evidence in the round when reaching his conclusions.  The
      grant draws attention to paragraph 41 of the decision which states


             "As  to  the  psychiatric  evidence  it  all  depends  on  the
             credibility of the appellant. The writer talks of there  being
             no evidence of him faking his symptoms but she  has  given  no
             indication as to  whether  she  has  considered  his  previous
             history of making false claims. Clearly if she had been  aware
             of this she might well have taken a different view as  to  the
             credibility of his  claimed  symptoms.  She  acknowledges  his
             previous inconsistencies but  not  the  making  of  the  false
             claims. I am not satisfied that he has told the truth  to  her
             anymore than he has told me. I am not satisfied he is  telling
             the truth about his sexuality, there has [sic] been no attacks
             upon him and he can safely return to Pakistan."


  13. The report, prepared following a 2 � hour face-to-face interview  with
      an interpreter whilst the appellant was in detention, from Dr Reiss of
      Medical Justice sets out the  appellant's  claim  of  some  homosexual
      encounters and to having been kidnapped some 10 years previously.  She
      states that


             "he has symptoms and signs of depression as detailed in ICD-10
             diagnostic  guidelines.......symptoms  and  signs   of   post-
             traumatic stress disorder".


        She  concludes  he  meets  the  diagnostic  criteria   for   severe
        depression and that he should receive high intensity  psychological
        intervention. She also concludes that his "symptoms and  demeanour"
        are consistent with a likely diagnosis of PTSD. She concludes


              "There were no indications  during  my  assessment  that  [the
             appellant] was exaggerating or faking his history or symptoms.
             He was consistent in his distressed demeanour  throughout  the
             lengthy consultation and was tearful on a number of  occasions
             when describing some particularly distressing aspects. He  was
             hesitant to describe details of his  first  sexual  encounter,
             but as he described it, it may have  been  non-consensual  and
             thus traumatic. Difficulty describing sexual  trauma  is  well
             recognised. He was  disorganised  in  giving  details  of  his
             history and from the documents I have read has been previously
             inconsistent in aspects of  his  story,  which  is  clinically
             compatible with a history of trauma. If  he  was  faking,  one
             would    expect    a    more    organised    and    sequential
             description.......his  ongoing   detention   appears   to   be
             contributing to his worsening mental state..."


  14. The respondent, in a Rule 24 response which was only available  to  me
      and to Ms Gunawala on the day of the hearing submitted that the First-
      tier Tribunal judge had considered the psychiatric report and  it  was
      open to the judge to find that the appellant was not  honest,  in  his
      assessment. (Although Ms Gunawala did not receive the copy of the Rule
      24 until after she had completed her submissions, having had  time  to
      read it she confirmed she had nothing further to add to what  she  had
      already said.)


  15. In paragraph 39 the First-tier Tribunal judge states

             "I do not believe  that  he  has  told  the  truth  about  his
             sexuality"


         In paragraph 40 the judge states


              "In considering his evidence I also had in  mind  the  medical
             report prepared on his behalf  and  did  not  consider  it  in
             isolation after considering what he had to say. So far as  the
             physical issues are concerned no thought has been given to the
             possibility of the injuries occurring due to  normal  everyday
             events. .....This part of  the  report  does  not  assist  his
             claim."


         In paragraph 41 the First-tier Tribunal judge says


              "As to the  psychiatric  assessment  it  all  depends  on  the
             credibility of the appellant. The writer talks of there  being
             no evidence of him faking his symptoms but she  has  given  no
             indication as to  whether  she  has  considered  his  previous
             history of making false claims. Clearly if she had been  aware
             of this she might well have taken a different view as  to  the
             credibility of his  claimed  symptoms.  She  acknowledges  his
             previous inconsistencies but  not  the  making  of  the  false
             claims. I am not satisfied that he has told the truth  to  her
             anymore than he has told me. I am satisfied  that  he  is  not
             telling the truth about his sexuality...."


  16. Ms Gunawala placed considerable  weight  in  her  submissions  on  the
      statement by the judge that "it all depends on the credibility of  the
      appellant". She submitted that that statement indicated that the judge
      had already reached a decision on the credibility of  the  appellant's
      claim  before  he  considered  the  psychiatric  evidence;  that   the
      reference in the previous  paragraph  to  not  having  considered  the
      medical evidence in isolation and the reference  in  paragraph  32  to
      having considered all the evidence was insufficient to illustrate that
      the judge had indeed not considered the evidence sequentially.


  17. The judge considered the appellant's immigration history including his
      admission that he had claimed to be a dependant of  his  EEA  national
      uncle when he was not, that he had studied when he had  not,  that  he
      had said he could return to Pakistan when first encountered  and  gave
      no reason why he could not, that he had remained in Pakistan for  some
      5-6 years after his claimed kidnapping, the evasiveness of his brother
      and  him  when  giving   oral   evidence,   the   contradictions   and
      inconsistencies in his evidence, the  irregularities  in  the  written
      evidence of his father and  his  brother,  the  late  additional  oral
      evidence from his brother as to a claimed incident in the  park,  that
      the appellant did not go to Manchester's gay quarter yet claimed to be
      kissing a man in a public park, the lengthy delay in  claiming  asylum
      despite having had previous contact with the respondent and  that  the
      Rule 35 report and physical medical report of Dr  Reiss  did  no  more
      than confirm that he had some physical scarring. On  the  other  hand,
      the judge has not engaged with the statement in Dr Reiss' report  that
      the appellant was severely depressed, suffered from PTSD and that this
      could account for his disorganised and inconsistent account.  That  is
      not to say that the inconsistencies, contradictions, fake  claims  and
      evasiveness are matters that the judge  should  not  have  taken  into
      account. Much of what the judge considers are matters external to  the
      appellant and not affected by his mental state.  But it is of  concern
      that the specific diagnosis of depression and PTSD  and  the  possible
      effect this may have had on the appellant's own oral evidence has  not
      been considered in the overall assessment of the evidence.


  18. This is a  finely  based  decision.  To  state  that  the  psychiatric
      assessment depends on the appellant's credibility indicates  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal judge has not taken into account the diagnosis  by
      Dr Reiss but has considered that evidence  through  the  prism  of  an
      adverse credibility finding rather than in the round as required.  The
      reference  to  having  not  considered  the  report  in  isolation  is
      insufficient in this case given the content of  paragraph  41  of  the
      decision (as set out above). That is not to say that  the  appellant's
      credibility is not damaged or that his account can be believed but  it
      does mean, given the potential serious consequences for the  appellant
      and the manner in  which  the  judge  seems  to  have  considered  the
      psychiatric evidence that I am satisfied the judge  erred  in  law  in
      failing to have adequate regard to that evidence.

  19. I therefore set aside the decision to be remade.

    20. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
        assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper  Tribunal.
        S12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First-
        tier Tribunal with directions or remake it for  myself.  Given  the
        facts are disputed or unclear and in accordance with  the  Practice
        Statement dated 25th September 2012 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
        Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal and given the nature
        and extent of the judicial fact-finding required, it is appropriate
        to remit the hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.

      Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for full hearing.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).






[pic]

                                    Date 28th July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
