
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02599/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st September 2016                        |On 4th October 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    s a r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Parmar, Counsel for Kanaga Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant was born on 12th June 1967 and is a citizen of  Pakistan.
    She appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 26th  October
    2015 refusing her asylum application and  her  humanitarian  protection
    claim.  Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Pears
    on  7th  July  2016  and  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
    protection grounds and human rights grounds in a  decision  promulgated
    on 18th July 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  This states that the Appellant may have been denied a  fair
    hearing due to the fact that the judge did  not  adjourn  the  case  to
    enable the Appellant to rebut the Respondent's assertion that the  FIRs
    produced by the Appellant were not authentic.  The verification reports
    on the FIRs were served by the Respondent five days before the hearing.
     At paragraph 87 the judge states "on the basis of the evidence  before
    me I find that the two FIRs and the relevant letters from and to Kashif
    Hanif Associates are not documents that can be relied on but I  do  not
    need to go further given my view of the case and do not  do  so."   The
    permission states that this finding goes to the heart  of  the  judge's
    findings on sufficiency of protection.  It states that it  is  arguable
    that the Appellant was placed at a disadvantage by  the  production  by
    the Respondent of evidence five days before the hearing  to  show  that
    the FIRs were not authentic and  the  refusal  of  the  adjournment  to
    obtain evidence and a rebuttal from a lawyer in  Pakistan  resulted  in
    unfairness.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file which states  that  the  Respondent
    made strenuous and repeated efforts to verify the evidence relied on by
    the Appellant in pursuit of her claim and the judge made clear findings
    that the reasons given in support of the application for an adjournment
    were peripheral to the issues before him (paragraph 80).  The  Rule  24
    response states that the judge has weighed  all  the  evidence  in  the
    round and concluded that certain aspects of  the  Appellant's  evidence
    were credible whereas others were not.  The response  states  that  the
    grounds do not disclose a material error of law.

The Hearing

 4. Before Counsel for the Appellant made his  submissions  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the Respondent accepts that there is an error of
    law in the decision.  He submitted that the judge  has  indicated  that
    there was an adjournment request to enable the Appellant to  rebut  the
    Respondent's assertion that the FIRs were not authentic.  At  paragraph
    80 of the decision a judge states that gaps  or  issues  on  which  the
    Appellant's  Counsel  wanted  further  time  to  gain   evidence   were
    peripheral.  The judge however goes on at paragraph 87 to  state:   "On
    the basis of the evidence before me, the  two  FIRs  and  the  relevant
    letters from and to Kashif Hanif Associates are not documents that  can
    be relied on but I do not need to go further given my view of the  case
    and do not do so."

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that on that basis  solely  the  judge
    has found that the Appellant's claim cannot be allowed.  The Presenting
    Officer submitted that as the Appellant was given  no  chance  to  look
    into this and make responses, this amounts to a material error of  law.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that the decision should be set  aside
    and directions given for  a  de  novo  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 6. Counsel for the Appellant concurred and asked me to follow that course.
     He submitted that he is adopting all the grounds of application.

Decision

 7. I find that there is a material error of law, for the reasons given  by
    the Presenting Officer, in the judge's decision.

 8. I set aside the decision of Judge Pears promulgated on 18th July 2016.

 9. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal cannot  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to  reconsider
    the case are not to include Judge Pears.

10. Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 4th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

