
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/02738/2018
                                                               PA/06133/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|21 September 2018                             |On 21 November 2018           |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                    [m s]
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                                    [A A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For Mr [S]:   Mr Devlin, instructed Latta & Co. Solicitors.
For Mr [A]:   Mr Irvine, instructed by Latta & Co. Solicitors.
For the Respondent in both appeals: Mr Komarowski, for the Government Legal
                               Service of Scotland.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Each of the appellants is a national of Iran who claims asylum  on  the
    basis of conversion to Christianity.  We  deal  with  the  two  appeals
    together with the agreement of all  parties.   On  the  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, Mr Komarowski told us that he concedes in  each  of
    the cases that the judgment of the First-tier Tribunal discloses errors
    of law.  In the case of [A], he accepts the appellant's  argument  that
    insufficient attention was paid to the evidence of the minister.  [S]'s
    case  is  more  complicated.   There,  the  judge  did  give   explicit
    consideration to the evidence of the  minister,  but  there  was  other
    evidence which might conceivably have made up the deficit in  knowledge
    of the Christian faith identified by the judge.   In  both  cases,  the
    Secretary of State took the view that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside and the appeal listed for  reconsideration
    by the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings preserved.

 2. From the appellants' side, Mr Devlin and Mr Irvine indicated that  they
    both agreed with that method of disposal.

 3. We agree too.  We will order remittal in these cases, not only for  the
    reasons identified by Mr Komarowski, but also  because  of  the  recent
    publication of the decision of the Inner House in  TF  and  MA  v  SSHD
    [2018] CSIH 58, which offers a number of  useful  reminders  to  judges
    about some of the dangers which beset  fact-finders  in  this  type  of
    case.

 4. The judgment needs to be read carefully.  A number of perhaps  alarming
    comments on it have already, to  our  knowledge,  been  made.   It  may
    therefore assist the judges responsible for the  re-hearings  of  these
    appeals, and possibly their colleagues also, if we supply some  general
    comments of our own.  We emphasise  that  they  are  made  without  the
    benefit of any submissions.

 5. The first point which shines out from  the  opinion  of  the  Court  as
    delivered by Lord Glennie is that in these cases, as in all others,  it
    is vitally important that the fact-finder considers the evidence  as  a
    whole.   That does not mean simply considering all  the  evidence.   It
    means considering it together, not merely separately.

 6. Secondly, in cases of this sort, evidence of church  members  who  have
    had dealings with the appellant is entitled  to  weight  which  may  be
    derived from their  experience  in  working  with  other  converts  and
    distinguishing between true and false converts.  Here the remarks in TF
    and MA, directed as they were to the determination  of  the  individual
    cases, may require a little expansion.  The rules of  evidence  do  not
    apply to the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal, so there is not
    any need to qualify a witness  as  an  "expert"  before  that  person's
    evidence of opinion  or  hearsay  evidence  becomes  admissible.    The
    citation of cases in areas to which the rules  of  evidence  do  apply,
    which is undertaken by the Inner House,  should  not  mislead  Tribunal
    Judges into thinking that a  similar  process  has  to  be  adopted  in
    Tribunals.  The only test for admissibility in Tribunal proceedings  is
    that of relevance.  It will usually be clear that witnesses of the type
    being referred to have something relevant to say about the  appellant's
    case, and it follows that  their  evidence,  albeit  opinion  evidence,
    should be received as evidence in the case.  As the Inner  House  makes
    clear, the weight to be attached to the evidence will be a  matter  for
    the individual fact-finding judge.  There  may  probably  be  enquiries
    into the extent to which the person giving the opinion is able to  show
    that his or her opinion should be accepted;  and,  in  any  event,  the
    opinion evidence needs to be set in the context of all the evidence  in
    the case, to be considered as a whole.

 7. Thirdly, there is the issue of what should be the judge's  approach  in
    circumstances where the judge is confident that the  appellant  is  not
    telling the truth.  As Lord Glennie points  out,  the  mere  fact  that
    somebody is not telling the truth in one part of his evidence does  not
    necessarily mean that he is not telling the truth in  another  part  of
    his evidence.  Equally, it does not mean that he is telling  the  truth
    in the  other  part  of  his  evidence.   If  a  person's  evidence  is
    disbelieved, that does not of itself mean that there is evidence to the
    contrary effect.  So, for example, in an ordinary civil case, the  mere
    fact that the Court does not believe one of the pursuer's witnesses  in
    relation to a road traffic accident does not carry any implication that
    the accident did not occur.  We would, however, draw attention  to  the
    fact that the matter may  be  a  great  deal  more  complex  where  the
    evidence being given is that of the witness's own feelings or  beliefs.
    If the judge is confident that the  witness  is  giving  an  untruthful
    account of his own beliefs, it is not easy to see that another person's
    assertion that the witness appears to have the beliefs he asserts  will
    carry the weight that it would have in the absence of any  evidence  at
    all from the witness himself.  Again, it is a  matter  of  putting  all
    things in the balance and looking at everything as a whole.

 8. Finally, we would point out that nothing in the opinion  of  the  Inner
    House in TF and MA casts any doubt at all upon  the  general  principle
    that it is for an asylum appellant to establish his case  and  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to assess it.   It is not for  the  Secretary
    of State  to  disprove  the  case;  nor  is  the  fact-finding  process
    delegated to witnesses, however well qualified.

 9. For the reasons we have given, and with the consent of the parties,  we
    set aside the judgments of the First-tier Tribunal  in  both  of  these
    cases.  We direct that the appeals be reconsidered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  No findings  are  preserved,  and  the  Tribunal  is  to  be
    differently constituted from the Tribunals  which  heard  the  original
    appeals.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 12 November 2018.

