

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA020242016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 23 May 2017                        |On 1 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     rM
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif, of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal with permission against the
    decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Carlin that
    was issued on 18 October 2016.

 2. It is appropriate, given the nature of this appeal, that the  anonymity
    directions made by the First-tier Tribunal is preserved and I  make  at
    the end of this decision the necessary Upper Tribunal order to do so.

 3. At the outset, I reminded  both  representatives  that  permission  was
    limited to the fourth ground and I can consider nothing else.

 4. Mr Sharif reminded me that it is accepted the appellant is a Kurd  from
    Iran.  He submitted that because of the appellant's activities in Iran,
    the Iranian authorities would have an adverse interest  in  him,  which
    means he has a well-founded fear of persecution.

 5. Mr Sharif admitted that the country guideline case, SSH and HR (illegal
    exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT  00308,  had  not  been
    available to Judge Carlin. Nevertheless, Judge Carlin should  have  had
    regard to the earlier country guideline case,  SB  (risk  on  return  -
    illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053.  As identified in  the  grant
    of permission, Judge Carlin made no reference to either case and it was
    unclear whether he made any findings.

 6. Mr Mills argued that the outcome of the appeal  turned  on  the  proper
    reading of SSH and HR.  At [34], the Upper Tribunal  found  that  being
    Kurdish was not sufficient of itself to establish a  well-founded  fear
    of  persecution  although  being  Kurdish  was  a  factor  that   could
    exacerbate adverse interest from the Iranian authorities.

 7. Mr Mills reminded me that Judge Carlin  had  made  adverse  credibility
    findings such that nothing of the appellant's account survived.   Those
    findings had been challenged in the grounds of  application  but  Judge
    Pullig did not grant  permission  on  those  grounds.   Therefore,  the
    credibility findings are preserved.  On that basis, the  appellant  was
    in the same position as the appellants in SSH and HR and  illegal  exit
    would not be sufficient to entitle him to refugee protection.

 8. In  my  discussion  with  Mr  Sharif,  he  admitted  that  the  adverse
    credibility findings were not disturbed.  This means the appellant  had
    failed to establish any past activities that might  bring  him  to  the
    adverse  attention  of  the  Iranian  authorities.   Mr   Sharif   also
    acknowledged that the country guideline cases  establish  that  illegal
    exit is insufficient by itself, even for a Kurd, to  generate  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on return.

 9. Having heard from both parties, I announced there is no legal error  in
    the decision and reasons statement.  I reserved my reasons, which I now
    give.

10. The fact the appellant's account is totally  rejected  means  the  only
    risk factors facing him on return are the issues of him  being  a  Kurd
    and having left Iran illegally.  On the face of the  country  guidance,
    those factors are insufficient individually or collectively to found  a
    refugee claim.  It follows that Judge Carlin's decision must be correct
    in law.

11.  Once  the  grounds  of  application  were  limited  by  the  grant  of
    permission, the criticism made by the appellant is in effect  that  the
    judge failed to spell out the consequences of his  adverse  credibility
    findings.  But there is no need for a judge to spell out  such  matters
    when the findings can lead only to one outcome, as is  the  case  here.
    The judge could assume  that  the  appellant's  solicitors  would  have
    advised him accordingly, particularly since this was not a  case  where
    the country guidance was being challenged.

12. It follows I find there is no legal error.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of FtT  Judge  Carlin  does  not  contain
legal error and his decision stands.

Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"RM".




    Signed                          Date     23 May 2017


    Judge McCarthy
    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
