
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/02246/2018
                                                               PA/02247/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th September 2018                        |On 31St October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                       MUNTASIR [B] (FIRST appellant)
                       MUHTADI [B] (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms J Bond, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.  They  are  brothers.   They
    have applied for asylum on the grounds that they  are  members  of  the
    Bangladesh National Party and that they are at risk of  persecution  as
    they are wanted by the Awami League  in  Bangladesh.   The  Appellants'
    applications were refused by Notices  of  Refusal  dated  1st  February
    2018.  The Appellants' immigration history is set out in some detail in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 2. The Appellants appeal against the refusal by the Secretary of State and
    their joint appeals were heard before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Pickup sitting at Manchester on 16th March 2018.   In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated promptly on 20th March 2018 the Appellants' appeals
    were dismissed on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the First-tier Tribunal on 20th  March
    2018.  On 13th April 2018 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Blundell
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Blundell  noted  that  there  were
    three Grounds of Appeal:

      i) that the judge had erred as he had  failed  to  consider  the  case
         based on perceived public opinion;

     ii) the judge had erred as he had failed to resolve the conflict in the
         evidence about the prevalence of forged  documents  in  Bangladesh;
         and

    iii) the judge had failed to consider whether the format of the original
         documents obtained  from  the  court  (the  certified  copies)  was
         consistent  with  the  format  as  described  in   the   Bangladesh
         Gazette/Procedural Rules.

 4. In granting permission to appeal whilst permission was granted  on  all
    three grounds so as to not limit  the  scope  of  the  argument,  Judge
    Blundell considered the first two grounds to be of very limited  merit.
    He noted that the background material painted a bleak  picture  of  the
    situation in Bangladesh but did not seem to support the contention that
    the Appellants would be at risk with the limited  profile  accepted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and that the judge had seemed to  resolve
    at paragraphs 105 to 108 the conflict which is highlighted in Ground 2.



 5. It was on that basis, and particularly with regard to  Ground  3,  that
    the appeal comes before me to determine  whether  or  not  there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     The Appellants appear by their instructed Counsel, Ms Bond.   Ms  Bond
    is extremely familiar with this matter.  She appeared before the First-
    tier Tribunal and she is the author of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr
    Whitwell.

Preliminary Issue

 6. There is produced to me by Ms Bond a bundle of documents which Ms  Bond
    is requested by her instructed solicitors to seek permission to  adduce
    in evidence.  This application is, after submission, refused  generally
    on the basis that the issue before me is whether the  judge  materially
    erred in law based on the evidence that was before him.

 7. However, the following factual scenario was put to me by Ms Bond.   She
    advises that  it  was  the  intention  of  the  Appellants'  instructed
    solicitors to produce to the First-tier Tribunal an  extract  from  the
    Bangladesh Gazette with stamps  and  folios  attached  as  an  original
    document which it  was  submitted  would  confirm  that  the  documents
    produced  were  in  the  format  used  by  the  government  bodies   in
    Bangladesh.

 8. A request was made by fax transmission to the Tribunal at 11:48 a.m. on
    19th March.  That request urgently asked the judge to take into account
    the  documents  before  reaching  his  decision  and  the  letter   was
    accompanied by the relevant  pages  of  the  Bangladesh  Supreme  Court
    Procedure Rules  (known  as  the  Bangladesh  Gazette)  describing  the
    procedure for the preparation of copy documents by the court.

 9. It is accepted that that fax was never placed before Judge  Pickup  who
    at  the  time  it  was  sent  was  dictating  his  decision  which  was
    promulgated the following day.  No criticism at all can be levelled  at
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

10. The submission made to me by Ms Bond is that it is  possible  that  the
    judge may have come to a different decision had he had the  benefit  of
    the original stamped copies of the Bangladesh Gazette before him.   She
    reminds me that it is open to a party to place  additional  information
    before a judge prior to the  promulgation  of  the  decision.   As  the
    papers were not placed before Judge Pickup  she  contends  there  is  a
    procedural irregularity which might well have created an unfairness and
    have led to a different decision had the papers been before the  judge.



11. Mr Whitwell on behalf of the Secretary of State accepts this  position.
    What is not accepted is the further submission made  by  Ms  Bond  that
    additional evidence over and beyond the papers mentioned  above  should
    be admitted in evidence, in particular an expert's report.  She  agrees
    that that report was not ready  prior  to  the  promulgation  of  Judge
    Pickup's decision.  I refuse her application to admit it in evidence.

12. In such circumstances it is the  agreement  of  all  parties  that  the
    correct approach is to remit the matter back to Judge Pickup merely for
    him to consider the outstanding point.  I  have  pointed  out  that  on
    reconsideration Judge Pickup may possibly come  to  the  same  decision
    that he came to previously and if so, then whilst it would be  open  to
    the Appellants to seek to  rely  on  Grounds  1  and  2  on  a  further
    application for permission, they must bear in mind  the  approach  that
    was adopted by Judge Blundell when he  originally  granted  permission.
    Further, it seems appropriate that the remitted hearing be  dealt  with
    on the papers.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law based on a procedural irregularity limited to the failure of the
    administration to put papers before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  for
    his consideration when those papers are lodged at the Tribunal prior to
    the judge promulgating his decision.


 2) The appeal is consequently remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    sitting at Manchester reserved to First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup,  to
    be dealt with on the papers and with a recommended ELH  of  one  and  a
    half hours solely for the purpose that he may reconsider  his  decision
    based on further consideration of the  additional  papers  that  should
    have been before him.


 3) That there be leave to either party to make written submissions to  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge with regard to the additional documents, such
    submissions to be made in writing within seven days of receipt of  this
    decision.


 4) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                           Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D  N  Harris                     28th  September
2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                                     Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D  N  Harris                     28th  September
2018


