
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02527/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 27 July 2018                      |On 4 October 2018                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A R O
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr R Toal (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  from  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shimmin) made on 12 February
    2018 and sent to the parties on 26 February 2018, whereupon  the  Judge
    allowed the appeal  of  the  respondent  (hereinafter  "the  claimant")
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 29 February 2016 to refuse
    his protection claim and to deport him.

 2. The Judge made an anonymity direction with respect to the claimant.  He
    did so because he thought any reporting of the case might expose him to
    risk if he were to be returned to his home country of Somalia.  Nothing
    was said before me about that direction but, in  the  circumstances,  I
    have  decided  to  maintain  the  status  quo  and  to   continue   it.
    Accordingly, I have not named the claimant in this decision.

 3. The claimant has a somewhat convoluted immigration, offending  (in  the
    sense of criminal acts) and adjudication history which I shall now  set
    out, though I do not intend to be utterly exhaustive.

 4. The claimant, it is accepted, is a citizen of Somalia. He was born on 6
    November 1986. It appears that he entered the United Kingdom ("UK")  on
    2 November 1993 as a dependent of his mother who was  travelling  on  a
    Kenyan passport. The claimant's mother sought asylum but,  on  27  June
    1994, such was refused and an appeal was  dismissed  on  19  May  1995.
    Thereafter, the mother absconded with the claimant and two other of her
    children. She must have left the UK because she subsequently re-entered
    with the same three children including the claimant. Having done so she
    claimed asylum, this time, as a Somalian national. She used a different
    name to that which had been in the Kenyan passport with which  she  had
    initially entered the UK. Her asylum claim  was  refused  but  she  was
    given leave to  enter,  I  think  outside  the  immigration  rules  but
    possibly under a then existing  policy,  which  was  at  a  later  date
    extended until  28  November  2002.  At  that  point  she  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK as was the claimant.

 5. On 20 February 2003, the claimant was convicted at  Sheffield  Juvenile
    Court of assaulting a Police Constable and received a 40 hour community
    punishment order. On 23 October 2003  he  was  convicted  at  Sheffield
    Crown Court of murder and received, as I  understand  it,  a  mandatory
    life sentence but with a requirement that he serve a  minimum  term  of
    imprisonment of 9 years and 4  months.  There  was  no  appeal  against
    either sentence or conviction. On 8 December 2014, whilst  he  remained
    incarcerated, the claimant was served with a signed Deportation  Order.
    He responded by claiming that he would face persecution or serious harm
    if he were to be deported  to  Somalia  but,  on  12  March  2015,  the
    Secretary of State confirmed the decision to deport him. However,  that
    decision was subsequently withdrawn and  further  enquiries  were  made
    into the claimant's protection claim.  But  all  of  that  led  to  the
    decision of 29 February 2016 referred to above. By that time  a  Parole
    Board had decided that it was no longer necessary for the  claimant  to
    be detained for reasons of public protection and he had  been  released
    from custody.

 6. The claimant appealed and his appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chambers who, in a decision sent to the parties on 31  May  2016,
    dismissed it. But the Upper Tribunal, on 12 October 2016 and  following
    a hearing of 11 October 2016, set aside that decision and remitted.  On
    2 February 2017  the  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Birrell who, in a decision sent to the parties  on  15  February  2017,
    also dismissed the claimant's appeal. But in a  decision  sent  to  the
    parties on 5 September 2017 I set aside the decision of  Judge  Birrell
    and again remitted for a rehearing. That rehearing was the  one  before
    Judge Shimmin.

 7. The central issues before Judge Shimmin revolved around the  claimant's
    claim to have converted to Christianity and whether there  was,  as  he
    had asserted, any consequent risk.  There  was  also  an  issue  as  to
    whether or  not  he  was  entitled  to  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention in consequence of his conviction for murder and the  content
    of section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  when
    read in conjunction with Article 33(2) of the Convention.  The  central
    concern as to that aspect was whether or not he was able to  rebut  the
    presumption, which followed from his conviction and sentence,  that  he
    is a danger to the community.

 8. The hearing before Judge Shimmin took place over two days. Both parties
    were represented  and  the  claimant  gave  oral  evidence.  The  Judge
    produced his written reasons on 12 February 2018. He concluded that the
    claimant had rebutted the above presumption (a matter not  the  subject
    of any further challenge) and that he would be at risk as  a  Christian
    if he were to be returned to Somalia. As to that he said (and this  has
    been the subject of subsequent challenge) that the Secretary  of  State
    had accepted that if the claimant were found to be a genuine  Christian
    convert he would be at risk on return to Somalia.

 9. Although what Judge  Shimmin  had  to  say  about  section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and exclusion from refugee
    protection has not, as I say, been the  subject  of  challenge,  it  is
    perhaps helpful for me to briefly summarise his conclusions as to  that
    and which appear in full at paragraphs 34 to 51 of the written reasons.
    Essentially, he noted the view which had been taken by the Parole Board
    which was, as he put it, "the statutory body  tasked  with  determining
    whether convicted prisoners represent a danger to  the  community".  He
    noted  that  although  the  claimant  had  had   some   mental   health
    difficulties  those  issues  appeared  to  have   resolved   themselves
    (paragraphs 38 and 39 of  the  written  reasons).  He  noted  that  the
    claimant had eventually  been  frank  about  all  the  details  of  his
    offending and that he had done well on a victim awareness  course  (see
    paragraphs 41 and 42). Being satisfied, in particular, that the  Parole
    Board had "fully addressed the seriousness of the index  offence"  (see
    paragraph 50 of the written reasons) he concluded that the claimant was
    not excluded from refugee protection. He then went on  to  analyse  the
    claim for protection and said this:

         "52.     If I find the appellant is  a  genuine  Christian  convert
         then the respondent accepts he  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
         Somalia.

         53.      The evidence supporting the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a
         Christian are as follows.

         54.      First, there is the appellant's own evidence on the issue.
         His first statement contains, I find,  an  entirely  plausible  and
         detailed account of his journey from being an atheist, motivated by
         'looking for ways forward', from the harm he  had  caused  and  the
         consequent guilt he experienced.

         55.      The claimant was partly influenced by his friend, [P]  and
         partly by the appeal of the  prospect  of  forgiveness  offered  by
         Christianity.

         56.      I have heard statements and oral evidence from [P] saying,
         inter alia, that he first met the appellant in 2001. The  appellant
         and his sisters attended the after-school club that, as a 'Homeless
         Children's Development Worker', he organized. He developed  a  good
         relationship with the appellant and kept in touch with him  'as  he
         had no other male role models'. [P] regularly visited the appellant
         after his arrest in  2003.  He  described  to  me  the  appellant's
         interest in religion, his questioning of his Muslim faith and their
         conversations about religion over several  years.  Importantly,  he
         described the appellant's questioning of  him  about  religion.  He
         described the impact on the appellant of working at the Pentecostal
         Church in [a town] whilst at [a prison].

         57.      He described the appellant's anxiety  about  the  possible
         effect on his mother of her learning of the  appellant's  Christian
         faith. He says, 'I have no doubt that [the claimant's] faith  as  a
         Christian is real...I am in no doubt that he  is  sincere...he  has
         given this a lot of thought over years and taken  a  long  time  to
         come  to  a  considered  position,  which  could  cost  him  a  lot
         emotionally and in family relationships'.

         58.      The Parole Board refers to [P] as providing the  appellant
         with 'strong support' as a person 'who knew you when he was a child
         support worker and you were in your early teens  and  has  kept  in
         touch with you and  provided  you  with  substantial  support  ever
         since. He...has clearly been a reliable and positive influence upon
         you.'

         59.      The appellant worked from March 2014 for almost  6  months
         at a Christian church in [a town] and during  that  period  'became
         fully committed to Christ'.

         60.      From April 2015 at [a prison]  he  was  actively  involved
         with the church, but also received threats from Muslim prisoners on
         account of his Christianity.

         61.      In particular there is the statement of [C],  chaplain  at
         [a prison], including reference to the 'remarkable' speech given by
         the appellant to his congregation which 'impacted  greatly  on  the
         eighty strong congregation and underlined the authenticity  of  his
         new found life'.

         63.      There is a statement of [A], Senior Minister of [a Church]
         where the appellant worked form 21 March 2014 to 12 August 2014.

         64.      There are the statements of [P], who I  have  referred  to
         above, and who visited the appellant approximately once  per  month
         during his 13 years imprisonment. He was aware  of  the  appellant,
         'searching for faith to help him come to terms with the enormity of
         his crime' and observed  the  appellant  during  that  search.  [P]
         described the  appellant's  life  post-release  and  expressed  his
         belief that the appellant has sincerely converted to Christianity.

         65.      There are the statements of [F].  Her  evidence  that  the
         appellant holds Christian beliefs and puts them into practice is, I
         find, particularly significant given the nature of her relationship
         with the appellant. She was a probation hostel worker in the hostel
         where appellant was accommodated. She  had  experience  of  dealing
         throughout her career, with potentially  manipulative  individuals.
         She described the appellant's life in the hostel as being 'under  a
         microscope' and on the basis of that degree of scrutiny,  describes
         his Christianity as genuine.

         66.      There is a letter from Rev [B] who has known the appellant
         for 10 months. He has  met  him  regularly  over  that  period  and
         participated in  discussions  with  the  appellant  from  which  he
         believes the appellant is 'practicing his Christian faith in  daily
         life'.

         67.       The  Parole  Board  reports  and  some  of  the   witness
         statements document the difficulty for the appellant in  coming  to
         terms with and addressing his offence and the sustained  hard  work
         that he has undertaken to deal with his offence.

         68.      I accept the submission on behalf of  the  appellant  that
         the  whole  context  provides  part  of   an   entirely   plausible
         explanation, consistent with the appellant's own evidence,  of  his
         turning to Christianity.  Furthermore,  the  appellant  becoming  a
         Christian is of a piece with his preoccupation with the offence and
         working over a long period of time on becoming a  different  person
         to the person who committed the offence.

         69.      The respondent submits the appellant is  not  credible  in
         his claimed conversion as he has lied in the past.

         70.      There is evidence of the appellant  having  told  lies  in
         relation to the knife used to murder [the victim]. At his trial the
         appellant denied having brought the knife to the scene and  claimed
         the knife was his victim's. That claim was 'the central lie' in his
         defence and it was rejected by the jury. He maintained the lie  for
         10 years until he admitted to the Parole Board that he had  brought
         the knife to the scene. It was described by the Parole Board as  'a
         dramatic demonstration of how you had found real insight into  your
         offending behaviour'. The appellant submits that this  is  relevant
         to the present issue as showing that whilst the appellant has  lied
         about a  very  significant  issue  in  the  past,  he  was  not  an
         accomplished liar. His lie failed before the  jury.  That  evidence
         does not support a conclusion that  the  appellant  is  capable  of
         successfully deceiving his witnesses, over substantial  periods  of
         time, into believing that he is a genuine convert  to  Christianity
         when he is not. The Tribunal would need to find that the  appellant
         is an extremely skilled and accomplished liar to have  accomplished
         a successful deception  of  this  kind.  A  major  feature  of  the
         appellant's rehabilitation is resiling from a major lie  in  favour
         of the truth. That fact is of at least as much significance as  the
         fact that the appellant maintained a major lie in the past.

         71.      It has also been said by the respondent that the appellant
         is not credible because he has maintained a lie about  having  seen
         his father murdered in Somalia. It is submitted on  behalf  of  the
         appellant that the evidence does not support that conclusion.

         72.      Reliance is placed on the  appellant's  mother's  evidence
         that the appellant had already left Mogadishu when his  father  was
         killed there to show that he could not have witnessed the  killing.
         However, the appellant's mother has  not  been  consistent  in  her
         statements in saying that the appellant was absent when his  father
         was killed.

         73.      It is clear from the appellant's mother's medical  records
         that she has suffered from prolonged mental disorder as a result of
          what happened to her family in  Somalia  and  that  her  disorder,
         including disordered and intrusive memory of  those  events  shaped
         the  environment  in  which  the  appellant   was   said   by   the
         psychiatrist, Dr [C], not to be a reliable historian in relation to
         some events in Somalia and that he had been involved in  recounting
         his mother's narrative rather than  narrating  his  own  clear  and
         distinct early childhood.

         74.      In the light of that, I accept the appellant's  submission
         that the Tribunal cannot properly conclude  that  it  has  no  real
         doubt: (a) that appellant did not witness the killing of his father
         and (b) that if he did not see the killing of his father, his claim
         to have done so was a deliberate ie rather  than  a  false  memory,
         honestly recalled.

         75.      The fact that in his screening interview the appellant did
         not mention his Christianity or fear of being persecuted in Somalia
         on that account is held against him by the Secretary of State.  The
         screening interview took place on 5 February  2015.  The  appellant
         says he was not asked  about  his  religion  and  the  interviewing
         officer must have made an assumption. It is important that there is
         independent evidence that by that time, the  appellant  had  become
         (or was acting as if he had  become)  a  Christian.  There  is  the
         statement of [A], Senior Minister of [a Church] where the appellant
         worked from 21 March 2014 to 12 August 2014, describing how, during
         that period, the appellant 'told us how he  made  a  commitment  to
         follow Jesus' and expressed his desire to be baptized. There is the
         statement of [P] tracing the appellant's conversion to  the  period
         when he was working at the church in [a town].

         76.      If the appellant was merely contriving  an  appearance  of
         being a Christian in order to advance a  false  asylum  claim,  his
         failure to mention his  conversation  at  his  screening  interview
         makes  no  sense  at  all.  The  conversion,  whether  genuine   or
         contrived, had taken place before the screening interview.  If  the
         conversion was a contrivance for the  purpose  of  a  false  asylum
         claim, the appellant would  have  mentioned  it  at  the  screening
         interview. His failure to mention it means that there must be  some
         reason other than advancing a false asylum claim for the  appellant
         appearing to have converted. None is suggested by the Secretary  of
         State. I find that the  only  plausible  explanation  is  that  the
         conversion is genuine.

         77.      I find in the light of the above  evidence  and  my  above
         findings that I  have  no  real  doubt  that  the  appellant  is  a
         Christian. I find that he has not falsely claimed to be a Christian
         in order to contrive an asylum claim.

         78.       Taking  the  above  conclusions  and   the   respondent's
         concession into account I find it  is  reasonably  likely  that  on
         return to Somalia he  would  face  torture,  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment and I find that rights under the Human Rights  Convention
         with respect to Article 3 would be infringed by his removal".

10.   So, the claimant's appeal was allowed. But that was  not  the  end  of
    the matter because the Secretary of  State  applied  for  and  obtained
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Whilst  I  paraphrase,  the
    first ground of appeal (ground 1) was to  the  effect  that  either  no
    concession (see above) had been made or, if it had been,  it  had  been
    wrongly given  by  the  presenting  officer  who  had  represented  the
    Secretary of State before Judge Shimmin. The second ground amounted  to
    a contention that  Judge  Shimmin  had  erred  through  speculating  on
    offering his own hypothesis as it was put in the grounds, as to why the
    claimant had not mentioned his Christianity during an asylum  screening
    interview (see paragraph 76 of the written reasons). It was not, it was
    argued, for Judge Shimmin to advance such  theories.  Thirdly,  it  was
    argued that Judge Shimmin had erred through relying upon  the  evidence
    of "two Reverends" regarding the acceptance of the  claimed  conversion
    rather than conducting a holistic assessment as to all of the  evidence
    prior to reaching such a conclusion.

11.   Permission to appeal was, in fact, granted on all grounds. The  matter
    was then listed for a hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me)  so
    that it could be decided whether Judge Shimmin had erred in law and  if
    so what should flow from that. Representation at that  hearing  was  as
    indicated above and I am grateful to each representative.

12.   At the hearing I reminded the parties of my  previous  involvement  in
    setting aside the decision of Judge Birrell. I inquired of the  parties
    whether they thought I should, in the circumstances, recuse myself.  Mr
    Toal argued that I should not do so and suggested that  I  should  only
    consider doing so if my previous decision had been impugned. Mr Diwnycz
    said he would not urge me to recuse myself and would not object  to  my
    hearing the case but he would understand if I felt I should.

13.   When I set aside Judge Birrell's decision I did so  for  quite  narrow
    reasons  based  upon  my  view  that  that  Judge  had  erred  in   his
    consideration of an adjournment request which had been made  on  behalf
    of the claimant. My decision had not involved me in making any findings
    or reaching any  view  as  to  the  merits  of  the  actual  claim  for
    international protection. In any event, as a Judge, I considered myself
    able to deal objectively, rationally and fairly with whatever arguments
    might be presented and neither party offered any view to the  contrary.
    In the circumstances I decided to proceed to hear the appeal. I stress,
    neither representative urged me not to do so.

14.   Mr Toal had filed a skeleton argument which contained his response  to
    the grounds of appeal. Mr Diwnycz had not had the opportunity  to  read
    that skeleton argument and I permitted  time  for  him  to  do  so.  He
    subsequently confirmed that he  was  happy  to  proceed.  But  I  shall
    briefly summarise what is said in the skeleton at  this  stage.  As  to
    ground 1, it was asserted that, in fact, there had  been  a  series  of
    similar concessions  which  had  been  made  throughout  the  appellate
    process. Additionally, and in any event, no basis  had  been  given  to
    justify any conclusion that the making of the concession (or I  suppose
    the acceptance) might have involved any legal error. As to  the  second
    ground it was argued that Judge Shimmin had not provided  a  hypothesis
    as to why the claimant had failed to  mention  his  conversion  in  his
    screening interview. Rather he had simply considered whether or not  he
    should draw an adverse inference from the failure to mention it and had
    concluded, as had been open to him, that he should not. As to the third
    ground, Judge Shimmin had given detailed reasons for his conclusion  as
    to the claimed conversion. His analysis had been holistic.

15.   Mr Diwnycz, as to the concession point, suggested that the  Presenting
    Officer before Judge Shimmin had not made any such concession though he
    said that that presenting officers notes of the hearing were brief. But
    I pointed out that in Judge Shimmin's typed Record  of  Proceedings  he
    had noted this:

         "Christianity element is the only issue as far as protection and  R
         accepts that A would be at risk  on  return  if  he  is  a  genuine
         Christian".

16.   When I read that to Mr Diwnycz he, very  fairly  and  properly  in  my
    view, said that he would not seek to impugn Judge Shimmin's  Record  of
    Proceedings and that ground 1 could not now be pursued. As to the other
    grounds Mr Diwnycz observed that the question of the credibility of the
    claimed conversion was all that was left to him to argue about. He said
    that he could  not  really  attack  what  Judge  Shimmin  had  said  at
    paragraph 76 and 77 of his written reasons (reproduced  above)  and  he
    observed that credibility had been a matter for the Judge. He  said  he
    would say no more. In those circumstances it was not necessary  for  me
    to hear further from Mr Toal, whose skeleton argument, of course, I had
    already read and considered.

17.   I have concluded that the decision of Judge Shimmin  did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law.

18.   As to the first ground of appeal, in my judgment what was said  by  Mr
    Diwnycz at the hearing amounted  to  an  abandonment  of  that  ground.
    Strictly speaking, therefore, it is not necessary for  me  to  say  any
    more about it  but,  at  the  risk  of  unnecessarily  prolonging  this
    decision of the Upper Tribunal, I will do so.

19.   There have, as will be apparent from what I have already said, been  a
    number of appeal hearings and a  number  of  decisions  concerning  the
    claimant's protection claim. At paragraph 26 of the decision  of  Judge
    Chambers this is said:

         "Counsel submitted that there is a real risk  of  Christians  being
         persecuted in Somalia. Mr  Dillon  agreed  but  if  the  appeal  is
         determined upon the basis that the appellant  is  a  Christian  the
         appellant will be persecuted in Somalia. I agree."

20.   Mr Dillon was the Presenting Officer  representing  the  Secretary  of
    State before Judge Chambers at the hearing of 16 May 2016. At paragraph
    8 of the written reasons of Judge Birrell which relates to the  hearing
    of 2 February 2017 this is said:

         "As a result of preliminary discussions  between  Mr  Toal  and  Mr
         Saunders it was conceded by Mr Saunders that if I accepted that the
         appellant was a genuine Christian then  he  would  be  at  risk  on
         return to Somalia".

21.   Mr Saunders was the Presenting Officer representing the  Secretary  of
    State at the hearing before Judge Birrell. There was then,  of  course,
    the hearing before Judge Shimmin who  also  recorded  a  concession  at
    paragraph 52 of his written reasons as set out above. There is then, of
    course, what was said in the typed Record of Proceedings. So,  even  if
    the first ground had not been withdrawn, I would have  concluded  that,
    as a matter of fact, there had been  a  concession  made  before  Judge
    Shimmin and that that was entirely in line  with  the  previous  stance
    which had been taken on behalf of the Secretary of  State  at  previous
    hearings concerning the same claimant and the same issues. So, I  would
    have rejected the contention in that ground to the effect that no  such
    concession had been made. As to the alternative suggestion that if such
    a concession had been made it had been wrongly made, my first  position
    as to that, had the ground not been effectively withdrawn in any event,
    would have been that it was up to the Secretary of State to choose  how
    to present her case and if her  position  was  (as  it  was)  that  the
    claimant would be  at  risk  solely  on  the  basis  of  conversion  to
    Christianity upon return, Judge Shimmin was not required to look behind
    that. He could have done so had he wished but he did not have to. So, I
    would have detected no error of law. But anyway, nothing is said in the
    grounds as to why  it  is  thought,  as  a  matter  of  law,  that  the
    concession was, in fact, wrongly given. All  that  is  really  said  in
    support is a summary of what the Home Office position as to  Christians
    in Somalia is said to be. But it does not appear that that position, as
    summarised, was actually advanced at any stage either  in  the  reasons
    for refusal letter (or decision  letter  as  perhaps  it  is  now  more
    commonly called) or at the hearing before Judge Shimmin.  Against  that
    background it seems to me that had the ground been maintained  I  would
    have had to conclude that it was simply untenable.

22. As to the second ground Mr Diwnycz said he  could  not  "really  attack"
    what had been said by Judge Shimmin concerning the screening interview.
    But in any event, I agree with Mr Toal that the Judge was  not  seeking
    to advance a hypothesis of his own. He was asking himself,  as  he  was
    required to do, whether he should or should not draw adverse inferences
    from the failure to mention  the  conversion  to  Christianity  in  the
    screening interview. At paragraph 76 he simply provides an  explanation
    as to why he had decided not  to  draw  any  such  adverse  inferences.
    Really, the ground is no  more  than  an  attempt  to  reargue  matters
    concerning the view taken by the Judge as to that discrete matter.

23.   As to the third ground, nothing was said in support of it  before  me.
    It is right to say that Judge Shimmin attached weight to the views of a
    number of persons who have followed a religious calling  and  who  have
    had contact and involvement with the claimant in recent years.  He  was
    entitled to do that. He  took  into  account  the  claimant's  previous
    conduct in lying regarding his criminality (see  paragraph  70  of  the
    written reasons). He considered, as already noted, the point made about
    his not raising the matter at his screening interview. What  the  Judge
    said in the extensive portion of his written reasons which I have  seen
    fit to set out above demonstrates that, in fact, his  consideration  of
    the truthfulness or otherwise of the claimed conversion  was  holistic.
    He reached a conclusion very clearly open to him on  the  evidence  and
    which he has more than adequately explained. The ground,  again  in  my
    view, does not  go  beyond  mere  re-argument  as  Mr  Diwnycz  tacitly
    accepted when observing that credibility was "an issue for the Judge".

24.   I appreciate that this was a most  serious  case  involving  the  most
    serious type of criminal offence. But Judge Shimmin reached a  decision
    which was open to him for the detailed reasons he gave. The grounds  of
    appeal advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State  do  not  withstand
    close analysis and Mr Diwnycz, it is fair  to  say,  did  not  offer  a
    spirited argument based upon them. There is  nothing  to  suggest  that
    Judge Shimmin misunderstood  or  misapplied  the  law  and  nothing  to
    suggest that he was not entitled, on the evidence, to reach the factual
    findings he did reach and to draw the  conclusions  he  did  draw  from
    those findings. In the circumstances the tribunal did not  err  in  law
    and its decision must, therefore, stand.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law. That decision  shall  stand.  Accordingly,  the  Secretary  of
State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed
       M R Hemingway
       Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated:      18 September 2018

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the claimant anonymity. I continue to do  so
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
Unless and until a Tribunal or  Court  directs  otherwise  the  claimant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
to both parties to these  proceedings.  Failure  to  comply  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
       M R Hemingway
       Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated:      18 September 2018

