
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    PA/02944/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 5 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [K T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Appellant's representative:     Mr T Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy,
Solicitors


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Gillespie,
    promulgated on 27 August 2019.

 2. The grounds are set out in an  application  dated  10  September  2019,
    paragraphs 1 - 12.  The FtT granted permission on  27  September  2019,
    summarising the grounds thus:

         "The grounds assert that the judge erred in  consideration  of  the
         case in line with the guidance in Nguyen [2017] EWCA  Civ  258  and
         failed to consider the factors  that  render  this  appellant  more
         vulnerable on return and at greater risk of being recognised  as  a
         former victim of trafficking and of being re-trafficked,  including
         her mental health problems.  The grounds are arguable."

 3. The grant of permission refers to a case of  no  relevance.   The  case
    referred to in the  grounds  is  Nguyen  (Anti-Trafficking  Convention:
    respondent's duties) [2015] UKUT 00170 (IAC) (which  does  not  involve
    the same appellant).

 4. A hearing on error of law took place  before  me  at  Edinburgh  on  13
    February 2020.  Mr Ruddy appeared  for  the  appellant.   Mr  M  Clark,
    Senior Presenting Officer, appeared for the respondent.

 5. Mr Ruddy submitted that the foremost point  of  the  grounds  was  that
    although the respondent accepted the  appellant's  account,  the  judge
    based his decision on adverse credibility findings, in particular about
    the appellant having no family support in Vietnam, when there had  been
    no dispute about what she said, and no challenge  in  cross-examination
    or in the respondent's submissions. The judge mentioned his concerns in
    course of submissions  for  the  appellant  but  he  had  not  put  any
    questions to her or provided an opportunity to revisit the issue by way
    of further oral evidence.  It had been submitted for her that  in  such
    circumstances it would be incorrect to reach adverse findings.

 6. Mr Ruddy referred also to [28] of the decision, where the  judge  finds
    that the appellant would have no problems on return to  her  home  area
    because her  trafficking  did  not  begin  there.   He  said  that  was
    illogical because her accepted account was that the  traffickers  began
    by luring her from home.

 7. Mr Clark accepted that the judge erred by finding  that  the  appellant
    had no family support, when that had not been a matter of  controversy.
    He said that if the case were to  proceed  to  a  fresh  decision,  the
    respondent would not adopt that point, and would not challenge what the
    appellant said on that matter.  He also accepted that the  judge  erred
    on where the trafficking began.

 8. Mr Clark submitted that the errors were immaterial, because the outcome
    would inevitably have been the same, applying Nguyen.   I  see  nothing
    in Nguyen to that effect.

 9. In a decision dated 14 and issued on 19 February 2020, I found that the
    two above errors required the decision to be set aside.

10. The grounds make further challenges, mainly by reference to  a  country
    expert report and to medical evidence; but  as  a  fresh  decision  was
    required, taking those aspects of the evidence  into  account,  it  was
    unnecessary to resolve those grounds.

11. Parties had not applied to introduce  further  evidence.   They  agreed
    that no rehearing of evidence was appropriate.

12. The case was listed to be heard on 23 April 2020, for final submissions
    on the decision which should be substituted.  It was indicated  in  the
    error of law decision that outline written submissions from both  sides
    would assist.

13. The pandemic intervened, and that hearing did not proceed.  In  a  note
    and directions, issued on 12 May 2020, the UT took the  view  that  the
    case might be suitable for resolution "on the papers by way of  written
    submissions only".  The UT set  a  timetable  for  parties  to  respond
    accordingly, and to state any objection to such procedure.

14. Mr Ruddy, for the appellant, filed full written submissions on  1  June
    2020, and copied these to the respondent.

15. By a further note and  directions  issued  on  16  July  2020,  the  UT
    directed the respondent either to comply with directions, or  to  apply
    to extend time.

16. To date, there are no submissions on file from the respondent.

17. The UT may now fairly and justly proceed to resolve the case, based  on
    all materials on file, in terms of rules 2 and 34.

18. Nguyen (Anti-Trafficking Convention: respondent's duties)  [2015]  UKUT
    00170 (IAC) is not country guidance, and does not  say  anything  which
    requires this appeal to be dismissed, after correcting the errors  made
    by the FtT.

19. The most relevant framework for deciding this appeal is not in  country
    guidance or in other case law,  but in the respondent's "Country Policy
    and Information Note, Vietnam: Victims of  trafficking",  version  4.0,
    updated in April 2020 (in similar terms to the note referred to in  the
    FtT).  The submissions for the appellant  are  closely  based  on  that
    policy and on its supporting information.  The policy section  includes
    the following:

         2.4.7 It is unlikely that a  person  would  be  re-trafficked  once
         returned to Vietnam but a person's  vulnerability  may  affect  the
         likelihood  of  this  happening  so  each  case  will  need  to  be
         considered on its merits. The onus is on the person to  demonstrate
         that their profile and circumstances are such that on  return  they
         would be vulnerable to abuse or re-trafficking which  would  amount
         to serious harm or persecution.

         2.4.8 Factors that may increase the risk of  being  abused  or  re-
         trafficked include, but are not limited to:

         .    The person having an outstanding debt to the traffickers

         .    The person knowing the trafficker

         .    The absence of a supportive family willing to take the  victim
         back into the family unit

         .    The person having no other support network to assist them  and
         material and financial deprivation such as to mean that  they  will
         be living in poverty or in conditions of destitution

         .    No or little education or vocational skills

         .    Mental health  conditions,  which  may  have  been  caused  by
         experiences of abuse when originally trafficked

20. The appellant has been trafficked and abused from place to place within
    Vietnam;  in  Russia  and  France;  and  within  the  UK,  in  Cardiff,
    Liverpool, and Glasgow.

21.  In  a  report  dated  20  May  2019,  the  appellant's  GP   describes
    "symptomology  consistent  with  complex,  multiple  traumas"  with   a
    "significant impact on the appellant's  mental  wellbeing"  and  opines
    that she meets the criteria for complex PTSD.

22. Dr Tran Thi Lan Anh, a country expert, opines in her  report  dated  24
    May 2019 that the support system for trafficking victims in Vietnam  is
    poor and that, "Due to her vulnerable status she ... will  be  an  easy
    target for human traffickers if she is returned and ... at serious risk
    of being re-trafficked".

23. It is not clear from the evidence that the first two "bullet points" of
    paragraph 2.4.8 of the policy are met, but the history raises at  least
    a suspicion that traffickers and abusers maintained  their interest  in
    the appellant over a protracted period, wherever she went.  On evidence
    which is not in dispute, the other four "bullet points" are all met.  I
    take into account that the UK offers  support  to  returnees,  but  the
    respondent has not provided any details of what would be  available  in
    this case, and such support is inevitably finite.

24. The appellant would be at risk in her home area.  The evidence in  this
    case does not defeat the claim  on  grounds  of  legal  sufficiency  of
    protection, or of internal relocation.

25. The appeal, as brought to the FtT, is allowed on asylum  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

26. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    [pic]


    2 November 2020
    UT Judge Macleman
