
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02963/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 17 April 2018                                   |On 23 May 2018                  |
|                                                   |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    [M K]
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chelvan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on [  ]  1985.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  20  March  2017
    refusing his  application  for  refugee  status,  his  application  for
    humanitarian protection and his claim under ECHR.  His appeal was heard
    by Judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Herbert  and  dismissed  on  all
    grounds in a decision promulgated on 8 January 2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Chohan on 31 January  2018.
    The grounds argue that the Judge erred in the  assessment  of  internal
    relocation and by failing to consider the medical and  expert  reports.
    Although at paragraph 8 of the decision the Judge  makes  reference  to
    medical  evidence  and  the  expert  report,  when  he   assesses   the
    appellant's case, particularly in relation to internal relocation,  the
    Judge makes no reference to either report.  The permission states  that
    had that evidence been properly considered  it  is  possible  that  the
    outcome may have been different.

The Hearing

 3. Counsel referred me to emails between him and the Home Office regarding
    this appeal.  With  these  emails  is  the  case  of  MSM  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  UKUT  00413  (IAC).
    Outline submissions also form part of the emails.  These point out that
    there is no Rule 24 response  from  the  respondent.   The  submissions
    state that the  appellant  is  ethnically  Pashtu  and  was  a  teacher
    targeted by the Taliban and was shot at in November 2016.  As  well  as
    the said case of MSM, the submissions state that  past  persecution  is
    probative of future risk and protection requires preventative  measures
    where there is a known risk, and that teachers are  in  a  risk  group.
    The submissions go on to state that the  First-Tier  Tribunal  accepted
    that the appellant was a teacher for a refugee NGO.  Having studied the
    decision the First-Tier Tribunal also accepted that the  appellant  was
    probably threatened by the  Taliban  verbally  but  the  Judge  doubted
    whether he was given a letter by the Deputy Head of the Taliban, as the
    person who signed the letter  is  not  referred  to  in  the  objective
    evidence.  The submissions then refer to mistakes within the  decision,
    including the statement that the appellant taught Pashtu and not Pashtu
    and English.  I noted however  that  in  his  screening  interview  the
    appellant stated that he taught Pashtu and English so  this  is  not  a
    mistake on the part of the First-Tier Judge. The appellant  did  change
    his answer when he answered question 234 of the substantive  interview,
    referring only to teaching Pashtu but that is not  what  he  originally
    stated.

 4. The appellant also taught boys and girls and the Taliban threatened him
    because he was teaching girls.


 5. There are errors of law in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal's  decision.  The
    emails show that the  respondent  accepts  this.   The  Judge  did  not
    properly consider the medical and expert reports when dealing with risk
    on return and when the case of MSM  is  considered  the  Judge  has  to
    distinguish between actual and imputed political opinion.  Paragraph 33
    in the said case of MSM is referred to.


 6. The lack of a Rule 24 Response is not significant. A Rule  24  Response
    is now more the exception than the Rule.


 7. Counsel appeared to believe that the respondent  granted  a  concession
    relating to all the matters raised in the  outline  submissions  but  I
    find the concession is merely that the respondent  accepts  that  there
    are errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and  that  it
    should  be  remitted.  The  details  of  the  outline  submissions  are
    arguable.  The submissions refer to the motorbike attack  taking  place
    in 2016.  This should of course be 2010.


 8. The respondent agreed in the emails that this claim does have  material
    errors of law therein and it  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal.


 9. I agree and am therefore going to remit this appeal back to the  First-
    Tier Tribunal. The only concession made by the respondent is that there
    are errors of law in the first-tier Tribunal's decision.


Notice of Decision

I find that there are  material  errors  of  law  in  First-Tier  Tribunal's
decision and under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of  Practice
Statement 7.2 the case should be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal for  an
entirely fresh hearing.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has to be set  aside.  None  of  its
findings are to stand other than as a  record  of  what  was  said  on  that
occasion.

The members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are  not
to include Judge Herbert.

Anonymity has been directed.





Signed
     Date 21st May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray





