


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/02234/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On:  21st June 2017                    |On:  23rd August 2017               |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     YA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr G. Brown, Counsel instructed by Greater
                       Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:           Mr Harrison,   Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Libya born in  1983.   He  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Gladstone) to
    dismiss his protection appeal.








    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a  claim  for  international  protection.  I  have
    decided to make a direction for anonymity, having had regard to Rule 14
    of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and   the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.  I  make  an
    order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"








    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. In seeking international protection the Appellant advanced a  claim  on
    the grounds that as a member  of  the  Zintan  tribe  he  had  suffered
    serious harm at the hands of a hostile militia  in  Tripoli,  including
    being  kidnapped  and  threatened.   Beyond  an   acceptance   of   the
    Appellant's  claimed  ethnicity  and  nationality  the  Respondent  had
    rejected the whole account for want of credibility.


 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Tribunal  did
    not believe the account of kidnap and threats.  As to the  danger  that
    the Appellant might face as a member of the Zintan tribe in Libya today
    the Tribunal had regard to the then extant country guidance case of  AT
    and Others (Article 15(c) - Risk Categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 00318
    (IAC) and finding that there was no real risk of  indiscriminate  harm,
    dismissed the appeal.


 5. The Appellant now appeals on the following grounds:

              i) That the First-tier Tribunal erred in its assessment of his
                 credibility, having failed to have regard  to  any  of  the
                 country background material in its analysis;


             ii) The Tribunal failed to have regard to the  changes  in  the
                 country situation since the decision in  AT  &  Others  was
                 made.














    Error of Law


 6. The hearing came before this Tribunal,  sitting in Liverpool,   on  the
    31st January 2017.  On that day the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department was represented by Senior Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.  In
    a decision promulgated that day I held that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal must be set  aside,  to  a  limited  extent.  My  written
    reasons were as follows:


         "Before me Mr McVeety conceded that he could have no real objection
         to the second ground. The decision in this appeal  was  promulgated
         on the 20th July  2016.    On  the  7th  September  2016  the  Vice
         President of the Upper Tribunal Mr  CMG  Ockelton  promulgated  the
         decision in FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 00413 (IAC).
           This indicated that due to significant changes on the  ground  in
         Libya the decision in AT & Others was no  longer  to  be  followed.
         The decision in respect of Article 15(c) is therefore set aside  to
         be remade.


         In respect of the first ground Mr McVeety defended the decision. He
         pointed out that the Tribunal rejected the account  of  kidnap  and
         threats not on grounds of plausibility,   but because  the  account
         had varied in its telling, and  because  significant  discrepancies
         had emerged in the chronology. I agree that this ground is not made
         out. The Tribunal could have had regard to the  country  background
         material, for instance evidence to indicate that a person of Zintan
         ethnicity might plausibility  encounter  problems  with  militiamen
         from Libya Dawn.  This would have made however no difference at all
         to the outcome of the credibility assessment,  since  none  of  the
         findings were predicated on grounds of implausibility. Put  another
         way, the country background  material  would  not  have  cured  the
         defects in the Appellant's case.".


 7. Accordingly the matter proceeded to be  listed  for  remaking  on  that
    basis. The decision in respect of the claimed  historical  account  was
    upheld, but the final decision as to risk was to be remade.










    The Re-Making


 8. There followed some delay in the appeal being  relisted  for  disposal.
    This was because the  parties  had  agreed  that  the  case  should  be
    adjourned pending the outcome of the country guidance case  on  whether
    the conflict in  Libya  engaged  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  It came back before me on the 21st June 2017.  The  country
    guidance was still not available. The parties  agreed  that  the  final
    determination of this appeal should follow the  handing  down  of  that
    decision.   ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 263  (IAC)  became
    available on the 28th June 2017 and the file in  this  appeal  has  now
    been returned to me for final disposal.


 9. As explained in my 'error of law' decision the Respondent had  accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in its approach to the issue  of
    Article 15(c). Although  the  Tribunal  could  not  be  criticised  for
    applying the extant country guidance in AT & Others, fresh evidence had
    become available which  indicated  that  the  situation  in  Libya  had
    dramatically worsened ; the error was the failure to engage  with  that
    evidence and make reasoned findings on it (the decision in FA applied).
     At the date that I remake the decision the applicable country guidance
    is ZMM.  The headnote summarises the findings in that case:


         The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level   that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person.


    It follows that the Appellant's appeal must be  allowed  on  protection
    grounds, because he is entitled to humanitarian protection.


10. Mr Brown submits that in this case however, recourse to  Article  15(c)
    is not necessary since on the facts the Appellant qualifies for refugee
    status. Although Judge Gladstone's findings  on  past  persecution  are
    preserved, Mr Brown points out that the Appellant is accepted to  be  a
    member of the Zintan tribe. As such, Mr Brown submits, he is reasonably
    likely to come to serious  harm  when  crossing  checkpoints  of  rival
    militias. The Zintan militia are one of the most prominent factions  in
    the civil war and as such it is reasonably likely that a young  Zintani
    man travelling on  his  own  might  be  singled  out  for  retribution,
    punishment or  kidnap,  particular  when  encountering  armed  factions
    representing, or allied to, the group formally known as  'Libya  Dawn',
    who at the date of ZMM held the airport in  Tripoli  and  much  of  the
    city.   The Appellant submits that over and  above  the  risk  that  he
    faces as  a  civilian,  his  ethnic  origins  render  him  particularly
    vulnerable.  The  country  background  evidence,   it   is   submitted,
    establishes that many of the human rights  abuses  occurring  in  Libya
    today are ethnically targeted. See for instance the  February  2016  of
    the Secretary General of  the  UN:  "armed  groups  act  with  complete
    impunity, continuing to abduct, torture and kill civilians on the basis
    of  their  perceived  or  actual  family  links,  origin  or  political
    affiliation"[1].  It is accepted that the Zintan are politically allied
    with General Haftar in the East [see paragraph 2 ZMM] and that as  such
    they are in direct conflict with the forces  collectively  known  -  or
    formerly known - as Libya Dawn: see for instance the OHRCR report dated
    February 2016 "Amongst the primary armed groups opposed to  Libya  Dawn
    are the Zintan-based Al-Sawa'iq, Al-Qa'qa'a and Al-Madani brigades...".


11. The risks to the Appellant's person are articulated in ZMM.  He faces a
    risk of harm as a civilian from inter alia explosive remnants  of  war,
    shelling, bombing, indiscriminate firing, from the exponential rise  in
    violent criminality, and from the human  rights  abuses  meted  out  by
    armed militias accountable to no central authority.    It is  only  the
    last of these feared harms that might,  in  this  context,  engage  the
    Refugee Convention: if the Appellant  is  caught  in  crossfire  it  is
    unlikely to be for reasons of his ethnic origins. Since it was only the
    cumulative total of those risks which engaged Article 15(c), can it  be
    said that this rather slim causal nexus is sufficient  to  entitle  the
    Appellant to refugee status?

12. On the one hand it is arguable that the harm feared -  assault,  kidnap
    or worse at a checkpoint - is statistically not great  enough  to  make
    out a risk, even on the lower standard.  The evidence  points  to  such
    abuses, and on the material cited  above  certainly  connects  them  to
    ethnicity and perceived political allegiance, but the evidence  is  not
    sufficient to demonstrate that these events happen so  often  that  the
    Appellant can be said to be at risk for a Convention reason  simply  on
    that basis.

13. On the other the Tribunal has already found the risk of serious harm to
    exist.  It is trite refugee law and that if  any  part  of  the  causal
    nexus between serious harm and the reasons for it is established to  be
    for a 'Convention reason', then the claim is made out: see for instance
    Sivakumar [2003] UKHL 14.  It would be wrong to dissect the global risk
    and assess each element in isolation. The risk is of harm, and  if  the
    harm is inflicted - to  any  significant  degree  -  for  a  Convention
    reason, then the claim will be made out.

14. I am satisfied that if confronted  with  Libya  Dawn  militiamen  at  a
    checkpoint there would be a particular risk to the Appellant because he
    would be identifiable as being from the  Zintan  tribe.  That  risk  is
    likely to result in serious harm.  The appeal is therefore  allowed  on
    protection (refugee grounds).







    Decisions


15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside to the extent identified above.


16. The decision is remade as follows:


    "The  appeal  is  allowed  on  protection  (asylum)  grounds.  In   the
    alternative, it is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds".

17. There is an order for anonymity.




    [pic]


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                  22nd
                                 August 2017






      -----------------------
[1] Page 43 Appellant's bundle

