
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02664/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 4 August 2021                 |On the 08 September 2021             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                    H V N
                         (Anonymity direCTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N. Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R. O'Ryan, Counsel instructed on behalf of HVN.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. On 17 October 2018 the respondent made an order that the  appellant
         is to be deported from the United  Kingdom  ('UK'),  following  his
         criminal convictions as it was considered that his presence in  the
         UK was not conducive to the public good. The respondent refused the
         appellant's protection and human rights claim in a decision  letter
         dated 11 February 2020.

      2. The appellant, a citizen of Vietnam, appealed this decision to  the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lodato) (hereinafter referred to as  the
         "FtTJ").  In a decision sent on 8 February 2021, the  FtTJ  allowed
         his appeal on human rights grounds, and the Secretary of State  has
         now appealed, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

      3. Whilst this is the appeal brought on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
         State, for sake of convenience I intend to refer to the parties  as
         they were before the FtT.

      4. The FtT did make an anonymity order and no grounds have been raised
         by the Secretary of State for the order  to  be  discharged  during
         these proceedings. I therefore continue the anonymity direction set
         out at the end of this decision.

      5. The hearing took place on 4 August  2021,  by  means  of  Microsoft
         teams which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable and both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. I conducted the  hearing  with  the
         parties, and I was present at the Court building.

      6.  No technical problems encountered during the  hearing,  and  I  am
         satisfied both advocates were able to make their  respective  cases
         by the chosen means.

      7. A previous hearing was adjourned in order for the appellant  to  be
         provided with the relevant documentation as he  did  not  have  the
         documents.  I explained the proceedings to the appellant  with  the
         assistance of the court interpreter who I am satisfied was able  to
         understand the proceedings. The appellant is now represented by  Mr
         O'Ryan, of Counsel who had provided a  skeleton  argument  for  the
         hearing.

      8. I am grateful  to  both  advocates  for  their  clear  and  helpful
         submissions during the hearing.

Background:

      9. The appellant's immigration history and background is summarised in
         the decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs [23]-[25] and  the  decision
         letter of the 11 February 2020.

     10. It is not known when the  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom.
         However on 18 July 2007 he was served with removal paperwork as  an
         illegal entrant in the UK.

     11. On 15 May 2008 was arrested on suspicion  of  cultivating  cannabis
         but no other information is known about the arrest.

     12. On 9 June 2008 he claimed  asylum  but  on  29  July  2008  it  was
         concluded that he  did  not  qualify  for  asylum  or  humanitarian
         protection but was granted discretionary leave to remain  until  26
         November 2013.

     13. On 2 October 2008 he lodged an appeal and on 6  November  2008  the
         appeal was allowed on humanitarian protection /human rights grounds
         (see decision of Immigration Judge Caswell later summarised).

     14. On 26 November 2008 was granted humanitarian  protection  leave  to
         remain until 26 November 2013.

     15. The appellant was convicted  on  2  occasions  for  a  total  of  2
         offences. He  was  first  convicted  on  8  December  2010  in  the
         magistrates court for producing cannabis and  was  sentenced  to  a
         custodial sentence of 6 months imprisonment suspended for  2  years
         with an unpaid work requirement.

     16. On 22 November 2013 he applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in
         the category settlement protection - ILR and included  a  dependent
         spouse  application  and  a  dependent   child   application.   The
         applications were refused but they were both  granted  humanitarian
         protection leave until 29 April 2017.

     17. On 26 May 2016 the appellant's spouse  lodged  an  application  for
         further leave and she was granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain
         until 24 March 2019.

     18. On 28 April 2017 the appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain in the category settlement protection - ILR. He  included  a
         dependent child  application  for  his  child  born  in  2013.  The
         application remains outstanding.

     19. The appellant was convicted of a 2nd drugs offence in 2018  at  the
         Sheriff Court on 17 May 2018. The offence of being concerned in the
         supply of controlled drugs,  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  an
         immediate custodial sentence of 21 months.

     20. In light of his conviction, a decision to deport him was issued  on
         17 October 2018. This was responded to by the appellant on 29 March
         2019 where he made a protection claim and a human rights claim.

     21. On 18 February 2019 the appellant's dependents were sent  a  notice
         of decision to deport.

     22. On 25 July 2019 the notice of decision to  deport  his  spouse  was
         withdrawn and on 27 January 2020 the notice of decision  to  deport
         his child was also withdrawn.

     23. A decision was made on 11 February 2020 to refuse a protection  and
         human rights claim.

The decision of the Secretary of State dated 11 February 2020

     24. The decision letter is a lengthy document extending to 16 pages.

     25. Having set out the appellant's immigration history, the  respondent
         set out a consideration of  the  appellant's  protection  claim  at
         paragraph 9. The appellant's position was that it  remained  as  it
         has been in the past that he was trafficked in United  Kingdom  and
         that he remained afraid of the traffickers and in fear for his life
         and therefore should not be returned to Vietnam.

     26. The appellant believe  the  same  group  of  criminals  were  still
         operating and active  in  trafficking  and  to  this  date  he  had
         frequent stories from other  Vietnamese  nationals  of  them  being
         trafficked in the same  manner  and  through  the  same  route  via
         Russia, the Czech Republic, Germany and France and lorries.

     27. It was said that his appeal was accepted by  an  immigration  judge
         and humanitarian protection was further granted by the Home  Office
         in 2014. As the Home Office continued to accept that he would  face
         persecution for non-Convention reason he should not be returned  to
         Vietnam  and  there  were  no  reasons   to   consider   that   the
         circumstances had changed  such  that  he  would  now  be  safe  in
         Vietnam.

     28. The respondent considered the protection claim at paragraphs  10-17
         and in the light  of  the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note:
         Victims of trafficking, September 2018 confirming  the  victims  of
         trafficking in Vietnam did  not  form  a  particular  social  group
         within the meaning of the Refugee Convention and that in absence of
         a link to 1 of  the  5  Convention  reasons,  the  question  to  be
         addressed in each case will be whether the particular person  faces
         a real risk of serious harm sufficient to qualify for  humanitarian
         protection.

     29. Reference was made to the previous decision  of  Immigration  Judge
         Caswell in November 2008, where the judge found that the  appellant
         did not fall within a particular social group of "former victims of
         trafficking". The respondent therefore concluded that the appellant
         did not qualify for asylum.

     30. At paragraphs 18 - 35 the  decision  letter  recorded  the  reasons
         given by Judge Caswell on the 6  November  2008  for  his  decision
         allowing his appeal and which had led to  the  respondent  granting
         him humanitarian protection on 26 November 2008.

     31.  The  respondent  noted  that  he  had  been  granted  humanitarian
         protection leave to remain on 26 November 2008  until  26  November
         2013 and that on 29 April 2014 his leave was extended to  29  April
         2017. On  28  April  2017  he  applied  for  settlement  protection
         -indefinite leave to remain, and  it  was  this  application  which
         remained outstanding.

     32. At paragraphs 37 - 43, the respondent set out the position that the
         situation in Vietnam had now changed by reference to  the  decision
         of Nguyen (Anti-Trafficking Convention; respondent's duties) [2015]
         UKUT 170. Under the heading "protection at paragraphs 44 -  50  the
         respondent set out the country information relating to the issue of
         sufficiency  of  protection  and  also  the  case  of  Nguyen.  The
         respondent stated that in general, effective state protection would
         likely to be available, but decision-makers need to  consider  each
         case on its facts. The onus is on the  person  to  demonstrate  why
         they are unable to seek and obtain effective state protection.

     33. In the appellant's case the respondent considered that  he  was  no
         longer at risk of traffickers as it had been  10  years  since  the
         judge decided he  would  be  in  the  situation  had  changed.  The
         respondent concluded there was no evidence to suggest that  he  had
         any outstanding debts to his traffickers meaning that he  would  be
         specifically targeted by  them  on  his  return.  Even  if  it  was
         accepted that he was at risk of his traffickers, which is  not,  it
         was considered that he would be able to relocate  to  another  area
         Vietnam where there will be no risk.  It  was  therefore  concluded
         that having given consideration to his individual circumstances, it
         was accepted that there was no evidence that he had family  members
         residing in Vietnam to support him on return, but it was considered
         that he was a fit and healthy young man who could  find  employment
         to support himself by utilising the employment  skills  he  learned
         whilst residing in the UK as a self-employed  nail  technician.  It
         was therefore decided that he  no  longer  faced  a  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm on his return to Vietnam and  he  no  longer
         qualified for humanitarian protection.

     34. At paragraphs 56 - 59 Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR were  considered
         but that there were no substantial grounds for believing that there
         was a real risk that he would face treatment contrary to articles 2
         or 3.

     35. At paragraphs 60 - 65 the  respondent  considered  the  appellant's
         exclusion from  humanitarian  protection  on  the  basis  that  the
         appellant had committed a "serious crime" based on  his  conviction
         of being concerned in the supplying of a controlled  drug.  It  was
         considered that he had been convicted  of  a  serious  offence  and
         therefore fell within the exclusion criteria set out in  rule  339D
         (iv).

     36. The respondent therefore  considered  that  not  only  did  he  not
         qualify for humanitarian protection but that also  because  of  his
         criminality he was excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection
         under paragraph 339D of the immigration rules.

     37. His protection  claim  was  therefore  refused,  and  it  was  also
         concluded that he had not shown there are substantial  grounds  for
         believing that he would face a real risk of suffering serious  harm
         on return, and he did not qualify for humanitarian protection.

     38. At paragraphs 67 - 105 the respondent  considered  the  appellant's
         claim advanced on article 8 grounds including the family life  with
         his child born in 2013 and his family life with his  partner.  When
         considering his family life it was accepted that the relevant child
         was under the age of 18 and that she was in the UK but that she was
         not a British citizen that was a citizen of Vietnam  who  was  last
         granted leave to remain in the UK on 22 November 2013. She had  not
         lived in the UK for at  least  7  years  and  therefore  could  not
         satisfy the requirements of the exception to deportation set out at
         paragraph 399 (a) of the immigration rules. Consideration was  also
         given however as to whether it will be unduly harsh for  the  child
         to live in Vietnam will remain in the UK. It was not accepted  that
         it would be unduly harsh for his child live in Vietnam and that she
         would have cultural ties in Vietnam as he was a Vietnamese national
         had spent the majority of his life in Vietnam and that she will  be
         young enough to adapt to life in Vietnam with his support  stop  it
         was also not accepted that it will be unduly harsh for his child to
         remain in the UK without the appellant as she could reside with her
         mother should they regularise the residence rights in the UK.

     39. As to family life with a partner, it was not accepted that she  was
         a British citizen or settled in the UK and  she  was  last  granted
         leave to remain in the UK on 24 September 2016.

     40.  It  is  also  not  accepted  that  he  had  a  genuine  subsisting
         relationship with her, and it was noted that whilst she was granted
         discretionary leave to remain on 13 January 2014 and 26 May 2016 as
         it was accepted they were in a genuine subsisting relationship,  on
         6 January 2020 was confirmed in a letter to the  Home  Office  that
         the relationship was no longer subsisting, and they no longer lived
         together. As regards her circumstances,  it  was  not  accepted  it
         would be unduly harsh for her to live in Vietnam. It was noted that
         she claimed asylum in  2010  which  is  refused  although  she  was
         granted discretionary leave to remain. She did not lodge an  appeal
         against the decision it was also noted that she  claimed  to  be  a
         victim of trafficking in 2013 that the claim was refused in 2014 as
         it was decided that she was not trafficked. No legal challenge  was
         lodged by her against that decision. Home Office records also state
         that she had confirmed an application for leave to remain lodged in
         March 2019 that she had returned Vietnam holidays in 2015, 2017 and
         2018. But it was considered that it would not be unduly  harsh  for
         his former partner live in Vietnam she was  a  Vietnamese  national
         was born and raised there. It was not accepted that would be unduly
         harsh for his former spouse remain in the UK she never been granted
         leave to remain in line with the appellant and  their  child  as  a
         family dependent. She has an  outstanding  discretionary  leave  to
         remain application which was lodged in  March  2019  and  therefore
         would be up to reside in the UK should she regularise her residence
         rights.

     41. The respondent therefore concluded that it was  not  accepted  that
         the appellant met the requirements of the exception to  deportation
         on the basis of family life with a partner.

     42. The appellant's private life was considered  at  paragraphs  100  -
         105. The respondent also  considered  that  as  the  exceptions  to
         deportation did not apply to the appellant, consideration was given
         to whether there were very compelling circumstances such did not be
         deported but the significant public  interest  in  his  deportation
         outweighed any  article  8  claim  raised.  Therefore  it  was  not
         accepted that there were very compelling circumstances to  outweigh
         the public interest in his deportation.

     43. As to the outstanding application where he applied  for  settlement
         protection indefinite leave to remain and having named his child as
         a dependent on the application, it was refused under paragraph  322
         (1C(ii) because he had been convicted of an offence which had  been
         sentenced to imprisonment for at least  12  months.  There  was  no
         right of appeal against that decision.

     44. In conclusion, the respondent considered that his deportation would
         not breach the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR and the
         public interest in deporting him outweighed his right to a  private
         and family life.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

     45. The appeal came before the FtTJ on 26 January 2021.  The FtTJ heard
         oral evidence from the appellant. The FtTJ also  had  a  bundle  of
         documentation including written  representations  from  his  former
         representatives and grounds of appeal. On behalf of the  respondent
         the  documents  included  the  decision  letter   and   deportation
         decision, the PNC printout dated 13 June 2018, a  criminal  justice
         social work report prepared for the  purposes  of  the  appellant's
         sentencing hearing on 7 June 2018 and the decision of Judge Caswell
         dated 5 November 2008. The FtTJ was not provided with  any  country
         materials by the respondent, and this is supported by the record of
         proceedings and the judge's note of the  submissions  made  by  the
         presenting officer.

     46. At paragraphs 26 - 36 the FtTJ set out the appellant's case and  at
         paragraphs 37 - 43 set out the respondent's case. He noted at  [20]
         it was conceded on the respondent's behalf that  it  would  now  be
         unduly harsh to  expect  the  appellant's  daughter  to  return  to
         Vietnam with her father since she was now a  qualifying  child  for
         the purposes of 2002 act having lived in the UK for over 7 years.

     47. At paragraphs 24 - 25 the FtTJ summarised the previous decision  of
         Judge Caswell in 2018.  There does not seem to be any dispute  that
         the summary given is not accurate.  I  therefore  reproduce  it  as
         follows.

    The decision of Judge Caswell in 2008:

         The factual account:

     48. The appellant said he was born in x village in the  x  province  of
         central Vietnam. His was a poor family, and his father  died  about
         10 years ago, when the appellant was very young. The appellant  was
         the only surviving son, that he had an  older  sister  who  was  22
         years old and had a child. He lived with them and with his  mother.
         From the age of 12 he had to work to help support the family.

     49. The appellant left Vietnam  just  before  his  14th  birthday.  His
         family arranged for him to go to work in Europe, said that he could
         send money home support them. The appellant travelled with a series
         of agents in the company of many other young Vietnamese  girls  and
         boys. He flew to the Czech Republic from Hanoi and was kept  locked
         up in hut in the forest for months, while attempts are made to  get
         him and others into Germany.

     50. Eventually they were told it was  not  safe  to  try  and  work  in
         Germany anymore, and they were going to  travel  to  the  UK.  They
         travel by lorry to France, in a place called Len, the appellant met
         a Vietnamese man called X. Apart from the agents in Vietnam itself,
         this is the 1st Vietnamese "organiser" the appellant has  been  put
         with since he started travelling.

     51. X said he would get the appellant working a nail bar in the UK, and
         he would be able to send  back  good  money  from  his  family.  He
         accompanied the appellant the UK by lorry and  then  they  went  to
         (place) to a house there. He told the appellant that the job a nail
         bar would be arranged but in the meantime should stay in the  house
         in (place) and look after the plants  there.  These  were  cannabis
         plants.

     52. The appellant spent 2 months living there. For the 1st 6  weeks  he
         was with X. After that he was left on his own look after the plants
         and threatened with sticks by four men who  visited  him,  when  he
         said he did not want to stay in  the  house.  They  threatened  his
         family would be harmed as well. On 14 May 2008  the  appellant  was
         rescued when the police raided the house and found him. Although he
         was prosecuted and convicted of being involved in  the  cultivation
         of cannabis, as part of a big police operation, the conviction  was
         later quashed on the grounds that he was a trafficked child.

     53. The appellant has not been able to contact his family since he left
         home. His mother had said they might move to x/x to look  for  work
         there. If he were returned to Vietnam he feared  death  or  serious
         ill treatment than the agents. Because he  would  expose  the  fact
         that they had lied about how it would be abroad  and  expose  their
         trafficking of children. He also feared for his family. The agents,
         whom he believed are highly organised and connected to  the  Mafia,
         would think he'd reported them to the authorities, or would do  so,
         it was not in their interests to leave him alive.

     54. The FtTJ noted that the appellant's claim for asylum was  dismissed
         on the basis that there was no convention reason  underpinning  the
         risk  he  faced  on  return,  and  it  was  found  that  there  was
         insufficient evidence to support the  conclusion  that  victims  of
         trafficking were particular social group (paragraph 14).

     55. However the conclusion was reached by Judge Caswell at paragraph 17
         that the appellant was a real risk from those who trafficked him of
         suffering treatment contrary to article 3 of the  ECHR  if  he  was
         returned to his home area. He could not hope to receive  sufficient
         protection (paragraph 22) and internal  relocation  within  Vietnam
         would not be reasonable given his age, background, lack of familial
         contacts and vulnerability (paragraph 24).

     56. At paragraph 27 Judge Caswell said:

         "I found therefore that the appellant, while not refugee, had shown
         substantial grounds for believing that he would face a real risk of
         suffering serious harm on return and that he was  unable  to  avail
         himself of the protection of his country. He had  also  shown  that
         return would expose him to the real risk of  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment, torture or death at the hands of the  traffickers,  from
         retaliation for his assumed part exposing  their  crimes,  wish  to
         silence him to protect themselves and/or being re-trafficked."

     57. The FtTJ findings of fact and analysis of the issues are set out at
         paragraphs [44]-[57].  The FtTJ found:

         1) The appellant was a foreign criminal having been sentenced to  a
            period of imprisonment of at least  12  months  and  was  not  a
            British citizen (at [44).

         2) The appellant had been  convicted  of  being  concerned  in  the
            supply of controlled drugs  which  was  a  particularly  serious
            crime and constituted a danger to the community in the  UK.  The
            appellant cannot  benefit  from  protection  under  the  Refugee
            Convention and the asylum ground of appeal must be dismissed (at
            [45]).

         3) The judge took as  his  starting  point  the  findings  of  fact
            reached by judge Caswell applying the principles in  Devaseelan.
            In those proceedings it was concluded that the appellant  was  a
            real risk of suffering article 3 ill-treatment from the criminal
            gang which forced him into servitude (at [46]).

         4) The judge considered the submission made by the respondent  that
            the country conditions in Vietnam and the specific risk  to  the
            appellant had materially changed since the 2008 decision  taking
            into account the passage of time and the decision of Nguyen. The
            judge cited paragraphs 39-51 of the decision letter by reference
            to that decision.

         5) The FtTJ found that the respondent had misquoted the decision in
            Nguyen  and that the decision actually included the following at
            paragraph 51:'' the respondent has made the point  that  Vietnam
            is a large country of some 90 million people with  a  number  of
            large cities in it. If the appellant  were  able  to  return,  a
            matter to which we will have to  return,  she  would  not  be  a
            person of any adverse interest of the government, and the chance
            of coming across the traffickers is very slight."

         6) The FtTJ found that there was  a  "distortion  in  the  decision
            letter" in that it converted a statement  about  the  particular
            circumstances of the appellant in those proceedings to a general
            statement of principle about the risk faced by  those  who  have
            been formally trafficked. The judge  stated  "it  is  noteworthy
            that while the decision was reported, it was not reported  as  a
            country guidance about Vietnam. The point of  principle  decided
            in that case was the responsibility of the UK in  its  treatment
            of a victim of trafficking  had  been  trafficked  before  their
            arrival in the UK. At paragraph 52  of  the  determination,  the
            personal circumstances of that particular  applicant  considered
            as a single mother with 3 small  children  before  going  on  to
            conclude that she would not be at risk and those who  originally
            trafficked  her  or  from  the   malign   interests   of   fresh
            traffickers. It was further stated  that  there  was  evidential
            support for the proposition that sufficiency  protection  exists
            Vietnam, but this falls a long way short of bearing  the  weight
            placed upon it by the respondent that the male appellant in this
            case would benefit from sufficient protection on return".

         7) The judge referred to paragraph 41 of the decision letter  where
            it was acknowledged that return victims of trafficking may be at
            risk of reprisals from their original traffickers or  being  re-
            trafficked and that the factors were identified which might have
            a bearing on that risk as follows:

            factors that may make the person face an increased risk of being
            abused or re-trafficked include, but are not limited to:

               . the person having outstanding debt to the traffickers

               . the absence of  supportive  family  willing  to  take  the
                 victim back into the family unit

               . the person having no other support network to a system: no
                 or little educational  vocational  skills,  mental  health
                 conditions, which may well have been caused by experiences
                 of abuse were really trafficked:  material  and  financial
                 deprivation such as to me that  they  will  be  living  in
                 poverty or in conditions of destitution.

         8) The judge found that there was no  evidence  of  an  outstanding
            debt owed to the appellant's original traffickers (at [52]).

         9) The judge found  that  the  respondent  did  not  challenge  the
            proposition that the appellant would return to  Vietnam  without
            any family support having lost contact with his immediate family
            when he left the country as a child (at [52]).

        10) The judge  found  that  the  respondent's  suggestion  that  the
            appellant could utilise his skills as a nail technician  to  re-
            establish and support himself once back  in  Vietnam  to  be  an
            "unrealistic submission" and that "such a basic skill set hardly
            seems sufficient to counter the risk factor".

        11) The judge stated that "save for the mere passage of  time,  they
            would seem to be little justification to depart from the finding
            reach by Judge Caswell that this appellant was at a real risk of
            suffering conditions contrary to article 3. This  is  consistent
            with the decision of the respondent to  grant  the  appellant  a
            period of leave to remain  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds
            until as recently as 2017. All that has changed  since  then  is
            the further, moderate passage of  time  and  the  conviction  in
            2018. The criminal offending is, of  course,  reprehensible  but
            does not touch upon the article 3 risk he would face on return."
            (at [52]).

        12) The judge concluded that there was no basis for going behind the
            assessment of judge Caswell in concluding that the appellant was
            at risk of encountering article 3 treatment on return to Vietnam
            and that "without more, it is insufficient to simply  rely  upon
            the passage of time to argue that the threat has dissipated" (at
            [53]).

        13) At [54] the judge stated that  he  had  carefully  consider  the
            arguments advanced on behalf  the  respondent  that  sufficiency
            protection now exists in Vietnam but that he did not  regard  it
            to amount to the "kind of  cogent  foundation  to  displace  the
            findings reach by judge Caswell that the authorities were  riven
            with  corruption  and  unlikely  to  offer  any   semblance   of
            protection to this appellant."

        14) He concluded at [55], "I am not  persuaded  that  the  appellant
            could internally relocate in Vietnam to guard against the  risks
            of reprisals or of being re-trafficked. He  would  return  as  a
            former victim  of  trafficking  without  any  family  or  social
            network to assist him in re-establishing himself. This  together
            with his very limited skill set would render him  vulnerable  to
            the malign interests of traffickers. I do not regard this  as  a
            reasonable option to counter the risky faces on return.

        15) The judge therefore allowed the appeal and article 3 grounds.

        16) At paragraph [56]'s the judge did not consider article 8 but had
            he done so, he stated there was no credible basis  on  which  to
            conclude that any of the exceptions found in S117C  of  the  Act
            were satisfied.

        17) The judge concluded at [57] "I have considered the matter in the
            round and find that there is no justification to depart from the
            findings reach by Judge Caswell that there is a real  risk  that
            the appellant would encounter conditions contrary to  article  3
            of the ECHR. Neither sufficiency protection or  internal  flight
            operate to counteract the danger the appellant would face.

     58. The FtTJ therefore allowed the appeal.

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

     59. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  that  decision
         and permission was refused by FtTJ Nightingale on 25 February  2021
         but on reconsideration permission was granted by UTJ Hanson  on  25
         March 2021.

     60. The Secretary of State  was  represented  by  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe,
         Senior Presenting Officer. The  appellant  was  represented  by  Mr
         O'Ryan of Counsel. I am grateful to both advocates for their  clear
         and helpful submissions.

The submissions:

     61. Ms Willocks-Briscoe relied upon the  written  grounds.  No  further
         written submissions had been filed on behalf of the respondent.

     62. An application was made in an email sent to the Tribunal on  the  3
         August 2021 to submit further evidence under Rule  15  (2A)  namely
         the report  of  a  Home  Office  fact-finding  mission  to  Vietnam
         published 9  September  2019  and  the  CPIN  Vietnam:  victims  of
         trafficking dated April 2020. It was not stated  how  the  material
         was relevant to the proceedings.

     63. The application was opposed by Mr O'Ryan on behalf of the appellant
         in his skeleton argument where he submitted that the documents  now
         relied upon were in existence at the time of the hearing before the
         FtTJ, and the Secretary of State had advanced no  reason  why  they
         could not have been placed for the Judge, if they  could  have  had
         some bearing on the outcome of the appeal, at that time.

     64. At the hearing, Ms Willocks-Briscoe confirmed  that  the  documents
         were not filed for the error of law hearing but that in  the  event
         of an error of law being found this would be material  which  would
         be relevant to any re-making of the appeal.

     65. Mr O'Ryan made reference to the remaking of the appeal and that  if
         the tribunal found that there was a material error of  law  in  the
         decision of the FtTJ that the respondents  CPIN  dated  April  2020
         differed from the earlier  CPIN  relating  to  whether  victims  of
         trafficking formed a "PSG", and that this would be an  issue  which
         he would wish to refer to at any later hearing and also  the  issue
         of exclusion from protection.

     66. I therefore heard from the  advocates  concerning  the  grounds  of
         challenge relating to the issue of error of law.

     67. The written grounds of appeal submit the following:

         1) It is submitted that the respondent's evidence and the  decision
            in Nguyen  (Anti-trafficking  Convention;  Respondent's  duties)
            [2015] UKUT 170 shows that effective protection is available  to
            the appellant to the Horvath [2000] UKHL 3700 standard  is  held
            by Lord Hope, "the standard to be applied is therefore not  that
            which would eliminate all  risk  and  would  thus  amount  to  a
            guarantee of protection the home state. Rather it is a practical
            standard, which takes proper account of the duty which the state
            owes to all its own nationals."

         2) It is submitted that the onus is on the appellant to demonstrate
            why he is unable to seek and obtain effective  state  protection
            and the decision of the FtTJ contains no reason to believe  that
            the appellant as a healthy adult is unable to do so.

         3) Reliance is placed on the reported case of Nguyen that there  is
            in  general,  sufficiency  of   protection   provided   by   the
            authorities in Vietnam (paragraph 52). The  evidence  for  these
            findings is largely based on the US State Department trafficking
            in Persons report on Vietnam  of  2010  which  stated  that  the
            Vietnamese government sustained "efforts to protect  victims  of
            transnational  sex  trafficking"  though  it   "did   not   make
            sufficient efforts  during  the  year  to  protect  or  identify
            victims." Current evidence shows that whilst efforts to  protect
            victims  has  decreased  from  the  previous  year  [2016],  the
            government of Vietnam has  demonstrated  increasing  efforts  to
            meet the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking.

         4) It is submitted that there is inadequate  consideration  of  the
            passage of time since the 2008 determination. At [52[  the  FtTJ
            describes this as a "moderate passage of time". It is  submitted
            that in 2008 the  appellant  was  a  child  and  the  respondent
            accepted relocation was therefore unreasonable. The appellant is
            now in a very different position as a healthy  adult  with  work
            experience.

         5) Given the absence  of  debt  and  the  passage  of  time  it  is
            submitted that the FtTJ has provided inadequate reasons why  the
            appellant is at risk of being trafficked at paragraph [55].

     68. Ms Willocks-Briscoe also made oral  submissions  to  which  I  have
         given careful consideration.

     69. In her oral  submissions  Ms  Willocks-  Briscoe  expanded  on  the
         grounds  and    made  the  following  submissions  which  I   shall
         summarise.

     70.  She submitted that the grounds identified a period in excess of 10
         years since the decision of Judge Caswell  in  2008  and  that  the
         decision letter based the situation compared to 2008 to the present
         and that there had been a significant change in  circumstances.  In
         this regard the judge had failed to properly consider the change in
         position. The appellant  was  no  longer  a  child,  and  this  was
         important because in 2008 he had been manipulated by his family and
         he now had skills he had obtained in the UK. She submitted that the
         judge did not address  the  period  of  time  and  that  there  was
         speculation as to any ongoing risk. The background evidence  quoted
         that many people have been trafficked for labour exploitation  that
         the judge did not address that issue or give adequate findings  for
         the respondent to understand why the position  in  2008  should  be
         maintained.

     71. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that she accepted Nguyen  was  not  a
         country guidance case but there was reference which indicated  that
         there  was  sufficiency  of  protection  for  former   victims   of
         trafficking as set out in the USSD report 2010 and  cited  in  that
         decision.

     72. When the tribunal stated that it did not appear that the  CPIN  was
         before the judge, she submitted that the judge did not engage  with
         the decision letter which should have been addressed. By  reference
         to the decision letter, she submitted that extracts of the decision
         letter were taken from the CPIN victims of trafficking version  3.0
         dated September 2008.

     73.  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the  decision  letter  made
         reference to the shelters available and would  cover  male  victims
         although not exclusively and that the case of Nguyen did deal  with
         general evidence that there would be a level  of  protection  which
         was not considered by the judge.

     74. She further submitted that the judge was an error when referring to
         "mere passage of time" which undermined the  decision  on  internal
         relocation. Looking at the decision of Kamara,  and  whether  there
         were very significant obstacles to reintegration there should be  a
         "broad evaluative  assessment".  The  judge  failed  to  take  into
         account all the relevant factors that he would receive support from
         shelters who assist trafficking victims.

     75. The judge failed to take into account that in  2008  the  appellant
         was a child whereas now he did not require reception facilities and
         therefore  the  judge  failed  to  identify  risk  based   on   his
         circumstances. Given the large number of trafficking victims it had
         not been demonstrated that he would be at  risk  of  re-trafficking
         and the evidence was lacking.

     76. She therefore invited the tribunal to set aside the decision.

     77. Mr O'Ryan on behalf of  the  appellant  relied  upon  his  skeleton
         argument which had been served on the morning of  the  hearing.  He
         submitted that the respondent's grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal are nothing more than a disagreement with the  outcome  of
         the appeal.

     78. The written submissions rely upon the following points:

     79. The Judge identified  that  Nguyen  was  not,  in  fact  a  Country
         Guidance case; it was reported for reasons relating to the  correct
         procedure to be taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  competent
         authority when considering trafficking claims.   The  body  of  the
         decision in Nguyen principally concerns itself with that issue.

     80. He submitted that little country information is actually set out in
         the Tribunal decision in Nguyen; such evidence as  is  referred  to
         dates from 2010 and 2011; ie well before  the  Secretary  of  State
         decided to grant the present Respondent  further  leave  to  remain
         from April 2014 to April 2017. Further, the  evidence  referred  to
         within Nguyen as to the availability of  trafficking  shelters  and
         the provision of counselling and vocational training for  were  for
         female sex trafficking victims; neither of  which  applies  to  the
         present Respondent. The  evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Nguyen did not speak directly to the issue of the risk  to  a  male
         trafficking victim.

     81. Mr O'Ryan submitted that the  Upper  Tribunal's  reference  to  the
         chance of the appellant in Nguyen  coming  across  her  traffickers
         being very slight should be  read  alongside  the  Upper  Tribunals
         observation at paragraph 2 of its decision that appellant had moved
         from her home area to work in Hanoi and was trafficked from  there.
         The present Respondent was trafficked from his home area,  and  the
         question  under  Immigration  Rule  399O(i)(b)   arose,   ie   when
         considering a grant of humanitarian protection, whether there was a
         part of the country of return a person would not face a  real  risk
         of suffering  serious  harm,  and  the  person  can  reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country. In finding at para 55
         that the Judge did not regard internal relocation is  a  reasonable
         option, the judge correctly directed himself in law.

     82. Further, and significantly,  the  Upper  Tribunal  appear  to  have
         proceeded in Nguyen to assess that appellant's risk  of  being  re-
         trafficked on the basis that it had not  been  suggested  that  she
         would be unable to make contact again with her two brothers and her
         sister (para 52). The appellant in Nguyen was therefore treated  as
         having a family network of support available to her;  a  materially
         different  scenario  than  the  scenario  faced  by   the   present
         Respondent.

     83. Further, the suggestion that paragraph 41 of the decision letter in
         the present appeal, that there are a number of factors which  might
         make a person face an increased risk of being abused re-trafficked,
         comes not from the case of Nguyen, but is a conclusion Secretary of
         State has arrived it  for  itself,  as  contained  within  its  own
         Country  Policy  and  Information   Note,   Vietnam,   Victims   of
         Trafficking, September 2018,  which  is  quoted  with  the  refusal
         letter. For the present Judge  to  have  taken  into  account  such
         considerations, including, specifically, the  agreed  consideration
         that the present Respondent has no network of support  in  Vietnam,
         cannot be said to amount to a material error of law.

     84. Further, within the Secretary of  State's  own  grounds  of  appeal
         dated11.2.21, it is acknowledged that 'current  evidence'  (without
         stating what that source of  evidence  was)  actually  showed  that
         efforts to protect victims had decreased  from  the  previous  year
         [2016]. It is unclear how such  assertion  establishes  a  material
         error of law and the judge's approach.

     85. It is submitted that the Secretary of State's  assertion  that  the
         appellant would have the necessary skills to find work  is  a  mere
         disagreement with the Judge's finding that that would  not  be  the
         case; the Secretary of State would  need  to  establish  that  such
         funding was perverse in order to establish a material error of law;
         the Appellant's grounds do not come near establishing that point.

     86. Further, the suggestion in the grounds of  appeal  that  the  Judge
         erred in his approach regarding the 'passage  of  time'  since  the
         determination in 2008 is misconceived. Judge Lodato did  not  treat
         the passage of time since Judge Caswell's decision in 2008, and his
         own consideration of the appellant's  circumstances,  in  2021,  as
         being a 'moderate passage of time'. A proper reading  of  paragraph
         52 of the Judge's decision clearly establishes that  the  'moderate
         passage of time' the Judge was there referring to was from 2017  to
         2021. The Secretary  of  State  had  in  April  2014  continued  to
         acknowledge a real  risk  of  serious  harm  to  the  appellant  by
         granting him a further four year period of humanitarian  protection
         until April 2017. It is in that context, wherein the  Secretary  of
         State had continued to recognise a real risk of serious harm to the
         appellant up until April 2017, (when the appellant was  nearly  25)
         that the Judge was entitled to observe that  the  passage  of  time
         from 2017 to 2021 would not make any  material  difference  to  the
         risk of harm that the appellant will face upon return to Vietnam.

     87. Further and in any event, the original Judge in 2008 did  not  find
         the appellant's case made out merely on the basis that he was  then
         16 years old; it is clear from her  paragraph  26  that  she  would
         still have allowed the appeal even if the Secretary  of  State  had
         been right (which they were not) to argue  that  the  risk  to  the
         appellant should be assessed at the  earliest  potential  point  of
         return, when the appellant would have  been  17  �.  Judge  Caswell
         therefore found the appellant's case made out, even if he had  been
         six months off being an adult. That approach  also  undermines  the
         Secretary of State's challenge to the FtTJ's decision.

     88. He also made the following oral submissions. He submitted that  the
         judge  directed  his  attention  to  the  case  of  Nguyen  in  his
         assessment of the issue of risk and the grounds seek to elevate the
         content of that case to something that it  was  not.  He  made  the
         point that the decision was a reported decision on  the  protection
         of trafficking victims and was not a country guidance decision.  He
         relied upon  his  skeleton  argument  which  set  out  identifiable
         differences between the appellant's in their respective cases.

     89. Mr O'Ryan submitted that the decision had little relevance  to  the
         task that the judge was required to determine and that the decision
         in Nguyen had little by way of content relating to country material
         relating to trafficking victims and in particular male victims  and
         that it was only between paragraphs 49 -  52  that  it  turned  its
         attention to the country conditions. The evidence referred  to  was
         in 2010 and 2011 and the reasoning as to risk of harm was "thin".

     90. As regards risk of harm, the FtTJ referred to guidance in the  CPIN
         at paragraph 51 which reflected or accepted that  some  individuals
         would be at risk of harm and risk of re-trafficking and set out the
         factors. Thus it was accepted that  they  would  not  be  effective
         sufficiency of protection from serious harm  for  some  individuals
         and those considerations were set out in the bullet points  recited
         by the judge at paragraph 51. He submitted that the judge  directed
         himself  to  those  factors  which  are  relevant  to   issues   of
         protection.

     91. He submitted that there had been a challenge  in  relation  to  one
         finding made in that assessment and that the appellant  could  find
         work but that this submission was simply making an assertion and it
         was not clear what the nature of the challenge was whether  it  was
         based on a perversity challenge. The judge had regard to the age of
         the appellant, his circumstances and his experience in working as a
         nail technician and he was entitled to reach the conclusion that he
         did, and it could  not  be  established  that  it  was  a  perverse
         finding.

     92. He submitted that contrary to the submissions made on behalf of the
         respondent and having drawn attention to paragraphs  39-51  of  the
         decision letter, the judge did take into account  the  sections  of
         the decision letter (see [48]). He submitted it was clear that  the
         judge had regard to that section of the  decision  letter.  In  any
         event he submitted that the references in the  decision  letter  to
         the country material presented a "mixed bag" and even if the  judge
         had in the body of decision made direct reference to it, it was not
         clear that it would have demonstrated this appellant had  effective
         protection. Whilst there was legal redress available, the  decision
         letter made reference  to  the  lack  of  coordination  and  uneven
         enforcement of the law. As the availability of shelters,  that  was
         also referred to at paragraph 48 in  the  decision  letter  on  the
         basis of the lack of availability and resources and also there were
         no shelters  for  male  or  child  victims.  When  considering  the
         background of the appellant, he has no family or support,  and  the
         section does not say that male victims will be given accommodation.

     93. As to the grounds on which it was asserted that the judge failed to
         have regard to the passage of time since he was 1st  recognised  to
         be at risk in 2008, Mr O'Ryan relied upon his skeleton argument  at
         paragraphs 30 - 31 and replicated above. He submitted that they had
         been 2 periods of humanitarian  protection  leave  with  the  final
         period being 2014 - 2017. In 2014 he was 21 years of  age  and  the
         respondent acknowledged even after his offending  when  he  was  an
         adult that he still required protection  and  was  then  granted  a
         further 3  years  humanitarian  protection  until  2017.  Thus  the
         respondent should be taken to have granted humanitarian  protection
         leave in full knowledge of the  country  conditions  and  that  the
         decision of Nguyen did not alter that landscape. He submitted  that
         the judge was entitled to observe the moderate passage of time from
         2017 - 2021 and that the appellant made an adult and thus the judge
         was not failing to have regard to the difference  to  the  position
         from when he was 1st recognised to the present day.

     94. Mr O'Ryan level submitted that the grounds were not  made  out  and
         the appeal should be dismissed.

     95. By way of reply  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  whilst  the
         appellant would be returning without family,  the  submission  made
         was that shelters were available to the appellant  on  return,  and
         nothing was suggested to  indicate  that  as  a  former  victim  of
         trafficking  he  would  be  excluded.  Even  if  the  evidence  was
         insufficient for males, the judge had to give a reason.

     96. She  further  submitted  that  the  later  grants  of  humanitarian
         protection did not mean that  the  Secretary  of  State  could  not
         change her position and the background evidence was in the decision
         letter and the judge did  not  give  adequate  reasons.  The  judge
         should have considered the case of Nguyen at paragraph 52 in tandem
         with the 2018 background evidence in the decision  letter  to  show
         that there was an adequate level of sufficiency of protection.

     97. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.

    Discussion:

     98. I have given  careful  consideration  to  the  submissions  of  the
         advocates and have done so in the light of the decision of the FtTJ
         and the material that was before the tribunal.

     99. The respondent's case advanced in the written grounds  submit  that
         the  respondent's  evidence  and  the  decision  in  Nguyen  (Anti-
         Trafficking  Convention:  respondent's  duties)  [2015]  UKUT   170
         (hereinafter referred to as "Nguyen") shows that there is effective
         protection available to the appellant. A further reference is  made
         to that case and that "reliance is placed on the reported  case  of
         Nguyen  as  support  for  the  respondent's  case  that  there   is
         sufficiency of protection provided by the authorities at  paragraph
         52 of the decision as supported by the evidence  in  the  USSD  TiP
         2010 report."

    100. Those written grounds do not particularise what error  of  law  the
         FtTJ made in  his  decision.  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  on  behalf  the
         respondent expanded on the ground submitting that the judge was  in
         error by not addressing Nguyen and the background evidence  in  the
         decision letter. Whilst accepting that Nguyen  was  not  a  country
         guidance decision, she submitted that the  decision  did  refer  to
         country material that  there  was  sufficiency  of  protection  for
         victims of trafficking returning to Vietnam and that the  FtTJ  did
         not properly engage with the material or the CPIN.

    101. I am satisfied that there is no merit in  the  submission  made  on
         behalf of the respondent that the FtTJ failed  to  properly  direct
         himself to the decision of Nguyen or that he failed to follow  this
         decision which supported the  position  that  there  was  effective
         protection available in Vietnam.

    102. The FtTJ began his consideration, correctly in my view,  by  taking
         the starting point as his assessment as the  previous  decision  of
         FtTJ  Caswell  in  2008  on  the  same  issues.  In  those  earlier
         proceedings and by reference to the factual findings made by  Judge
         Caswell, the appellant was found to be at a real risk of  suffering
         treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

    103. In his decision  the  FtTJ  expressly  addressed  the  respondent's
         argument that the country  conditions  in  Vietnam  had  materially
         changed since 2008 and the specific risk to the appellant  and  did
         so by expressly by referring to the  decision  in  Nguyen  and  the
         material referred to in the decision letter.

    104. In my judgement there is no error in the FtTJ's assessment  of  the
         decision in Nguyen and its status as  evidential  support  for  the
         claim made in the decision letter and subsequently in  the  written
         grounds.

    105. At paragraphs [48]  -  [50]  the  FtTJ  gave  entirely  sustainable
         reasons for reaching the conclusion that the  decision  letter  had
         misquoted the decision of Nguyen. At [49] the judge identified that
         the extracts copied into the  decision  letter  in  fact  misquoted
         Nguyen and set out what the decision had in fact included. At  [50]
         the judge stated, "the  distortion  and  the  reasons  for  refusal
         letter converts a statement about the particular  circumstances  of
         the appellant in  those  proceedings  to  a  general  statement  of
         principle about the risk faced  by  those  who  had  been  formally
         trafficked." He went on to give  further  reasons  as  to  why  the
         citation in the decision letter of that decision "fell a  long  way
         short of bearing the weight placed upon it by the  respondent  that
         the male appellant in  this  case  would  benefit  from  sufficient
         protection on return."

    106. The decision in Nguyen is a reported decision of the  tribunal  but
         as both advocates accept it is not a country guidance decision.  As
         to the status of reported cases such a reported case does not  have
         the same status as a country guidance decision and where  summaries
         of the evidence in such cases can be relied on, the  assessment  of
         the evidence is not binding unless it accords with any pre-existing
         country guidance ( see SI (reported  cases  as  evidence)  Ethiopia
         [2007] UKIAT 00012.

    107. The decision does not deal with the background evidence or  country
         material in the way that a country guidance decision would normally
         do. Contrary to the emphasis placed on the decision in the  grounds
         and the respondent's submission, the decision is not  reported  for
         what it says about country conditions or sufficiency of  protection
         in Vietnam but what it states about the public law  duties  of  the
         Secretary of State towards victims  of  trafficking.  Judge  Lodato
         properly identified that at paragraph  [51]  of  his  decision.  As
         identified by Mr O'Ryan the only paragraphs that deal with risk  on
         return are those at paragraphs 49  -  52  and  the  decision  cites
         limited evidence. The main source appears to be the USSD TiP  2010.
         This cannot be viewed as up-to-date source  documentation  for  the
         present appeal given its age and that the CPIN 2018 which  in  fact
         reproduces its reliance on the decision in Nguyen  refers  to  more
         recent reports from the same source.

    108. The FtTJ properly identified in my view that the decision was based
         on the particular  circumstances  of  that  appellant.  There  were
         identifiable differences in the circumstances of this appellant and
         that of the appellant in the decision and notably their gender. The
         appellant in Nguyen was a female who moved from her  home  area  to
         work in Hanoi and had been trafficked from  there.  The  conclusion
         reached by the UT which referred to the chances  of  the  appellant
         coming across the traffickers as "slight" had to be  considered  in
         the light of that appellant's particular factual circumstances.  In
         the present appeal it had been found by the earlier judge that  the
         appellant  had  been  trafficked  from  his  home  area  with   the
         complicity of his family. A further difference identified from  the
         facts  is  that  the  material  in  the   decision   referred   the
         availability of shelters for female sex trafficking  victims  which
         again does not apply to this particular  appellant.  As  Mr  O'Ryan
         submitted the evidence before the  Upper  Tribunal  did  not  speak
         directly to the issues relevant to male trafficking victims.

    109. Furthermore the Upper Tribunal in Nguyen assessed the risks of  re-
         trafficking on the basis that it had been suggested that she  would
         be able to  make  contact  with  her  2  brothers  and  her  sister
         (paragraph 52). The appellant in that case was therefore treated as
         having a family and support which was not  the  position  for  this
         appellant where it was accepted by the  respondent  that  he  would
         have no such family or social support network.

    110. The FtTJ therefore correctly identified  at  paragraph  50  of  his
         decision that paragraph 52 of Nguyen  should  be  set  against  and
         considered in  the  light  of  particular  characteristics  of  the
         appellant in that appeal.  In  my  judgement,  the  fact  that  the
         Tribunal decided on the evidence before it that  the  appellant  in
         that case could obtain effective protection is not determinative.

    111. Consequently the FtTJ correctly identified the lack  of  evidential
         weight which could be attributed to the case  as  support  for  the
         claim that  sufficiency  of  protection  existed  in  Vietnam.  His
         conclusion that it fell a "long way short  of  bearing  the  weight
         placed upon it by the respondent that the male  appellant  in  this
         case would benefit from sufficient protection on  return"  was  one
         that was rationally open to him to make.

    112. Therefore for those reasons I am satisfied that the judge  did  not
         fall into error by his analysis of the decision in Nguyen and  that
         he was entitled to place  little weight on that decision in so  far
         as they applied to the circumstances of this particular appellant.

    113. Insofar as it is argued now that the judge failed to  consider  the
         CPIN, that was not particularised in the written grounds  where  it
         was argued on the basis of the judge failing to place  reliance  on
         the decision in Nguyen.

    114. The respondent did not provide any country materials to the FtTJ. I
         have a copy of the record of proceedings and there is no  reference
         in the judge's note or his decision that the respondent put  before
         him a copy of the CPIN 2018 which is briefly  referred  to  in  the
         decision letter nor has it been demonstrated that  there  were  any
         submissions made by reference  to  that  CPIN  in  the  proceedings
         before the FtTJ beyond the generalised paragraphs in  the  decision
         letter.

    115. The proceedings before the FtTJ are adversarial proceedings and the
         judge reaches his decision based on the material that is  presented
         to the court and in the light of the submissions  made  about  that
         evidence. The respondent is duty-bound  not  only  to  provide  the
         country material relied upon to the tribunal but also  to  make  it
         clear to the tribunal during submissions as to how that material is
         relevant to the particular circumstances of  the  appellant  within
         those proceedings. The reference to the CPIN 2018 in  the  decision
         letter was also not the current CPIN as a more up-to-date  document
         had been published in April 2020. I can see no  reference  to  that
         document having been referred to during the proceedings.

    116. I therefore do not consider that the judge was in error by  failing
         to make specific reference to the paragraphs in the  CPIN.  In  any
         event the FtTJ did make express reference to paragraphs 41  and  42
         of the decision letter which is replicated at  paragraph  2.4.5  of
         the 2018 CPIN which set out factors which were identified as  those
         which might have a bearing on the risk of harm  or  re-trafficking.
         The judge set out at paragraph [51] the factors which may make  the
         person face an increased risk  of  being  abused  or  re-trafficked
         which include, but are not limited to:

             . the person having outstanding debt to the traffickers

             . in the absence of a supportive family  willing  to  take  the
               victim back into the family unit

             . the person having no support network to assist  them;  no  or
               little   educational   vocational   skills;   mental   health
               conditions, which may well have been caused by experiences of
               abuse when  originally  trafficked:  material  and  financial
               deprivation such as to mean  that  they  will  be  living  in
               poverty or in conditions of destitution.

    117. Thereafter the FtTJ at paragraphs [52]-[55] undertook his  analysis
         of risk by reference to those factors but also by reference to  the
         sufficiency of protection (at [54]).

    118. The grounds advanced on behalf of the respondent also  assert  that
         the FtTJ fell into error in his assessment of risk  by  failing  to
         take into account the passage of time since the 2008  decision.  Ms
         Willocks-Briscoe submits that the  description  of  there  being  a
         "moderate passage of time" was not an accurate  reflection  of  the
         factual circumstances of the appellant  and  that  this  inaccuracy
         undermined his assessment of risk and also internal relocation. She
         submits that in 2008 the appellant was a child, and it was  against
         that  background   that   relocation   was   therefore   considered
         unreasonable. Thus it was submitted on behalf the  respondent  that
         the appellant was in a different position as a healthy  adult  with
         work experience. In her submissions Ms Willocks-Briscoe expanded on
         this by submitting that the judge had not taken  into  account  the
         length of time since the last decision and that  he  could  support
         himself having owned a nail bar in the UK. She  submitted  that  he
         would  also  have  the  advantage  of  shelters  provided  by   the
         government and that the circumstances were different from 2008.

    119. I have carefully considered  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  and  his
         assessment of risk. At [54] the judge reached the  conclusion  from
         the evidence that having considered what had been  advanced  before
         him, little had changed since the earlier decision of Judge Caswell
         who reached the decision that there was a real  risk  of  suffering
         conditions contrary to article 3. The judge was plainly aware  that
         the appellant was no longer a minor as he had been in  2008  (  the
         age of 17 �) and where he referred to the "mere passage of time" or
         a "moderate passage of time" he was not referring to the length  of
         time between 2008 and the date of the current  appeal  but  was  in
         fact referring to the position between 2017 - 2021.

    120. I agree with the submission made by Mr O'Ryan that when  the  judge
         considered the issue of risk he was entitled to rely upon the later
         grant of humanitarian protection status which had been provided  by
         the respondent  until April 2017 where the respondent continued  to
         acknowledge that the appellant was a real risk of serious harm.  It
         was therefore open to the judge to  find  that  the  respondent  by
         granting further periods of humanitarian protection up  until  2017
         when the appellant was the 21 that the judge was referring to  that
         passage of time and that the passage of time without more  made  no
         material difference to the risk of harm he would face on return. As
         Mr O'Ryan pointed out, the grant  of  humanitarian  protection  had
         been provided for long after  the  case  of  Nguyen  and  thus  the
         respondent could be  taken  to  have  granted  leave  in  the  full
         knowledge of that decision and the risk of harm to the appellant.

    121. I therefore conclude that the judge was plainly aware of the length
         of time since the decision but was entitled to  consider  the  time
         since the last grant of leave based on the same risk of harm. I  am
         also satisfied that the FtTJ gave adequate reasons for reaching the
         view that the  respondent  had  not  provided  cogent  evidence  to
         displace the findings reached by Judge Caswell in any event.

    122. The FtTJ stated that he had  "carefully  considered  the  arguments
         advanced on behalf the respondent that sufficiency  of  protection"
         now existed in Vietnam but that he did not regard it to "amount  to
         the kind of cogent foundation to displace the findings  reached  by
         Judge Caswell that the authorities were riven with  corruption  and
         unlikely to offer any semblance of protection  to  this  appellant"
         (at [54]).

    123. Judge Caswell had found that the appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
         reprisals in his home area from the traffickers (at[17])) and  that
         in respect of issues of protection at paragraph 19  the  judge  set
         out the respondent's argument that there was sufficient  protection
         as the appellant would be able to go to the  police.  Reference  is
         made to the USSD report that the government were  increasing  their
         efforts to  prosecute  traffickers,  but  it  was  noted  that  the
         government did not fully comply with the minimum standards for  the
         elimination of trafficking that it was making  significant  efforts
         to do so. It was also stated by the respondent that the  government
         also demonstrated  progress  in  improving  victim  protection  and
         assistance. At paragraph 20 Judge Caswell set out  the  appellant's
         argument that the efforts of the government, while encouraging, had
         been focused on  developing  national  laws,  law  enforcement  and
         awareness  raising  campaigns  as  opposed  to   making   resources
         available for victim support and protection. Such resources were in
         any event concentrated towards the south of the  country  or  along
         the border provinces and were for the return of  adult  victims  of
         sex trafficking. There were no known  support  services  for  young
         male victims of trafficking. The judge concluded at [21] that  "all
         the objective evidence show that corruption was a  significant  and
         widespread problem the police force". The  judge  also  quoted  the
         USSD Tip 2008 which confirmed the retaliation of agents,  and  some
         government officials was a problem for returning victims of  labour
         trafficking.  The  judge  concluded   at   [22]   that   from   her
         consideration of the objective evidence,  that  the  appellant  had
         shown that there would not be sufficient protection for him in  his
         home area and that although she accepted that  the  government  was
         trying to deal with the problem of trafficking,  even  the  minimum
         accepted international standards were not yet being met. The  judge
         also found that the appellant would not have  the  benefit  of  any
         sort of support services on return and that the police service  was
         rife with corruption so that he would not  have  a  sufficiency  of
         protection from the traffickers, who would be concerned to  silence
         him.

    124. In my judgement the FtTJ's assessment that the evidence relied upon
         by the respondent did  not  displace  that  earlier  assessment  of
         sufficiency of protection was open to him. The judge  had  provided
         sustainable reasons as to  why  the  decision  in  Nguyen  did  not
         provide a proper evidential basis for  concluding  that  there  was
         sufficiency of protection for victims of trafficking on  return  to
         Vietnam. He had not been referred to the full  information  in  the
         CPIN but had applied the risk  factors  set  out  in  the  decision
         letter (which had been taken from the CPIN at paragraph 2.4.5)  and
         had undertaken his assessment of those factors  at  [52]-[55].  The
         paragraphs in the decision letter are in my  judgement  generalised
         statements which did not refer to other specific relevant parts  of
         the CPIN. By way of example  reference  is  made  in  the  decision
         letter to the anti-trafficking  legislation  at  paragraph  45,  no
         specific reference is made to the law set out in Articles 150-  151
         of the penal code and that the definition of trafficking in Vietnam
         under the legislation did not fully comply with  the  international
         obligations set out at 3.13  and  that  it  was  inconsistent  with
         international law as set out at paragraph 3.2.3 by reference to the
         US SD 2018 report. The government  does  not  systematically  refer
         victims to services as the government's definition  of  trafficking
         does  not  fully  correspond  with  the  internationally   accepted
         definition. That is what Judge Caswell found in 2008.

    125. The fact that the authorities prosecute some traffickers  does  not
         mean they generally accord meaningful protection and assistance  to
         former victims of trafficking. Many victims of trafficking are  not
         recognised as such under the Vietnamese law.

    126. As Mr O'Ryan submits, what was cited in the decision letter  itself
         did not support sufficiency of protection  for  former  victims  of
         trafficking or for this appellant. Whilst paragraphs 44 - 46  makes
         reference to the law in Vietnam and that  there  was  comprehensive
         anti-trafficking legislation, the decision letter  also  refers  to
         the lack  of  coordination  across  provincial  agencies  and  poor
         understanding of the relevant legislation  which  had  resulted  in
         uneven enforcement of the law.

    127. Paragraph 45 and 46 refers to the prosecutions that occur but  fail
         to set out that at 6.4.3 of the same CPIN and citing the  USSD  Tip
         2018 that for the last 6 consecutive years the government  had  not
         prosecuted  any  suspected  traffickers  under   the   2012   anti-
         trafficking law. Paragraph 6.5.1 refers the difficulties to enforce
         the law due to the complicity of the officers.  That  material  was
         consistent with the same evidence before Judge  Caswell  which  the
         present judge found had not altered in the intervening period.

    128. At paragraph 48 of the decision letter referring  to  "protection".
         It states that there are 400 social  protection  centres  to  local
         authorities which provide services  to  wide  range  of  vulnerable
         groups including trafficking victims. However it goes on  to  state
         the centres are reported to be unevenly staffed and  resourced  and
         lack appropriately trained personnel to assess victims.  There  are
         no shelters designated  exclusively  for  male  or  child  victims,
         although existing shelters provide assistance  to  all  victims  as
         needed. The relevant  paragraphs  that  deal  with  protection  and
         support are set out at paragraph 6.3 where it is  stated  that  the
         government did  not  systematically  refer  victims  to  protective
         services due to inadequacies in its  formal  referral  process.  At
         8.1.3 the CPIN referred to the lack of resources as  to  long  term
         support services for  male  victims  of  trafficking  returning  to
         Vietnam. Again this echoed the earlier findings of  Judge  Caswell,
         and upon which Judge Lodato concluded the evidence  of  sufficiency
         of protection or effective support had not changed in any  material
         regard.

    129. Whilst the judge did not expressly refer to the shelters  available
         given the assessment at paragraph 48 of the decision  letter  which
         referred to the lack of staffing and  resources  and  personnel  to
         assist victims, and that it is stated that there  are  no  shelters
         designated exclusively for male  or  child  victims,  the  lack  of
         reference to this does not undermine his overall assessment.

    130. In the light of that material it was open to the FtTJ to reach  the
         conclusion that the evidence did not displace the earlier  findings
         that the authorities were riven with  corruption  and  unlikely  to
         offer any semblance of protection to the appellant.

    131. Insofar as the grounds seek to argue that the FtTJ's description of
         the appellant of having limited skills or a "basic skill  set"  was
         wrong, in my judgement that was  merely  a  disagreement  with  the
         judge's assessment and does not demonstrate that the  finding   was
         either irrational or one not open to him.

    132. At [55] the judge concluded "I am not persuaded that the  appellant
         could internally relocate in Vietnam to guard against the  risk  of
         reprisals or of being re-trafficked. He would return  as  a  former
         victim of trafficking without  any  family  or  social  network  to
         assist in re-establishing himself.  This  together  with  his  very
         limited skill  set  would  render  him  vulnerable  to  the  malign
         interests of traffickers. I do not  regard  this  as  a  reasonable
         option to counter the risk he faces on return."

    133. Furthermore the judge not only consider the lack of skills and  his
         lack of education (having left Vietnam as a child and  having  been
         exploited in the UK by his traffickers)  but  also  considered  the
         lack of support that the appellant would have  in  Vietnam  without
         any form of family available to provide that social support to  re-
         establish himself and that it was also this which gave rise to  the
         real risk of re-trafficking. It was open to the judge to find  that
         internal  relocation   would   not   change   the   economic/social
         vulnerabilities including lack of support,  employment  and  having
         been a former child victim of trafficking that would expose such  a
         former victim to an elevated risk of re-trafficking.

    134. Whilst the judge did not expressly refer to the shelters  available
         given the assessment at paragraph 48 of the decision  letter  which
         referred to the lack of staffing and  resources  and  personnel  to
         assist victims, and that it is stated that there  are  no  shelters
         designated exclusively for male  or  child  victims,  the  lack  of
         reference to this does not undermine his overall assessment.

    135. For those reasons, it has not been demonstrated that  the  decision
         of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point of law and I
         therefore dismiss the appeal. The decision of the FtTJ shall stand.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not not involve  the  making  of
an error on a point of law and therefore the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  shall
stand.



Signed
                                Dated    5 August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because
    the case involves protection issues. I find that it is  appropriate  to
    continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.

