
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02703/2020 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Parties appeared remotely by Microsoft     |                                |
|Teams                                      |                                |
|On 10th August 2021                        |On 17 September 2021            |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     HT
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Syeds Law Office
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

Anonymity
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  As
this appeal arises from a claim for international protection and concerns
the best interests of a minor it is appropriate that a direction is made.
Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction
applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply with this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   1. The hearing before me on 10th August 2021 took the form of a remote
      hearing using Microsoft Teams. Neither party objected. I sat at the
      Birmingham Civil Justice Centre.  The appellant joined the hearing
      remotely.  In proceeding with a remote hearing I was satisfied: no
      party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any
      restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and
      proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the interests of
      justice and in accordance with the overriding objective to proceed
      with a remote hearing because of the need to take precautions against
      the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a
      remote hearing will ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly
      in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
      complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      the parties have been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


   2. The appellant is a national of Albania.  She arrived in the United
      Kingdom clandestinely in May 2018 having previously made two
      unsuccessful applications for leave to enter the UK on a six-month
      short-term multi entry visitor visa.  She claimed asylum on 18th
      September 2018.  Her claim was initially refused by the respondent for
      reasons set out in a decision dated 23rd May 2019.  The claim was
      certified as clearly unfounded.  The appellant challenged that
      decision by a claim for judicial review and the claim was compromised
      by a consent order agreed by the parties under the terms of which the
      respondent agreed to withdraw the decision. The respondent issued a
      further decision dated 6th March 2020 that carried with it, a right of
      appeal. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Gill for reasons set out in her decision
      promulgated on 21st December 2020.


The respondent's decision


   3. In the respondent's decision of 6th March 2020, the respondent
      concluded that the appellant does not belong to a particular social
      group in Albania and therefore the reason for claiming asylum in the
      UK is not one covered by the Refugee Convention. Nevertheless, the
      respondent referred to the core of the appellant's account and noted,
      at paragraphs [31] and [36], that the appellant's account of events
      "... is deemed as being internally consistent with [her] account
      provided in [her] screening interview, substantive asylum interview
      and preliminary information questionnaire, as well as [her] witness
      statement submitted in support of [her] claim ...".  At paragraph
      [37], the respondent said:


         "... Consideration has been given to all of the facts of your
         claim, as well as any documents submitted as evidence for your
         claim. It is considered that the inconsistencies in your account
         relating to your captivity in a room and escape from the captivity
         goes to the core of your claim. Therefore, in terms of whether
         these events took place, that your father was abusive towards you,
         held you captive in a room and your house and threatened to kill
         you and [E] which forced you to leave the country, it is considered
         that we are unable to accept or reject your account of events and
         that they remain unsubstantiated. Your claim will be considered
         under paragraph 339L of the immigration rules."


   4. The respondent went on to consider s8 of the Asylum and Immigration
      (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 and paragraph 339L of the
      Immigration Rules.  At paragraph [49] of her decision, the respondent
      said:


         "Taking all of the above into consideration, in the round, your
         general credibility has been established. It is considered that
         there is good reason to apply the benefit of the doubt to this core
         aspect of your claim and as such your claim of experiencing
         problems in Albania from your family, and in particular your
         father, as a result of your relationship with [E] has therefore
         been accepted."


   5. The respondent went on to address whether the appellant would be at
      risk on return to Albania and concluded that the background material
      demonstrates avenues of redress available.  The respondent concluded
      that the authorities in Albania are able to provide the appellant with
      effective protection.  The respondent concluded that in any event, the
      appellant can freely move within Albania to an urban area away from
      Durres, where she fears her father and family. The respondent
      concluded that irrespective of the merits of the claim, the appellant
      has failed to establish that it would be unreasonable to expect her to
      live in Shkoder, Vlore, Sarande or anywhere else in Albania.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


   6. The background to the appellant's claim for international protection
      is set out at paragraphs [6] to [10] of the decision of Judge Gill.
      At paragraphs [14] to [16], Judge Gill refers to the reasons given by
      the respondent for refusing the claim for international protection in
      her letter dated 6th March 2020.


   7. At paragraph [20] of her decision, Judge Gill refers to the evidence
      that was before the Tribunal and relied upon by the respondent.  She
      refers to a supplementary bundle filed by the respondent on the day of
      the hearing containing 106 pages with documents appertaining to
      previous Visa applications made by the appellant.


   8. At paragraphs [22] to [27] of her decision, Judge Gill refers to a
      preliminary issue that arose at the outset of the hearing before her.
      At the hearing, the respondent sought to withdraw the concession of
      credibility set out in her decision letter, in light of the supporting
      documents attached to the previous Visa applications made in September
      and October 2017.  Judge Gill records the application to withdraw the
      concession was opposed by the appellant's representative.  At
      paragraphs [24] and [25] of her decision, she said:


         "24. I accepted that the application to withdraw the concession
         came very late in the day, on the day of the substantive hearing
         which was listed for the first time. Mr Sansom stated that he (sic)
         concession should never have been made. Both parties accepted that
         the appellant would be prejudiced if the application was granted,
         necessitating further work, which would have financial implications
         as the appellant is privately funded.


         25.  Given that the respondent had presented the case on the wrong
         footing, the decision of the Tribunal would be predicated upon
         incorrect grounds. Therefore, in the interests of justice I did
         grant the respondent's application to withdraw the concession to
         enable the respondent to submit a supplementary letter and file and
         serve the additional documents."


   9. At paragraph [26], Judge Gill records that the Presenting Officer
      sought an adjournment, but that was opposed by the appellant's
      representative on the basis that he could deal with credibility issues
      by way of submissions.  At paragraph [27], Judge Gill records that as
      the appellant's representative was content to proceed, she decided the
      hearing should continue.  She records that the inconsistencies in the
      appellant's account had been fully explored by the respondent at
      paragraphs [30] to [37] of the respondent's decision and the appellant
      had been questioned during the asylum interview, regarding the support
      of her father referred to in the previous Visa applications.


  10. The findings and conclusions of Judge Gill on the appellant's claim
      for international protection are set out at paragraphs [42] to [63] of
      her decision. Judge Gill rejected the core of the appellant's account
      regarding her escape from her family home, the control and abuse that
      she was subjected to by her father, the threats made by her father,
      her contact with her partner, and her exit from Albania.  In light of
      the findings made, she concluded that the appellant's claim for asylum
      and humanitarian protection cannot succeed.


The appeal before me


  11. The appellant claims the respondent, in her decision of 6th March
      2020, accepted the appellant to be credible having considered the
      discrepancies in her account.  It is said that at the hearing of the
      appeal the Presenting Officer made an application to withdraw the
      "credibility concession", simply seeking to rely upon the previous
      applications for entry clearance which the Presenting Officer
      considered, undermined the concession made.  The appellant claims
      nothing was mentioned about the other discrepancies that have been
      highlighted in the respondent's decision letter.  It is said that as
      the appellant was capable of addressing the new material relating to
      the previous applications and the supporting documents at the hearing,
      without the need for an adjournment, the appellant was content to
      proceed.  The appellant claims Judge Gill erroneously went on to
      consider the appellant's claim and her credibility as a whole and made
      adverse findings that go to the core of the claim and extend far
      beyond a consideration of the previous applications for entry
      clearance and the extent to which those applications and the evidence
      in support, undermined the core of the appellant's account.


  12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 15th
      February 2021.  He said:


         "It is arguable on the basis of the grounds that the proceedings
         were unfair as the judge, having allowed the HOPO to withdraw the
         concession that the appellant was credible, went beyond the scope
         of the issues that became live in relation to the appellant's
         credibility. That is certainly one reading of the grounds which
         merit further consideration at an oral hearing. It is difficult, at
         this stage, to disentangle any of the paragraphs in the grounds
         that raise points which may not be connected to any unfairness.
         Permission to appeal is granted on all grounds."


  13. The appellant's grounds of appeal are prolix and beyond the claim that
      the decision is vitiated by procedural unfairness because of the way
      in which matters progressed following the decision to allow the
      respondent to withdraw the concession made in her decision, the task
      of the Tribunal is hindered by the failure fail to properly  delineate
      the grounds and identify the errors of law relied upon.


  14. At the outset of the hearing before me I indicated to the parties that
      it is unfortunate that I have not been provided with a witness
      statement from Mr Hussain, the appellant's representative before the
      First-tier Tribunal, explaining his understanding of how matters were
      to progress following the decision of Judge Gill permitting the
      respondent to withdraw the concession previously made by the
      respondent.  It is apparent from what is said at paragraph [27] of the
      decision of Judge Gill that contrary to what Mr Hussain may have
      understood, once the judge had granted the respondent's application to
      withdraw the concession previously made, it was envisaged that the
      judge would be considering the credibility of the appellant's account
      as a whole, taking into account the inconsistencies in the account
      referred to in the respondent's decision.  Regrettably I have no
      explanation before me as to why Mr Hussain erroneously believed that
      Judge Gill would limit her consideration of the appellant's account
      and only consider the extent to which the account is undermined by the
      further documents (i.e. the previous visa applications) relied upon by
      the respondent.  It should have been apparent to a reasonably
      competent representative that once the credibility concession had been
      withdrawn, the Tribunal Judge would reach her own findings and
      conclusions upon the appellant's account of events.


  15. Ms Rutherford submits there was clearly a misunderstanding regarding
      the impact of the withdrawal of the concession and the extent to which
      the Tribunal would be revisiting any of the respondent's previous
      concerns about the core of the appellant's claim.  She submits Mr
      Hussain appears to have proceeded upon the premise that the
      credibility issues relied upon by the respondent were only those that
      arise from the documents that had been provided to the Tribunal by the
      respondent on the day of the hearing and could be addressed by
      submissions.  She submits this is a claim for international protection
      and the appellant should not be prejudiced because of the way in which
      matters unfolded on the day of the hearing.


  16. Mrs Aboni relies upon the rule 24 response dated 19th March 2021 that
      has been filed and served by the respondent.  She submits it is clear
      from the respondent's decision that there were concerns about the
      credibility of the core of the appellant's account. The appellant was
      initially given the benefit of the doubt, but it had become apparent
      to the Presenting Officer at the hearing before the First-tier
      Tribunal that the concession made in the respondent's decision
      regarding the credibility of the core of the appellant's account had
      been erroneously made, in light of the information contained within
      the previous applications for entry clearance and the evidence relied
      upon by the appellant in support of those applications.  Once the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge had granted the respondent permission to
      withdraw the concession, the Presenting Officer had taken a perfectly
      proper approach, by making an application for an adjournment to enable
      the respondent to submit a supplementary letter and formally serve the
      additional documents relied upon by the respondent.  That sensible
      course proposed by the Presenting Officer was opposed by the
      appellant's representative.  Mrs Aboni submits that once the
      credibility concession was withdrawn, Judge Gill was entitled to have
      regard to all the inconsistencies in the appellant's account and reach
      her own findings and conclusions regarding the claims made by the
      appellant.  She submits Judge Gill reached a decision that was open to
      the Judge on the evidence before the Tribunal.


Discussion


  17. The appellant does not challenge the decision of Judge Gill to permit
      the respondent to withdraw the concession previously made by the
      respondent regarding the credibility of the core of the appellant's
      claim.  It is the Tribunal's consideration of the appellant's claim
      thereafter, and the extent to which the appellant's credibility
      remained in issue, that is the focus of the appeal before me.


  18. I have already said that it is regrettable that I do not have a
      witness statement from Mr Hussain explaining his understanding of how
      matters were to progress. I have to say it is surprising that in an
      appeal arising from the refusal of a claim for international
      protection where the credibility of the appellant is in issue, even if
      that is only to the limited extent understood by Mr Hussain, in the
      absence of good reason why the appellant could not give evidence, she
      was not called to give evidence at all.


  19. There can be no criticism of Judge Gill for the way in which she dealt
      with the appeal and the way in which she went on to make her own
      assessment of the credibility of the appellant and the core of her
      account.  She was faced, on the day of the hearing, with an
      application to admit further evidence from the respondent, and an
      application to withdraw a concession previously made by the
      respondent.  Having decided the applications in the respondent's
      favour, it is unsurprising that there was an application by the
      Presenting Officer for an adjournment to enable the respondent to
      submit a supplementary letter and to formally serve the additional
      documents relied upon.  For reasons that are unexplained by Mr
      Hussain, knowing that the previous credibility concession had been
      withdrawn, opposed the application for an adjournment and was content
      to proceed and deal with any prejudice to the appellant.  Given that
      stance adopted by the appellant's representative, I can only assume,
      on instructions, it was unsurprising that Judge Gill went on to
      consider the credibility of the appellant and reach her own findings
      as to the account relied upon by the appellant.


  20. I am however persuaded that there appears to have been a
      misunderstanding on the part of Mr Hussain as to the extent to which
      Judge Gill would be considering the core of the appellant's account
      and in particular, the inconsistencies in her account previously
      identified by the respondent in her decision. However misconceived or
      erroneous the understanding of Mr Hussain may be, at the heart of this
      appeal lies a claim for international protection.  Although I have
      considerable sympathy with the submissions made by Mrs Aboni and the
      entirely valid points she makes, there is in the end, an issue of
      fairness, and I cannot ignore the late stage at which the respondent
      had made the applications to withdraw the concession and to adduce
      further evidence, which then had implications upon how the hearing
      progressed, and possibly impacted upon the parties understanding of
      the credibility issues that the Judge would consider.


  21. Fairness is an essential component of the judicial process.  An
      individual is entitled to know of the case against them and to an
      effective opportunity to answer that case.  Although I accept that
      natural justice does not generally include the failings by the party
      or their representatives, the appeal concerns a claim for
      international protection made by the appellant, who also has a young
      child.  I am satisfied that the appellant should not suffer any
      prejudice because of the procedural errors of her representative and
      that it is in the wider interests of justice to set aside the decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal given the way in which matters developed
      during the hearing of the appeal. In MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan
      [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that where there is a
      defect or impropriety of a procedural nature in the proceedings at
      first instance, this may amount to a material error of law requiring
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside. The
      authorities referred to by the Upper Tribunal in MM make it clear that
      upon an appeal such as this, the criterion to be applied is fairness
      and not reasonableness.


  22. I re-iterate that there can be no criticism of Judge Gill, but I
      accept that the decision of the Judge Gill is infected by an error of
      law arising from the unfairness that arose from the misconceived
      understanding of Mr Hussain that the Judge would only be considering
      the credibility of the appellant insofar as it was undermined by the
      additional documents.  He appears to have understood that Judge Gill
      would not be considering all the inconsistencies that had previously
      been identified by the respondent in the appellant's account and that
      the appellant was not required to establish her entire claim.  In the
      absence of any explanation from Mr Hussain I am satisfied that his
      understanding was entirely misconceived and without any foundation.
      It is difficult to see how the Judge could be expected to disentangle
      the evidence and make proper credibility findings without considering
      the evidence as a whole, and in particular, the inconsistencies in the
      appellant's account and how her account has developed.


  23. In my judgment the appropriate course is for the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Gill to be set aside.  In the circumstances I do
      not need to address the other grounds of appeal relied upon by the
      appellant.  As to disposal, the parties agree that the appropriate
      course is for the matter to be remitted to the FtT for hearing de novo
      with no findings preserved.  I have decided that it is appropriate to
      remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having considered
      paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th
      September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and
      extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


  24. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gill to allow the respondent
      to withdraw the concession made in the respondent's decision of 6th
      March 2020 regarding the appellant's credibility as to the core of her
      account is not challenged by the appellant and is preserved.  The
      parties agree that it would be sensible for the respondent to file and
      serve a supplementary decision, as had been proposed by the Presenting
      Officer at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, before the
      appeal is heard.


  25. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.





Notice of Decision


  26. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Gill promulgated
      on 21st December 2020 is set aside.


  27. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
      with no findings preserved.


  28. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gill to allow the respondent
      to withdraw the concession made in the respondent's decision of 6th
      March 2020 regarding the appellant's credibility as to the core of her
      account, is preserved.  The respondent shall file and serve a
      supplementary decision in light of the withdrawal of the concession
      regarding the credibility of the appellant, within 42 days.


  29. I make an anonymity direction.


Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         11th August 2021
             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





