
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/02697/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice System |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th September 2019                   |On 2nd January 2020               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     OR
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, A Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge EMM Smith promulgated on 4th June 2019.  The  judge
    had dismissed the Appellant's protection claim.

2.   Mr Howard summarised his grounds of appeal.  In  his  oral  submissions
    before me he said there were three grounds namely the judge placed  too
    a high a reliance on the screening interview; the judge failed to  deal
    with a specific document; and thirdly the judge  did  not  properly  or
    adequately deal with the refugee sur place activities.

3.   Mr Mills in his response  had  said  that  ultimately  there  was  very
    little to the issue  in  relation  to  the  screening  interview.   The
    judge's concern was there was no sufficient or  any  reference  to  the
    Etelaat or indeed to the  matters  which  the  Appellant  says  he  was
    dealing with namely weapons and such like.   If  that  really  was  the
    Appellant's case then he should have explained that  in  his  screening
    interview.  Selling satellite dishes, in effect, is very  different  to
    be dealing with weapons.

4.   Insofar  as  the  document  is  concerned  albeit  there  is  a  slight
    typographical or similar error in relation to whether or not there  was
    an envelope at paragraph 30 the judge corrected this at  paragraphs  32
    and 42 of his decision because he does indeed refer to these  documents
    having been sent electronically.

5.   Insofar as the refugee sur place  activities  are  concerned  Mr  Mills
    says that this is fully and adequately dealt with by the judge  because
    in the end the judge concluded at paragraph 43 that  he  was  satisfied
    that the Facebook detail that the Appellant had provided could  not  be
    used against him because he  had  not  established  the  page  for  the
    Facebook was actually anything to do with him.  This was as I note also
    referred to at paragraph 38.

6.   The grounds as I see them are hand  drafted  and  I  suspect  they  are
    probably drafted by the Appellant himself but even if not they are very
    brief in their format.   The  issue  which  arose  however  during  the
    submissions under discussion this afternoon was that the judge said  in
    relation to the  refugee sur place activities as follows  at  paragraph
    43.

         "The Appellant has I am satisfied tried  to  answer  his  claim  by
         attending a rally in London on behalf of Kurdish people.  He  prior
         to then showed no interest in  seeking  out  political  involvement
         either in Iran or the UK.  He said that he  actually  attended  two
         meetings but no evidence of the  other.   The  photographs  he  has
         produced are all of him central  to  the  camera  taken  as  if  to
         enhance  his  presence  not  to  enhance   the   purpose   of   the
         demonstration.  I am satisfied that there would be evidence for the
         Appellant to confirm his clear reasons for attending does not I  do
         not accept that he is genuinely and politically active and  further
         satisfied that Facebook details provided would not be used  against
         him as he had not established a page for Facebook he  has  produced
         is actually anything to do with him."

7.   The parties helpfully reminded me of the background of how it  is  that
    the most recent country guidance case of HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT
    430 (IAC) came to exist  is  namely  a  reference  to  earlier  country
    guidance which in the past in the head note says as follows:


         Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have become increasingly
         suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity. Those
         of Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater suspicion
         than hitherto and are reasonably likely to be subjected to
         heightened scrutiny on return to Iran".

8.   It was also said:

         "However, the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity
         with or without a valid passport, and even if combined with illegal
         exit, does not create a risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
         treatment.  Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor which,
         when combined with other factors, may create a real risk of
         persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment."

9.   So what does one make of all of these submissions in  court  which  has
    been reached.  In my judgment  the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
    conclude  that  had  the  Appellant's  truthful  reasons  for   seeking
    protection in  the  United  Kingdom  being  anything  to  do  with  the
    distribution or otherwise of weapons then this would have been set  out
    and explained by or indeed involvement as an informant for Etelaat  and
    as was pointed out by Mr Mills not only was the  Appellant  asked  once
    there was a follow-up question as well.  The response  from  Mr  Howard
    was that the Appellant does mention the KDPI  later  in  his  screening
    interview and that indeed well after the screening interview there  was
    a witness statement explaining why the Appellant felt scared  to  refer
    to these matters.

10.  Be that as it may the difficulty with that submission  from  Mr  Howard
    is the judge does  deal  with  the  reason  as  to  why  the  screening
    interview was deficient.  The  judge  rejected  that  evidence  of  the
    Appellant in my judgment the  reasoning  of  the  judge  is  more  than
    adequate.

11.  Moving on to the issue of the document this is the  document  from  the
    Hengaw website and  while  it  is  correct  that  the  judge  initially
    referred to among them he does correct this at paragraphs 32 and indeed
    42.  I see no basis on which it can be said that there was  a  lack  of
    anxious scrutiny in relation to this part of the case.   I  reject  the
    ground of appeal which says otherwise.  In  my  judgment  it  is  quite
    plain that it is no more than a  typographical  error  at  the  initial
    paragraph which refers to the envelope.  This was  properly  and  fully
    corrected by the judge in the later paragraphs of his decision.

12.  Insofar as the assessment  of  the  refugee  sur  place  activities  is
    concerned I see no reason to go against the judge's findings that there
    was no basis on which it could be said  that  the  Appellant  could  be
    linked to his claimed Facebook details.  Again the judge gave more than
    adequate reasons at paragraphs 38 and 43.

13.  One issue remains  though  and  that  is  an  important  one.   If  the
    Appellant is returned to Iran the parties agree that the Appellant will
    be questioned by the authorities alternatively the parties  also  agree
    that at the very least, to the required lower standard of proof  it  is
    likely that the Appellant will be questioned. This questioning will  be
    not least because of his Kurdish background.  There will be  relatively
    straightforward questions asked of him during that questioning such  as
    have you attended demonstrations or events against the Iranian  regime.
    The Appellant will have to answer truthfully.  The Appellant  will  say
    "Yes".  That will therefore lead to further questioning and in view  of
    the country guidance case law, that will lead to  persecution  or  ill-
    treatment.

14.      There cannot be any doubt that the Appellant cannot be expected  to
    lie and that  is  clear  for  Supreme  Court  authorities  such  as  RT
    (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38 where when reviewing its old  decision
    in HJ (Iran) the Supreme Court made clear that having to lie to protect
    oneself from persecution is impermissible.  So  I  ask  the  rhetorical
    question here.  If the Appellant is returned to Iran, could he do  what
    is suggested by Mr Mills namely all the Appellant would have to say  is
    that he did attend a demonstration against the Iranian regime in London
    on behalf of Kurdish people but a judge at the First-tier Tribunal  had
    found that he did not do so for genuine political reasons.

15.  In my judgment such a nuanced response from this  Appellant  is  almost
    certain to fall on deaf ears in Iran and in view of what is reported in
    the country guidance case  in  my  judgment  the  heightened  sense  of
    concern  by  the  Iranian  regime  and  of  such  Appellants  and  such
    politically active persons would  lead  to  further  questioning.  That
    therefore will lead to a real risk to the Appellant.

16.  In the circumstances I find as follows. The grounds in respect  of  the
    screening interview, the document and the general sur place aspects are
    grounds which I reject.  However the issue in respect of whether or not
    the Appellant would be questioned on return forces me to  hesitate.   I
    have to ask is there a real risk that the Appellant will be  questioned
    on return.  I conclude in view of his Kurdish background,  there  is  a
    real likelihood that he will be  questioned.  That  may  initially  be,
    "routine" questioning. The matter which makes that routine  questioning
    more serious is that the Appellant  is  accepted  to  have  attended  a
    demonstration against the Iranian regime  in  this  country.  Therefore
    this is not a case in which the Appellant is merely being returned as a
    person  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.  The  fact  that  he  has  attended   a
    demonstration places his case in a different category. There is a  risk
    of ill-treatment during such questioning amounting  to  persecution  in
    view of the country guidance that I have referred to.

17.  It is of note that although the judge referred to whether or not  there
    was genuine political engagement by the  Appellant,  the  case  law  is
    clear that it matters not as to whether or not the Appellant  has  been
    opportunistic in his sur place activities.  Indeed the  judge  referred
    at paragraph 37 to the Court of Appeal's decision  in  YV  (Eritrea)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA  Civ  360  where
    the judge said the Court  of  Appeal  sounded  a  note  of  caution  in
    relation to that argument that if the Appellant was found to have  been
    opportunistic in his  sur  place  activities  his  credibility  was  in
    consequence low.

18.  In my judgment these are difficult cases because one does not  want  to
    give the wrong impression to any Appellant that simply making things up
    and presenting them to the Tribunal will lead to success.  However  the
    case law makes clear that the circumstances of the  current  regime  in
    Iran are such  that in my judgment the  risk  is  simply  too  high  to
    enable me to conclude that  the  Appellant  will  be  able  to  somehow
    persuade the authorities that he should not be persecuted, detained  or
    ill-treated. I  deplore  the  Appellant's  attempts  at  lying  to  the
    authorities about his protection claim in this country, but it  remains
    the position that the country guidance forces me to say that the appeal
    has to be allowed.

19.  In the circumstances I conclude:

      1)  That there is a material error of law in the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal.
      2)  I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
      3)  I remake the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal on asylum
         grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed: A Mahmood                       Date: 30 09 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed: A Mahmood                       Date: 30 09 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

