
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02958/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 May 2016                                |On 7 June 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               ASA (PAKISTAN)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Macdonald QC, Counsel instructed by Farani,
                    Javid &Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise  her  as  a  refugee,  or  as
    otherwise requiring international or human rights protection.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal on two grounds for the following reasons:

         1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [  ]  1987  and
             seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a  decision  of
             First-tier Tribunal Judge Kamara promulgated on 31 March  2016
             to dismiss her appeal against the decision of  the  respondent
             dated 17 November 2015 to refuse her protection claim.

         2.   Ground 1 asserts that the judge failed  to  consider  evidence
             before her, being two witness statements each dated  14  March
             2016, as indicated at [23,34].  These two statements appear to
             have been received by the Tribunal on 15 March 2016 but it  is
             unclear whether or not they were placed before the  judge  for
             the hearing on 17 March 2016.  If they were not, this may have
             resulted in unfairness.  On the other hand, they may have been
             overlooked by the judge.  As the absence of  these  statements
             was referred to by the judge, this does disclose  an  arguable
             error.

         3.    Ground  2  challenges  the  judge's  interpretation  and  his
             findings relating to the medical evidence, but I find no merit
             in this ground.  It amounts to no  more  than  a  disagreement
             with findings of the judge which were  open  to  her  and  the
             weight to be given to the medical evidence was  a  matter  for
             the judge.

         4.   Ground 3 asserts that the judge should have taken into account
             in the proportionality balancing exercising  under  Article  8
             her own finding that the appellant had not practised deception
             and had not fallen foul of the immigration rules.  I find this
             does raise an arguable error.

         5.   I grant permission on grounds 1 and 3, but  refuse  permission
             on ground 2.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  20  January  2011  with  a
    student visa which was valid until 30 September  2012.   The  visa  was
    issued in order to be able her to  study  for  an  MBA  in  Banking  at
    Holborn College.  On 19 September 2012 she sought leave to remain as  a
    Tier 4 General Migrant.  In the interim, she was awarded an MBA by  the
    University of Wales.  While her application for  leave  to  remain  was
    pending, on 8 October 2014 she was detained for a Section  10  removal,
    as it was alleged that she had obtained a TOEIC certificate  by  fraud.
    She was not given an in-country right of appeal against the decision to
    remove her, or against the decision to refuse her application for leave
    to remain.   The appellant commenced judicial review proceedings, which
    were still pending at  the  time  of  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. The appellant applied for asylum  on  29  June  2015.   In  brief,  the
    appellant's claim was that she had a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    on return to Pakistan because she was a lesbian.  She said she had been
    in a long-term lesbian relationship with a female, S1, in Pakistan from
    the age of around 16 or 17 to when she left  Pakistan  at  the  age  of
    around 23.  S1 was the daughter of one of her maternal uncles.  Two  or
    three years into the relationship, S1's mother caught the appellant and
    S1 engaged in sexual activity.  The appellant was beaten by her  mother
    and grandfather and sustained an injury to her chin.   Thereafter,  the
    appellant was unable to see S1 as often, as her mother was  keeping  an
    eye on her.  She decided to come to the United Kingdom.  She  was  able
    to leave without her parents' knowledge and she left late at night  via
    the back door.  If she had told her parents she was planning  to  leave
    the country, they might have killed her or forced her into marriage.

 5. The appellant had had two long-term relationships in the United Kingdom
    and a number of one night stands.  Her relationship with A  had  lasted
    around a year and ended when A inexplicably left  without  telling  the
    appellant and switched off her mobile telephone.  The other significant
    relationship was with S2, which  lasted  from  2013  until  2015.   The
    appellant said she had received anonymous threatening  telephone  calls
    and threatening emails in the United  Kingdom.   She  feared  that  her
    uncles who had been to prison and who were involved in  politics  would
    kill her if she returned  to  Pakistan.   She  had  attempted  to  harm
    herself in the United Kingdom during 2015, before applying for  asylum,
    and she had made a similar attempt  at  self-harm  in  Pakistan  during
    2009.

 6. The asylum claim was rejected on credibility grounds by  the  Secretary
    of State in a letter dated 17 November 2015.  At paragraph  46  of  the
    refusal letter, the Secretary of State addressed paragraph 339L of  the
    Rules.  She had failed to provide a consistent  account  outlining  the
    reasons why she feared returning to Pakistan.  Moreover,  it  had  been
    concluded the English language tests she completed in order to study in
    the UK were completed by a proxy user and it  was  considered  she  had
    used deception in order  to  gain  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   In
    addition, it was not considered she had made an  asylum  claim  at  the
    earliest possible time.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7.  Both  parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Kamara.   Mr
    Macdonald QC appeared on behalf of the appellant.  The  judge  received
    oral evidence from the appellant and from Ms  A,  who  had  provided  a
    signed letter dated 10 June 2015.  In that letter, she  said  that  the
    appellant was a very dear friend of hers and that  both  of  them  were
    lesbian.  She knew that the appellant's sexual identity was lesbian  as
    they had had a few one night stands together,  and  she  also  used  to
    attend LGBT parties.  The last time she had visited, she had found  her
    in  a  very  miserable  condition.   She  had  taken  an  overdose   of
    painkillers, and so she had taken her to hospital.

 8. In her subsequent decision, Judge Kamara gave her reasons for rejecting
    the appellant's claim to be a lesbian or at risk of forced marriage  in
    paragraphs [18] to [35].  She began  by  explaining  why  she  attached
    little or no weight to various items of documentary evidence relied  on
    by  the  appellant,  including  emails,  medical  documents,   whatsapp
    messages and photographs.

 9. At paragraph [23] she said she had placed no weight on the evidence  of
    Ms A.  She noted there was no witness statement from her and  that  her
    letter at page 97 of the bundle did not  contain  her  address  or  any
    means of identification: "accordingly, the respondent was  at  somewhat
    of a disadvantage."

10. Ms A showed her evidence that she  was  a  recognised  refugee  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She told  the  judge  that  her  claim  was  based  on
    domestic violence at the hands of her former husband.

11. The judge asked Ms A when she had visited the appellant on the occasion
    she said she had taken an overdose: "her response was  evasive  in  the
    extreme and despite being asked three times, she was entirely unable to
    tell me when this was."

12. At paragraph [26], the judge said that the appellant  had  provided  an
    account, particularly in the unsigned undated statement in the  bundle,
    which was rich in sexually explicit detail, yet there were a number  of
    matters which caused her to conclude that the appellant's account was a
    work of fiction from beginning to end.   She  added  that  the  witness
    statement was written in English but was not of the  same  standard  as
    that of the appellant's spoken  English.   Furthermore,  the  statement
    focused repetitively and somewhat unnecessarily on  details  of  sexual
    acts between the appellant and her claimed partners.  She bore in  mind
    that a detailed and consistent account could also be a  false  account.
    Details of some but by no means all of the matters which caused her  to
    reject the appellant's account in its entirety were set out below.

13. At paragraph [27],  the  judge  said  that  during  her  interview  the
    appellant maintained that she was able to obtain  a  CAS,  a  visa  and
    leave Pakistan without the knowledge of her family.   Furthermore,  she
    stated that none of her family knew where she was until 2013.  However,
    in the lengthy unsigned statement in the  appellant's  bundle,  it  was
    claimed that the appellant's mother had assisted her to leave Pakistan,
    including helping her with her visa application and arranging transport
    for  her  trip  to  the  airport.   The   appellant   was   unable   to
    satisfactorily explain this discrepancy during cross-examination.

14. At paragraph [28], the judge said that the appellant  had  consistently
    stated that her mother knew of  her  sexuality  long  before  she  left
    Pakistan in 2011 and she relied upon a  denunciatory  letter  from  her
    mother obtained shortly before the asylum application  was  made.   The
    bundle contained a declaration by  the  appellant's  mother  which  the
    appellant had originally produced in support  of  her  application  for
    leave to remain under Tier 4.  The  mother  undertook  to  sponsor  her
    daughter's expenses during  her  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom.   That
    declaration was dated 30 October 2013.  Attached  to  that  declaration
    was a letter from the Pakistani Ministry of Finance confirming that the
    appellant's mother had deposited 5 million  rupees  at  the  Namakmandi
    National Savings Centre.   The  existence  of  these  documents  was  a
    further reason not  to  place  weight  on  the  2015  letter  from  the
    appellant's mother.  It made no sense for her to write criticising  the
    appellant's alleged lifestyle and cutting her off in 2015, when it  did
    not trouble her in 2013 when she was prepared to put considerable funds
    at her daughter's disposal for her foreign education.

15. At paragraph [29], the judge held that the appellant's account of  when
    she  realised  her  sexual  identity  had  varied.   In  her  screening
    interview she said this was when she was aged 17.  Yet  in  her  asylum
    interview she said this was when she was aged 10.  At the hearing,  she
    told the judge it was not until she was 18 or 19.  The judge held these
    inconsistencies were not credibly addressed when they were put  to  the
    appellant.

16. At paragraph [30], the judge said that the appellant's  account  as  to
    how long she was in a relationship with  S1  had  varied.   During  her
    asylum interview, she initially  said  their  relationship  lasted  for
    seven years.  But minutes later she said it lasted almost five years.

17. At paragraph [31], she said that the appellant's claim of being  caught
    in sexual activity with S1 on one occasion as they forgot to  lock  the
    door appeared somewhat unlikely.  It was even more  unlikely  that  she
    and S1 were able  to  continue  the  relationship,  including  spending
    nights together and truanting  from  school  together  for  some  years
    afterwards.  Indeed, contradicting herself, the appellant stated during
    her interview that her mother never left them alone at night after they
    were caught.

18. At paragraph [32] the judge  observed  that  the  appellant  was  asked
    during her asylum interview to state which people in Pakistan  knew  of
    her sexuality.  She mentioned only S1, S1's mother and the  appellant's
    mother.  But in the unsigned statement, the appellant mentioned that  a
    friend in Pakistan by the name of Sonia knew of the  relationship,  and
    also that the appellant's sister was aware.  The judge said she had had
    no explanation as to why the appellant had not mentioned Sonia and  her
    sister during her interview.

19. At paragraph [34], the judge said the appellant claimed  that  she  had
    two serious longstanding relationships in the United Kingdom with women
    she was introduced to via mutual friends.  Furthermore, she claimed  to
    have had a number of flings.  However, despite  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over five  years,  apart  from  Ms  A  whose  evidence  she
    rejected, no other person had written a letter on  her  behalf  or  had
    attended the hearing to support her claims.

20. At paragraph [35], the judge observed that the appellant arrived in the
    United Kingdom in 2011 at least partially, according to her account, to
    obtain international protection owing to her sexuality and to  avoid  a
    forced marriage.  Instead of seeking asylum she pursued her studies and
    sought further leave to do so.  Even when the  appellant  was  detained
    with a view to imminent removal, she made  no  mention  of  fearing  to
    returning to Pakistan.  Instead she launched a judicial review  of  the
    removal decision.  It was only after several months "and after  what  I
    considered to be a cynical collation of evidence," that  the  appellant
    made her asylum application.  The appellant claimed she  did  not  know
    about asylum, but this claim was unlikely given her level of  education
    and her facility in English as well as her familiarity with immigration
    processes.  Furthermore, Ms A was a recognised refugee and  claimed  to
    have known the appellant for a long time.   Finally,  the  judge  noted
    that when the appellant was  interviewed  in  October  2014,  prior  to
    removal, she claimed to be single.  However, it was now her  case  that
    she was in a relationship with S2 until 2015.

21. In paragraphs [36] to [41], the judge gave her reasons for finding that
    the Secretary of State had not discharged the burden  of  proving  that
    the  appellant  had  used  deception  in  order  to  obtain  her  TOEIC
    certificate.

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

22. Mr Macdonald settled the  appellant's  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

23. Ground 1 was that the judge had made material errors at paragraphs [34]
    and [23].  The judge had been wrong to say that no one, apart  from  Ms
    A, had written a letter on  the  appellant's  behalf  or  attended  the
    hearing on her behalf to support her claims.  A witness statement  from
    Maria Santos, the mother of one of the women who was  in  a  short-term
    relationship with the appellant, was  sent  to  the  court  before  the
    hearing.  This made it very clear that the appellant and  her  daughter
    were in a lesbian relationship and that the relationship had ended when
    her daughter returned to Brazil to look after her paternal grandmother.

24. The judge was wrong to say at paragraph [23] that there was no  witness
    statement from Ms A and no means of identification.  Ms A  had  made  a
    signed and dated witness statement giving her  address.   It  had  been
    sent to the Tribunal before the hearing, accompanied by a copy  of  her
    residence permit as a recognised refugee.

25. Both statements were material to the issue of whether the appellant was
    a lesbian and the A statement was also material to the issue of whether
    Ms A's evidence should be rejected by the judge in large  part  because
    of the absence of a witness statement.  The failure to take  these  two
    statements  into  account  meant  there  was  not  a  proper  or   full
    consideration of all the available evidence.

26. Ground 3 was that the judge had erred in her Article  8  assessment  at
    paragraph [45] because she had failed to deal with the  effect  on  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights of her very  clear  and  definite  finding
    that the appellant had not committed any fraud or deception with regard
    to the English language test.  This finding of fact meant that the sole
    reason for the refusal of her application for leave to remain under the
    Tier 4 General Student category, and the decision to  remove  her  from
    the UK under Section 10, had disappeared.  In the light of this finding
    of fact, the appellant fully met the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules for further leave.  She was able to argue compliance with the law
    and the Immigration Rules as relevant issues on proportionality in  her
    Article 8 claim: see Mostafa (Article 8  and  Entry  Clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 112 (IAC).



The Rule 24 Response

27. Chris Avery of the Specialist Appeals Team settled the Rule 24 response
    on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  opposing  the  appeal.   With
    reference to ground 1, without sight of the statement the Secretary  of
    State was unable to offer a view as to the materiality  of  any  error.
    Furthermore it was unclear why the absence of  the  documents  was  not
    brought to the attention of the judge by the appellant's representative
    at the hearing.  With respect to ground 3, the Secretary of  State  was
    of the view that this was not an error.  The points  raised  could  not
    have counted as positive factors in the proportionality assessment.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

28. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out on either or both permitted grounds, I explored with  Mr  Macdonald
    the point raised by Mr Avery in the Rule  24  response.   Mr  Macdonald
    said that he did not have the witness statements himself.  He was  only
    given the witness statements after the hearing.  He  had  no  idea  why
    Maria Santos had not been asked to attend  the  hearing  to  give  oral
    evidence.

29.  I  informed  the  representatives  that  in  my  file  there   was   a
    supplementary bundle containing the two witness statements which bore a
    manuscript endorsement to the effect that the  witness  statements  had
    been received after the hearing.  (There was also reference made in the
    manuscript note to an E-det, which  indicated  that  Judge  Kamara  had
    already sent her decision for electronic promulgation by the  time  the
    witness statements reached her.)

30.  Mr  Macdonald  submitted  that  the  fault  lay  with   Taylor   House
    administration, and there was  procedural  unfairness  in  consequence.
    Mrs Santos' evidence corroborated that of Ms Asif and the appellant. It
    could not be said that it was  not  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    assessment of the credibility of the core claim.

31. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Tufan invoked Ladd  v  Marshall
    and submitted that in any event the witness statement of Mrs Santos was
    of little significance, as she was just giving hearsay  evidence  about
    what had been said by her daughter and she did not attend the  hearing.
    Also, she had not exhibited to her statement any documents to show, for
    instance, that her daughter was in fact  out  of  the  country  and  so
    unable to be a witness herself.

32. On the topic of ground 3, Mr Tufan agreed the judge had  erred  in  her
    assessment of the Article 8 claim in paragraph [45], but  he  submitted
    the error was not material as Article 8(1) was not  engaged,  following
    Patel.  If the error was material, the finding on deception  needed  to
    be revisited, as the judge's reasoning was flawed.  Mr Tufan produced a
    typed note of a decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds given on 1 March
    2016 in respect of the appellant's application for permission  to  seek
    judicial review of the Section 10 removal decision.  According  to  the
    note, Upper Tribunal Reeds had  refused  to  grant  permission  to  the
    appellant to bring proceedings for judicial review, as her demonstrated
    ability to speak English was "not enough" to justify a challenge to the
    S10 removal decision.

Discussion

33. In MM (Unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) a  Presidential
    panel gave the following guidance:

      1. Where there is a defect or impropriety of a  procedural  nature  in
         the proceedings at first instance, this may amount  to  a  material
         error of law requiring the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
         be set aside.

      2. A successful appeal is not dependent on the demonstration  of  some
         failing on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.  Thus an  error  of
         law may be found to  have  occurred  in  circumstances  where  some
         material evidence, through no fault of the First-tier Tribunal, was
         not considered, with resulting unfairness (E &  R  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49).

34. The following passages in MM are particularly pertinent to the  matters
    raised                in                 oral                 argument:



             19.  Of unmistakable importance also, in the context  of  this
                  appeal, is the decision of the Court of Appeal in E & R  -
                  v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA
                  Civ 49.  As appears from  the  opening  paragraph  of  the
                  judgment of Carnwarth LJ, one of the  two  central  issues
                  raised in this appeal concerned cases decided by the first
                  instance Tribunal  (in  that  instance,  the  Adjudicator)
                  where it is demonstrated that -

                      '... an important part of its reasoning was based  on
                      ignorance or mistake as to the facts ....'

                  Drawing particularly on the speech of Lord Slynn in R -  v
                  - Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, ex parte A  [1999]
                  2 AC 330 (at pages 333 - 336), Carnwath LJ stated:

                  '[63]    In our view, the CICB case points to the way to a
                      separate ground of review, based on the principle  of
                      fairness  ...   the   unfairness   arose   from   the
                      combination of five factors:

                      (i)  An erroneous impression created by a mistake  as
                           to,  or  ignorance  of,  a  relevant  fact   (the
                           availability of reliable evidence to support  her
                           case);

                      (ii) The fact was 'established,' in the  sense  that,
                           if attention had been drawn  to  the  point,  the
                           correct  position  could  have  been   shown   by
                           objective and uncontentious evidence;

                      (iii)     The  Claimant  could  not  fairly  be  held
                           responsible for the error;

                      (iv) Although there was no duty on the Board  itself,
                           or the police,  to  do  the  Claimant's  work  of
                           proving her case, all the participants had shared
                           interest in co-operating to achieve  the  correct
                           result.

                      (v)  The mistaken impression played a  material  part
                           in the reasoning.'

                      ...

         20.  The principles relating to  the  impact  upon  proceedings  of
             unfairness arising from error of fact were reconsidered by the
             Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD in which decision the
             Court of Appeal conducted a detailed review of  categories  of
             error of law  frequently  encountered.   Brooke  LJ  said  the
             following:

                  'Part 6.Error of law: unfairness resulting from a  mistake
                                        of fact

                  28.  The next  matter  we  must  address  relates  to  the
                      circumstances in which an  appellate  body  like  the
                      IAT, whose primary role during  the  relevant  period
                      was restricted to identifying and  correcting  errors
                      of law, could entertain an  argument  to  the  effect
                      that the outcome in the lower court was unfair  as  a
                      result  of  a  mistake  of  fact,   and   that   this
                      constituted an error of  law  which  entitled  it  to
                      interfere.

                           In E & R v Home Secretary of  State  [2004]  EWCA
                           Civ 49; [2004] QB 1044 this court  was  concerned
                           to  provide  a  principled  explanation  of   the
                           reasons why a court whose jurisdiction is limited
                           to  the  correction   of   errors   of   law   is
                           occasionally able  to  intervene,  when  fairness
                           demands it, when a minister or an  inferior  body
                           or tribunal has taken a decision on the basis  of
                           a foundation of fact which was demonstrably wrong
                           ...

                  30.  At para 64 Carnwath LJ said that there was  a  common
                      feature of all these cases, even where the  procedure
                      was adversarial, in that the Secretary  of  State  or
                      the  particular  statutory  authority  had  a  shared
                      interest with both the particular appellant and  with
                      any tribunal or other decision-maker  that  might  be
                      involved in the case in ensuring that decisions  were
                      taken on the best  information  and  on  the  correct
                      factual basis.  At para 66 he identified  asylum  law
                      as representing a  statutory  context  in  which  the
                      parties shared an interest in co-operating to achieve
                      a correct result.  He went on  to  suggest  that  the
                      ordinary requirements for  a  finding  of  unfairness
                      which amounted to an error of law were that:

                      (i)  there must have been a mistake as to an existing
                           fact, including a mistake as to the  availability
                           of evidence on a particular matter;

                      (ii) it must be possible to categorise  the  relevant
                           fact or evidence as 'established'  in  the  sense
                           that  it  was   uncontentious   and   objectively
                           verifiable;

                      (iii)    the appellant (or  his  advisors)  must  not
                           have been responsible for the mistake;

                      (iv) the mistake must have  played  a  material  (not
                           necessarily  decisive)  part  in  the  tribunal's
                           reasoning.'

             Notably, the learned lord Justice made clear that he  was  not
             seeking to lay down a precise code.

             ...

                  32.  The reference to the Ladd v Marshall principles is  a
                      reference to that part of the judgment of Denning  LJ
                      in [1954] 1 WLR 1489 when he said (at  p  1491)  that
                      where there had  been  a  trial  or  hearing  on  the
                      merits, the decision  of  the  judge  could  only  be
                      overturned by resort to further evidence if it  could
                      be shown that:

                      (1)  the  new  evidence  could  not  with  reasonable
                           diligence have been obtained for use at the trial
                           (or hearing);

                      (2)  the new evidence must be such that, if given, it
                           would probably have had an important influence on
                           the result of the case (though  it  need  not  be
                           decisive);

                      (3)   the  new  evidence  was   apparently   credible
                           although it need not be incontrovertible.

                  33.  By way of a final summary of the  position,  Carnwath
                      LJ said in E and R at para 91 that  an  appeal  on  a
                      question of law might now be made  on  the  basis  of
                      unfairness  resulting   from   'misunderstanding   or
                      ignorance of an established and  relevant  fact'  and
                      that the admission of new evidence on such an  appeal
                      was subject to  Ladd  v  Marshall  principles,  which
                      might be departed from in  exceptional  circumstances
                      where the interests of justice required.

35. I find that the judge made a mistake  of  fact  at  paragraph  [23]  in
    stating that there was no witness statement from Ms A.  There was  such
    a witness statement in existence, although it  had  not  been  deployed
    before her at the hearing.  I find that the witness statement of  Ms  A
    did not reach the judge until after the hearing and until after she had
    made her decision based on the evidence deployed at the hearing.

36. The judge was similarly mistaken in paragraph [34] in stating  that  no
    other person had written a letter on the appellant's behalf apart  from
    Ms.  Mrs Santos signed a witness statement on 14 March 2016, which also
    did not reach the judge until after the hearing.

37. I accept that the appellant's  solicitors  intended  that  the  witness
    statements should be adduced in evidence at the hearing, and sought  to
    achieve that result by faxing them to Taylor House on  15  March  2016,
    two days before the hearing took place.   However,  as  the  solicitors
    would have been well aware, they were serving the evidence late and not
    in accordance with the timetable stipulated in the standard directions.
     It was thus reasonably foreseeable that the witness  statements  might
    not make their way into the  judge's  possession  before  the  hearing.
    This would not have  mattered,  if  the  solicitors  had  ensured  that
    Counsel had copies of the witness statements so that  he  could  deploy
    them at the hearing.

38. I find that the  responsibility  for  the  resulting  mistakes  in  the
    decision lies with the appellant's legal representatives.  But for  the
    unexplained failure by the solicitors to provide Counsel with copies of
    these witness statements, particularly the witness  statement  from  Ms
    Asif whom they knew Counsel was going to be calling as a  witness,  the
    mistakes in the judge's decision would not have arisen.

39. I am also not persuaded that there is a real, as opposed  to  a  purely
    minimal, possibility that the outcome would have been different if  the
    judge had taken account of the two witness statements when  writing  up
    her  decision.   The  content  of  Ms  A's  witness  statement  is  not
    materially different from the contents of her letter, which  presumably
    she adopted as her evidence-in-chief.  The only  significant  point  of
    difference relied on by way of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is that the
    witness statement contains Ms A's address.  Nonetheless, the point made
    by the judge at paragraph [23] still holds good.  As a  result  of  the
    late  service  (and  even  later  receipt)  of  the  witness  statement
    containing her address, the respondent remained at  a  disadvantage  in
    that there was no time to make enquiries about Ms A.

40. I accept that the witness statement of Mrs Santos was  helpful  to  the
    appellant's case in that  she  gave  evidence  of  her  daughter  Bruna
    telling her that she had  had  some  casual  sex  with  the  appellant.
    However, the judge was bound to attach little  weight  to  the  witness
    statement for a number of reasons.  Firstly, this was because the maker
    of the statement was in the jurisdiction (living  in  London)  and  the
    judge had not been given any reason as to why the witness had not  been
    able to attend the hearing to give oral evidence, and to be  tested  on
    her oral evidence in cross-examination.   Secondly,  the  evidence  was
    hearsay in that Mrs Santos did not claim to have  witnessed  any  overt
    signs  of  her  daughter  and  the  appellant  being   in   a   lesbian
    relationship, apart from them being together "all day long" in  a  room
    in the house which they all shared. Despite  being  suspicious  of  the
    relationship between them on this account, Mrs Santos  was  nonetheless
    surprised when her daughter informed her that they were  in  a  lesbian
    relationship. Thirdly, as submitted by Mr Tufan, there were no  primary
    documents exhibited  to  the  witness  statement  which  supported  the
    claimed departure of the daughter  to  Brazil;  or  supported  a  prior
    association between the daughter and the appellant (such as documentary
    evidence of residence at the same address at the same time).  Fourthly,
    as the witness statement of Mrs Santos had not  been  deployed  at  the
    hearing, the judge had not heard any submissions from the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer about it,  and  more  importantly  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer had been  deprived  of  the  opportunity  to  cross-
    examine the appellant on its contents.

41. In conclusion, the witness statement of Mrs Santos was not  a  reliable
    piece of evidence that might change the landscape.  There is not a real
    possibility that its contents, taken  in  conjunction  with  the  other
    evidence bearing on the issue, would have persuaded the  judge  to  the
    lower standard of proof that the appellant was a lesbian.

42. Accordingly, I find that ground 1 is not made out  as  with  reasonable
    diligence on the part of the appellant's legal representatives the  two
    witness statements could have been deployed at the  hearing,  and  thus
    they are responsible for the judge commenting on their absence; and  in
    any event there is not a real possibility that the outcome  would  have
    been different if the judge had been aware of their existence, and  had
    taken their contents into account when making her decision.

43. I am however persuaded that ground 3 is made out for the reasons  given
    by Mr MacDonald in the permission application.  Having found  that  the
    appellant did not use deception in order to obtain a TOEIC certificate,
    and she was thus, by necessary implication, unjustly facing removal  to
    Pakistan on an allegation of fraud that had been shown to be false, the
    judge needed to explain why it was nonetheless proportionate to require
    the appellant to return to Pakistan.

Appropriate Forum for Re-Making the Decision under Article 8 ECHR

44. In the ordinary course of events, the appropriate course would  be  for
    the Upper Tribunal to re-make the decision under Article 8  ECHR,  with
    or without hearing further evidence.  But neither Mr Macdonald  nor  Mr
    Tufan wanted me to proceed to re-make the decision on the  evidence  as
    it stands.  Mr Macdonald did not want me to do  so,  as  he  wished  to
    adduce additional evidence that was not before the First-tier  Tribunal
    on the topic of the course of  study  that  the  appellant  would  have
    wished to pursue had not her leave to remain application been  unjustly
    refused. Mr Tufan did not wish me to do so either, because he  did  not
    accept the soundness of the factual premise  on  which  the  Article  8
    claim was now being squarely put and  he  wished  to  introduce  expert
    evidence, which has now  become  available,  to  fortify  the  evidence
    previously relied on by the Secretary of State.

45. I consider that the judge's reasoning on  the  issue  of  deception  is
    erroneous in law such that her finding is unsafe.  Although she  refers
    to Ghazi v SSHD (ETS - Judicial Review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC) she
    misdirects herself as to its import.  While the Presidential  panel  in
    Ghazi identified shortcomings in  the  generic  evidence,  the  panel's
    overall conclusion was that the  generic  evidence  was  of  sufficient
    robustness and reliability to be capable of discharging the  burden  of
    proof.

46. The judge was thus wrong to state at paragraph [38] that there  was  no
    evidence to show that the reason for the test result being  invalidated
    was as a result of fraud or dishonesty; and she was also wrong  to  say
    at paragraph [40] that there was no evidence of  the  appellant  having
    obtained a fraudulent test result.

47. Accordingly, given the extent of the judicial fact-finding  which  will
    be required, I consider that the appropriate forum for the re-making of
    the decision under Article 8 ECHR is the First-tier Tribunal.

     Notice of Decision

48. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights  (Article  3
    ECHR) grounds did not contain an error of law, and  that  part  of  the
    decision stands.

49. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal on  human
    rights (Article  8  ECHR)  grounds  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
    accordingly that part of the decision is set aside.

Directions

50. The appellant's appeal on human rights  (Article  8  ECHR)  grounds  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor  House  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before any judge apart from Judge Kamara.

51. The finding on the allegation of deception shall not be preserved.

52. Accordingly, the time estimate for the rehearing is 2 hours.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 7 June 16

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
