
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/02002/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st October 2019                  |On 3rd October 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                 SHOFIK ALI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox, of Counsel, instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born in November 1975.  He
         arrived in the UK in  September  2006  as  a  visitor  on  his  own
         passport with entry clearance, and overstayed. In 2009 he  made  an
         application to remain which was refused without a right of  appeal.
         That decision was reconsidered and maintained in October  2010.  In
         May 2013 the appellant was discovered working illegally and  served
         with removal notices. In March 2014 he was declared  an  absconder.
         On 21st December 2018 the appellant applied for  asylum,  and  that
         application was refused in the decision of 18th February 2019.  His
         appeal against that decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Rai in a determination promulgated on the 19th June 2019.

      2. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Bristow on the 8th August 2019 on the basis  that  it  was
         arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law in  failing  to
         fully and lawfully consider the Article 8 ECHR claim.

      3. The matter came before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
         Tribunal had erred in law.

    Submissions - Error of Law

      4. In the grounds of appeal and oral submissions from Mr Wilcox it  is
         contend firstly that despite setting out that Article 8 ECHR rights
         were an issue  to  be  determined  in  the  appeal  the  First-tier
         Tribunal failed to make a reference to such  issues  in  the  legal
         framework section or in the findings and  conclusions  sections  of
         the decision. There ought to have been consideration of this appeal
         with reference to the Immigration Rules at paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
         and also outside of those Rules. Consideration ought to  have  been
         given to his 12 years of residence; his family and friends  in  the
         UK; his broken ties with Bangladesh  and  problems  he  would  have
         reintegrating with respect to work, social life,  health  care  and
         accommodation; his good English and integration in the UK.

      5. Secondly it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in
         the approach to the credibility of the appellant,  particularly  in
         paragraph 53 of the decision in the consideration  of  s.8  of  the
         Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc)  Act  2004  and
         the delay in his claiming asylum, and further (set  out  as  ground
         three in the written grounds) in failing to put reliance  on  other
         evidence (particularly the falsely brought  criminal  police  case)
         apart from credibility  in  finding  that  the  appellant  was  not
         entitled to international protection.

      6. Mr Avery accepted that there was a failure to explicitly deal  with
         Article 8 ECHR in the decision although  he  expressed  doubt  that
         this would actually have made any difference to the outcome. I  did
         not need to call on him to make submissions on the second and third
         grounds.

      7. After hearing the above submissions I informed the parties  that  I
         found there was an error of law with respect to Article 8 ECHR  and
         that it would be just to have submissions on remaking on that issue
         and deal with it substantially. I informed the parties that I found
         that there was no error of  law  with  respect  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's decision on the asylum appeal. I set  out  my  reasoning
         for these decision in writing below.

    Conclusions - Error of Law

      8. The First-tier Tribunal clearly understood that the appeal included
         a contention that removal of the appellant would be a breach of his
         Article 8 ECHR rights as well as a protection claim, see  paragraph
         3(e) and 13 of the decision. It is also clear that  the  respondent
         disputed that such a claim could succeed, see paragraphs  4(g)  and
         (h) of the decision.  There are no findings relating to  Article  8
         ECHR apart from indirect ones about his being  in  the  UK  for  12
         years made in assessing the credibility of his asylum claim  and  I
         find that there was therefore no determination of  this  ground  of
         appeal, and that this was an error in law.

      9. The First-tier Tribunal found that a previous  human  rights  claim
         made in 2009 had been made  with  false  documents  in  a  reasoned
         decision at paragraphs 19 to 28 of the decision.  Consideration  is
         given to the new documents supporting  the  current  and  different
         protection claim at paragraphs 29 to  40  of  the  decision,  again
         lawful and proper reasons are given (including their being  copies,
         the fact of internal inconsistencies in the documents, and the lack
         of evidence that they were obtain through a lawyer  in  Bangladesh)
         are given for finding that these documents cannot  be  relied  upon
         when considered in the round. The First-tier  Tribunal  then  quite
         properly   considers   other   issues   including   vagueness   and
         inconsistencies in the appellant's own evidence  and  inconsistency
         with the evidence of the appellant's brother-in-law, and the  delay
         in making this asylum claim before concluding that the  appellant's
         claim is not genuine at paragraph 54. It is not arguable  that  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  the  assessment  of   the
         appellant's credibility or  the  determination  of  the  protection
         claim on the basis of the evidence before it.

    Submissions Remaking Article 8 ECHR

     10.  Mr Wilcox submitted that there would be very significant obstacles
         to the appellant's integration if he were returned to Bangladesh as
         he has been away from his country of origin for a long time; he has
         lost opportunity to pursue his career in Bangladesh as he has  been
         in this country; and would thus find it difficult  to  reintegrated
         within a reasonably short period of  time.  He  accepted  that  the
         appellant had a mother, wife and  children  in  Bangladesh  in  his
         village.

     11. Mr Avery submitted  that  the  appellant  would  have  no  problems
         reintegrating as his family lived in Bangladesh, and the witness in
         the asylum appeal had visited the family.  Whilst  he  clearly  had
         private life ties with the UK given his period of  residence  there
         was no reason why he could  not  re-establish  a  private  life  in
         Bangladesh.

     12. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties that I found  that
         the appellant's appeal could not succeed on Article 8 ECHR grounds,
         but informed them that I would set out my full reasons in  writing.



    Conclusions Article 8 ECHR

     13. I find that that the appellant cannot succeed in his Article 8 ECHR
         appeal with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration
         Rules. This is because there is no evidence that he would have very
         significant obstacles to integration if he returned to  Bangladesh.
         The fact that he has lived in the UK for 13 years does not mean  he
         would have problems reintegrating on his return. The evidence  from
         his asylum interview is that he has a mother, wife and children  in
         a village in Sylhet in Bangladesh, and that he was  in  touch  with
         them. His witness, Mr  Iqbal  Ahmed,  records  having  visited  the
         appellant's wife in the village in 2016 in his  witness  statement,
         and notes that other relatives live there too. The  appellant  also
         says he speaks Sylheti and  Bangla  in  his  interview  notes.  The
         appellant was arrested whilst working in a restaurant in the UK  in
         2013. There is no reason, on the evidence before me, why  he  could
         not return to live with his  family  and  do  restaurant  or  other
         unskilled work in Bangladesh  as  he  accepts  that  he  knows  the
         relevant languages and is fully entitled to do so as a  citizen  of
         that country. His political activities and problems have  not  been
         believed for credible reasons set  out  in  the  dismissal  of  the
         asylum appeal by the First-tier Tribunal  so  these  issues  cannot
         form any basis for finding that the appellant would  have  problems
         integrating.

     14. If looked at on wider Article 8 ECHR grounds when  considering  the
         proportionality of the appellant's removal none of the  appellant's
         ties with the UK can be given more than little weight because  they
         have all been   formed  whilst  he  has  been  unlawfully  present,
         applying s.117B(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
         2002. Although the appellant has indicated  that  he  suffers  from
         anxiety and stress he states that he is not on any  medication  and
         there is no evidence of any other treatment  plan,  and  thus  this
         does not therefore form any basis on which he should be allowed  to
         remain in the UK particularly as there is  also  no  evidence  that
         these medical conditions could not be treated in Bangladesh. In all
         the circumstances of this case I find that  given  the  significant
         weight that must be given to the  public  interest  in  maintaining
         immigration control  that  the  removal  of  the  appellant  is  an
         entirely proportionate interference with his private life ties with
         the UK.




    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law in relation to the  Article  8
         ECHR appeal only.

      2. I set aside the decision in the Article 8 ECHR appeal only.

      3. The dismissal of the protection appeal by the  First-tier  Tribunal
         is upheld.

      4. I re-make the decision in the Article 8 ECHR appeal  by  dismissing
         it.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 1st October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

