
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02464/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2016                   |On 9 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     hja
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vaughan a Solcitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs Peterson a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for  asylum  or
         ancillary protection on 22 October 2015. His  appeal  against  that
         was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Khan  ("the  Judge")
         following a hearing on 14 July 2016.

      2. I retain the anonymity order previously made pursuant to Rule 13 of
         the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
         Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 as the Appellant's asylum and  ancillary
         protection claim, for  reasons  that  will  become  clear,  remains
         outstanding.

      3. Upper Tribunal Judge  Perkins  granted  permission  to  appeal  (17
         October 2016). It is not necessary for me to recite details of  the
         grant, or indeed the facts of the case, as  Mrs  Peterson  accepted
         that the failure of the Judge to consider the reasonableness of the
         Appellant's ability to relocate to Baghdad and in  particular  [15]
         of the headnote in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544
         (IAC) was a material error of law.

Conclusion on error of law

      4. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge made a  material  error  of
         law as identified above.

      5. Mrs Peterson and Mr Vaughan agreed that it was appropriate  for  me
         to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal and that no findings
         should be preserved.



Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    The matter shall be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  not  before
    Judge Khan, with a time estimate of  3  hours  and  an  interpreter  in
    Bahdini being provided.





Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
7 November 2016
