
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/02110/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 June 2017                          |  On 20 June 2017                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                   mrs RK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel, instructed by North
                    Kensington Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen  of  India  born  on  5  April  1989,  appeals
    against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Coutts
    promulgated on 10 April 2017 in which he dismissed her claim for  leave
    to remain on asylum and human rights grounds.

2.   At the hearing before me both representatives asked  me  to  find  that
    there were errors of law in the determination of the First-tier  Judge.
    They  asserted  that  the  errors  of  law  related  to  the  lack   of
    consideration by the judge of the expert report and the fact that  that
    would have fed into his conclusions that the appellant was not credible
    and also that she could safely return to India.

3.    Although  I  consider  that  this  is  a  clear  and  properly  argued
    determination I accept that there is some merit in the  submissions  of
    both parties in that the judge  did  not  analyse  in  any  detail  the
    assertions made in the  expert  report.   I  therefore  set  aside  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge.

4.   I consider further that as analysis of the report is required  as  well
    as evidence from the appellant so that her credibility can be assessed,
    it is appropriate that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier  for  a
    hearing afresh in accordance with the Practice Directions of the Senior
    President of Tribunals.


Decision.

The determination Judge of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Direction.

The appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh in the  First-tier,  the  appeal
will take place at Hatton Cross,  with  a  Punjabi  interpreter,  time  four
hours.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed
     [pic]                          Date 16 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy



