
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02952/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2016                  |On 30 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     EMZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Ly, counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andonian, promulgated on 19 September 2016. Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 25 October 2016.




Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, nonetheless one is made now  as
      this is a protection matter.

Background

 3. The  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  25  August  2015  in
    possession of a business visit visa which was valid until  25  December
    2015. On 28 September 2016, the appellant applied for asylum.

 4. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that as a national of  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) he was recognised as  a  refugee  in
    South Africa. The appellant left the DRC during  2001  and  resided  in
    South Africa thereafter. He was granted permanent  residency  in  2009.
    The appellant first began experiencing problems in South Africa  during
    2008, when he was beaten and stabbed for being a  foreign  employee  of
    African origin. Thereafter,  the  appellant  was  subjected  to  verbal
    abuse. On 17 April 2015, the appellant was attacked at work by a  group
    of men and some days later, his wife received  telephone  calls  during
    which the appellant was threatened. The  appellant  left  South  Africa
    owing to a fear that he would be killed in a xenophobic  attack.  Prior
    to doing so he renounced his DRC nationality in preparation for seeking
    South African citizenship.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the asylum  application  on  3  February
    2016. The appellant's nationality and identity were accepted as was his
    claim that he was recognised as a refugee. The  respondent  noted  that
    the appellant was now a permanent resident in South Africa. It was  not
    accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  attacked  because   of   his
    nationality. It was noted that the two attacks were seven  years  apart
    and did not amount to a systematic campaign of persecution. It was  not
    considered credible that the appellant's South  African  wife  remained
    safe and well in that country in view of the appellant's claim that she
    was threatened and intimidated. Inconsistencies were noted with  regard
    to whether or not the appellant reported the 2015 attack to the police.
    Mention was also made of the lack of any further incidents between  the
    April 2015 incident and the appellant's departure from South Africa  in
    August 2015. In the alternative, it was considered  that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection available to the appellant  or  that  it  was
    reasonable to expect him to internally relocate.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  attended
    in person, his barrister having fallen unwell on the  day.  The  appeal
    proceeded in the absence of the appellant's representative;  the  judge
    considering that the solicitors ought  to  have  intended  the  hearing
    instead.

 7. The judge concluded that the appellant was not a credible  witness  and
    did not have a well-founded fear of persecution in South Africa.

The grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds of appeal in support  of  the  application  criticised  the
    judge's handling of the adjournment request; argued that the  appellant
    was prejudiced by not having counsel to represent him;  submitted  that
    the inconsistency referred  to  by  the  judge  was  addressed  in  the
    appellant's witness statement and contended that the  judge  failed  to
    consider the continuous verbal abuse and  harassment  suffered  by  the
    appellant between the two physical attacks.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the following basis;

    "With some hesitation I am prepared to permit this case to  go  forward
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Although  the  Judge  considered  some  of  the
    information relating to the availability of counsel it may be  arguable
    that he erred.  Whether  that  is  material  is  another  issue  to  be
    considered. Equally there will be argument about the reasoning applied.

    The grounds are arguable..."

10. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 9 November 2016,  stated
    that the tribunal did not receive any  written  instructions  from  the
    appellant's solicitor that the representative was ill. It was said that
    the  judge  "fairly"  gave  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to  obtain
    alternative representation but  the  solicitors  were  unable  to  send
    another barrister. Accordingly, the respondent opposed the appeal.

The hearing

11. At the outset, I raised the issue of statelessness which the  appellant
    had alluded to in his witness statement which was before the judge  and
    regarding which there were no findings.

12. Mr Ly submitted a detailed skeleton argument as well as  relevant  case
    law in the form of SH (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ  1284  and  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness)[2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). He submitted that there
    was evidence in the material  before  the  judge  which  supported  the
    appellant's  claim  to  have  renounced  his   Congolese   citizenship.
    Thereafter, Mr  Ly  took  me  through  each  of  the  judge's  negative
    credibility findings  and  made  extraordinarily  detailed  submissions
    which, he argued, he would have made on the appellant's behalf had  the
    appeal not proceeded in  his  absence.  Briefly,  with  regard  to  the
    apparent delay in the appellant fleeing South  Africa,  an  explanation
    was available, as was documentary evidence to support that explanation.
    Furthermore, the appellant had addressed the discrepancy as to the date
    of the first attack and  there  was  73  pages  of  supporting  medical
    evidence showing when it occurred. Later  in  his  submissions,  Mr  Ly
    argued that it was understandable that the appellant may  have  made  a
    genuine mistake as to a date given the  years  of  persecution  he  had
    suffered. He submitted  that  this  discrepancy  caused  the  judge  to
    disbelieve the entirety of the appellant's case.

13. Mr Ly argued that the judge  mischaracterised  the  first  incident  of
    assault as an accident, which  was  not  consistent  with  the  medical
    evidence. He further argued  that  the  judge  appeared  to  blame  the
    appellant for the fact that the police did not identify his assailants,
    whereas there was copious evidence before  the  judge,  including  from
    UNHCR, regarding the attacks on  African  immigrants  in  South  Africa
    owing to resentment from locals over employment. That evidence was said
    to show, inter alia, that the police turned a blind  eye  to  incidents
    and that their resources were inadequate.   The  statistics  for  those
    killed, attacked or who had fled indicated that this  was  a  pervasive
    problem.

14. Addressing me on the fairness point, Mr Ly argued that the points  made
    before me could not be made on the day owing to the judge's decision to
    proceed with the appellant representing himself. The  judge  fixed  the
    responsibility for the errors of the solicitors on the appellant. While
    taking care not to give evidence, Mr Ly, stated that it was  not  clear
    at what point the judge undertook to hear the appeal.

15.  Mr Ly had telephoned Taylor House at 0900 hours in order to state that
    he would not be attending and also called his  instructing  solicitors.
    Those solicitors communicated with the court. He acknowledged that  the
    documentary evidence was "hefty" in the appellant's  case,  but  argued
    that he could have assisted the judge with this  and  more  importantly
    the  appellant  had  suffered  a  detriment.  Lastly,  the   issue   of
    statelessness had not been addressed.

16. Mr Clarke noted that there was no mention of counsel's  telephone  call
    in the decision and reasons. At this point I showed Mr Clarke Fadiga  &
    Co's faxed letter of 24 August 2016 which was marked urgent and sent at
    1025 hours. Mr Clarke acknowledged that if there had  been  some  delay
    with this letter going before the judge there would be  unfairness.  He
    argued that no application for an adjournment was  made  and  that  the
    telephone call would not have sufficed. Ultimately, it was unclear what
    time the judge considered the appeal.

17. Mr Clarke argued that regardless of whether the appeal  was  adjourned,
    it was immaterial to the outcome. He argued that the UNHCR figures were
    insufficient to show that there was a risk  per  se  to  the  appellant
    because there was a lack of detail in  relation  to  the  ethnicity  of
    those attacks and where those took place. Even putting  credibility  to
    one side, the police were willing to protect the appellant.  The  judge
    dealt with all the matters raised in the grounds of appeal as  well  as
    additional matters raised during the error of law hearing. At [24], the
    judge considered the appellant's complaint  re  interpretation  at  his
    asylum interview; at [13] he had considered his explanations. Mr Clarke
    asked me to note that the medical evidence was at odds  with  what  the
    appellant had said happened to him. The judge had also noted the verbal
    abuse and harassment  between  the  two  major  incidents  and  rightly
    concluded that they were insufficient to  amount  to  persecution.  The
    incidents of assault amounted to the core of the appellant's claim  and
    these were comprehensively considered. He argued that the appellant had
    failed to demonstrate that the  police  were  unable  or  unwilling  to
    assist him. The judge noted that the appellant  approached  the  police
    but was unable to identify his assailants. His case was  considered  at
    its highest, with the judge concluding  that  he  was  not  subject  to
    systematic persecution. On the statelessness issue,  Mr  Clarke  argued
    that the appellant was a refugee who could be returned to South Africa,
    where he would have access to public services.

18. In reply, Mr Ly argued that the judge's decision to  proceed  with  the
    hearing was inherently unfair. While it was not  known  what  time  the
    hearing took place, it was known that the letter was faxed at 1025.  He
    contended that it would be rare for case to start on the dot  of  1000,
    particularly at Taylor House. Mr Ly recalled receiving  a  call  around
    lunchtime on the day of the hearing, while he was at  A&E  to  say  the
    case was not adjourned. He drew my attention to  [3]  of  the  decision
    where it is mentioned that the appellant had  spoken  to  him  the  day
    before the hearing when he was well. It was only  at  the  last  minute
    that Mr Ly could not  attend  and  this  had  been  too  late  for  the
    solicitors who could not arrange representation at such  short  notice.
    At [4] it was apparent that at the forefront of judge's  mind  is  that
    one is guaranteed ones' solicitor which implied  that  the  letter  was
    already before him. In any event, it was clear that a  request  for  an
    adjournment was before the judge.

19. Mr Ly returned to the UNHCR material in some  detail  which  he  argued
    contradicted the judge's findings  on  the  sufficiency  of  protection
    point.  With regard to the inconsistencies in the medical evidence,  Mr
    Ly explained that he was hampered by not knowing what transpired at the
    hearing. There was not even a summary of questions and answers  put  to
    the appellant in the judge's decision

20.  Otherwise,  in  relation  to  credibility  as  well  as  the   refugee
    definition, Mr Ly made the submissions he would have made had  he  been
    present at the hearing. With regard to statelessness,  he  argued  that
    notwithstanding that he was a permanent resident in South  Africa,  the
    appellant was without nationality.

Decision on error of law

21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material error of law in declining
    to adjourn the hearing.

22. The appellant informed the  judge  that  his  counsel  had  been  taken
    unexpectedly ill on the day of the hearing, having apparently been well
    the night before. The judge proceeded to hear the appeal in the absence
    of a representative. According to [3]  of  the  judge's  decision,  the
    letter from Fadiga & Co, sent at 1025, arrived after  the  judge  heard
    the appeal. In [3] to [6] of the decision, the judge then justifies his
    decision to proceed with the appeal after he has already done so,  with
    reference to Fadiga & Co's letter. At [6] he says, "I considered  there
    was no reason why the appeal should not go ahead..." But of course  the
    appeal already had by the time the judge came to that conclusion.

23. The judge considered that the solicitors ought to have stepped into the
    breach, rather than relying on counsel. There is  no  consideration  by
    the judge of whether he ought to have declined to determine the  appeal
    or  whether   the   matter   ought   nonetheless   to   be   adjourned,
    notwithstanding that he had heard it in the minutes prior to the letter
    arriving.

24. I have had regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  regarding  the  power  the
    First-tier Tribunal has to adjourn or postpone a hearing under its case
    management powers. Regard  should  have  been  had  to  the  overriding
    objective set out in Rule 2 requiring the Tribunal to deal  with  cases
    fairly and justly.

25. I have also  had  regard  to  the  decision  in  Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:
    Fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). The crucial question  being  whether
    the refusal of an adjournment deprived the affected party of a right to
    a fair hearing. I have also taken into consideration  the  Presidential
    Guidance note no. 1 of 2014 and note that factors weighing in favour of
    adjourning an appeal, even at a late  stage,  are  to  be  balanced  by
    factors weighing against the grant of  an  adjournment;  for  instance,
    that the application was not made at the  earliest  opportunity  or  is
    speculative or that it does not show that anything  material  would  be
    achieved by the delay.

26. In SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 at [13],  it  was  held
    that when considering whether an adjournment should have been  granted,
    the test was not irrationality or whether  the  decision  was  properly
    open to the judge; the sole test was whether it was unfair.  As  stated
    in Nwaigwe, supra, in practice, in most  cases  the  question  will  be
    whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a  fair
    hearing. I find that the appellant has been so deprived.

27. It is clear that from the background circumstances  prevailing  at  the
    date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  that  fairness  in
    this case required that an adjournment should have been  granted  owing
    to the sudden ill-health of counsel. In  these  circumstances,  it  was
    unreasonable for the judge to expect an alternative  representative  to
    be available at such short notice. Furthermore,  the  judge  heard  the
    appeal without consideration of the letter from Fadiga & Co in which  a
    short adjournment of a week was sought.

28. The adjournment application was made at the earliest opportunity, given
    the circumstances. Furthermore, there was no consideration by the judge
    of the overriding objective at any point.

29. It is also a matter of concern that the appeal was heard so swiftly  to
    the extent that it was concluded by the time Fadiga & Co's fax,  marked
    urgent, arrived at 1025. The speed with which the appeal was heard  was
    remarkable in  view  of  the  credibility  issues,  complex  issues  of
    sufficiency  of  protection,  200-pages  of  relevant  subjective   and
    objective material and the fact that the appellant gave evidence via an
    interpreter.

30. I now consider whether the error of law was material. As  was  apparent
    from  Mr  Ly's  lengthy  and  pertinent  submissions  in  relation   to
    credibility  issues,  the  background  material  and   the   issue   of
    sufficiency of protection; the presence of counsel at the appeal  could
    have  led  to  a  different  outcome.   Furthermore,   the   issue   of
    statelessness went entirely unaddressed by the judge.

31. Having regard to the case law and the  2014  rules,  I  find  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal refusing the adjournment was unfair
    in the circumstances. I accordingly set aside that decision.

32. I considered retaining this matter at the Upper Tribunal,  however  the
    appellant has been deprived of a fair  hearing.  I  therefore  consider
    that this matter ought to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    fresh hearing, with no findings preserved.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Andonian.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 29 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

