

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration   and   Asylum   Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: PA/02084/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2020                       |On 01 October 2020            |
|                                           |                              |
|                                           |                              |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's  decision  dated  19  February
      2019 to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hoffman dismissed the appeal  on  protection
      grounds but allowed the appeal on human rights grounds. The respondent
      appealed the human rights decision. In a decision  promulgated  on  06
      December 2019 the Upper Tribunal set aside  a  narrow  aspect  of  the
      judge's assessment relating to suicide risk with reference to  Article
      3 of the European Convention (Annex). The judge's findings relating to
      the first five points of the test identified by the Court of Appeal in
      J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 were preserved [21-22]. Only the findings
      relating to the sixth point in J were set aside and need to be  remade
      [23-28].

3.    Regrettably, there has been  a  delay  in  remaking  the  decision.  A
      previous hearing  listed  in  February  2020  was  adjourned  for  the
      appellant to produce further evidence and because the  Upper  Tribunal
      had not been notified that an interpreter might be  required  for  the
      hearing.

4.    The case was reviewed following the start of  the  Covid-19  pandemic.
      The Upper Tribunal sent directions to the parties  on  23  April  2020
      inviting submissions as  to  whether  the  decision  could  be  remade
      without a hearing bearing in mind the need to take measures to prevent
      the spread of  Covid-19.  The  respondent  was  directed  to  consider
      whether she wanted to question  the  appellant  in  light  of  further
      information provided in a  supplementary  witness  statement  and  the
      addendum report of Dr Obuaya dated 06 March 2020. The appellant served
      the  up  to  date  evidence  on  the  respondent  and  filed   written
      submissions. The respondent responded to the directions on 07 May 2020
      but failed to give any clear indication of whether she wanted to cross-
      examine the appellant (who did not give evidence at the hearing before
      the First-tier Tribunal).

5.    In the absence of any clear  indication  from  the  respondent  as  to
      whether she wished to question the appellant, the Upper Tribunal  sent
      further directions on 19 May 2020 concluding that it was reasonable to
      infer that she did  not.  The  Upper  Tribunal  decided  that  it  was
      possible to determine the appeal without a hearing  and  made  further
      directions for filing documents. The  directions  made  provision  for
      either party to object to the proposal. No objection was received. The
      appellant was content to proceed without a hearing.

6.    The  appellant  filed  a  skeleton  argument  on  03  June  2020.  The
      respondent does not appear to have  filed  any  further  arguments  in
      addition to the written submissions already filed on 07 May 2020. I am
      satisfied that the parties were given more than enough time  to  lodge
      any objection to the matter being decided without  a  hearing  and  to
      make written submissions on the substance of the narrow  issue  to  be
      determined. Bearing in mind the overriding objective  I  am  satisfied
      that the appeal can be determined fairly without a  hearing  based  on
      the written submissions and the documentary evidence.

7.    In addition to the documents that were already before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, the following additional  documents  are  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal:

      (i)   The appellant's bundle dated 21 February 2020;


      (ii)  The appellant's response  to  directions  dated  30  April  2020
           including the addendum report of Dr Obuaya dated 06 March 2020;

      (iii)       The appellant's  further  correspondence  dated  30  April
2020;

      (iv)  The respondent's written submissions dated 07 May 2020;

      (v)   The appellant's written response dated 26 May 2020; and

      (vi)  The appellant's skeleton argument  dated  03  June  2020  and  a
           consolidated bundle.

Legal Framework

8.    The relevant legal framework relating to  the  assessment  of  suicide
      risk was outlined in the error of law decision.

           "12.  Claims involving  medical  issues  and  suicide  risk  are
                 particularly difficult to decide. A case brought  on  human
                 rights grounds based on a person's medical condition is one
                 that comes within the  'N  paradigm'.  In  such  cases  the
                 threshold  for  showing  a  breach  of  human   rights   is
                 particularly high. The European Convention on Human  Rights
                 does not place an obligation on a  host  state  to  refrain
                 from removal where the feared harm does  not  emanate  from
                 intentionally inflicted acts of the public  authorities  in
                 the receiving state, but instead from a naturally occurring
                 illness.  It was only in the most exceptional circumstances
                 of the kind faced by the applicant in the D case,  who  was
                 in  the  final  stages  of  a  terminal  illness  facing  a
                 distressing death without family or other  support  in  the
                 receiving    state,    that     compelling     humanitarian
                 considerations  were  found  to  engage  the  operation  of
                 Article 3.

           13.   Some aspects of the law  relating  to  the  assessment  of
                 medical  claims,  which  are  not  'deathbed  cases',   are
                 currently in flux following the decision  of  the  European
                 Court of Human Rights (ECHR) in Paposhvili v Belgium [2016]
                 ECHR 1113. In that case the ECHR considered  the  potential
                 category of "other exceptional cases,  with  other  extreme
                 facts, where the humanitarian  considerations  are  equally
                 compelling" identified by Baroness Hale  in  the  House  of
                 Lords decision in N [70].

           14.   The Court of Appeal decisions  in  J  and  Y  (Sri  Lanka)
                 govern a  discrete  area  of  assessment  under  Article  3
                 relating to suicide risk. The decisions in  J  and  N  were
                 heard at around the same time in May 2005. By the time  the
                 Court of Appeal in J handed down its decision, it  had  the
                 benefit of the House of Lords decision in N. The  Court  of
                 Appeal conducted a detailed  review  of  the  European  and
                 domestic case law.  The  six  points  it  drew  from  these
                 authorities for the purpose of assessing Article 3  in  the
                 context of suicide risk were:


                 "26.  First, the test requires an assessment to be made  of
                       the severity of the treatment which it is  said  that
                       the applicant would  suffer  if  removed.  This  must
                       attain a minimum level of  severity.  The  court  has
                       said on a number of occasions that the assessment  of
                       its severity depends on all the circumstances of  the
                       case. But  the  ill-treatment  must  "necessarily  be
                       serious" such that it is "an affront  to  fundamental
                       humanitarian principles to remove an individual to  a
                       country  where  he  is  at  risk  of   serious   ill-
                       treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].
                 27.   Secondly, a  causal  link  must  be  shown  to  exist
                       between the act  or  threatened  act  of  removal  or
                       expulsion and the  inhuman  treatment  relied  on  as
                       violating the applicant's article 3 rights.  Thus  in
                       Soering at para [91], the court said:


                            "In  so  far  as  any   liability   under   the
                            Convention  is  or  may  be  incurred,  it   is
                            liability   incurred   by    the    extraditing
                            Contracting State by reason of its having taken
                            action which has as a  direct  consequence  the
                            exposure of an individual  to  proscribed  ill-
                            treatment."(emphasis added).


                       See also para [108] of  Vilvarajah  where  the  court
                       said that the examination  of  the  article  3  issue
                       "must focus on the foreseeable  consequences  of  the
                       removal of the applicants to Sri Lanka..."


                 28.   Thirdly, in  the  context  of  a  foreign  case,  the
                       article  3  threshold  is  particularly  high  simply
                       because it is a foreign case. And it is  even  higher
                       where the alleged inhuman treatment is not the direct
                       or indirect responsibility of the public  authorities
                       of  the  receiving  state,  but  results  from   some
                       naturally  occurring  illness,  whether  physical  or
                       mental. This is made clear in para [49] of D and para
                       [40] of Bensaid.


                 29.   Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed
                       in a suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).


                 30.   Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk  of
                       a breach of article 3 in a suicide case,  a  question
                       of importance is whether the applicant's fear of ill-
                       treatment in the receiving state upon which the  risk
                       of suicide is said to be based is  objectively  well-
                       founded. If the fear is not well-founded,  that  will
                       tend to weigh against there being a  real  risk  that
                       the removal will be in breach of article 3.


                 31.   Sixthly, a further question of considerable relevance
                       is whether the removing and/or  the  receiving  state
                       has  effective  mechanisms  to  reduce  the  risk  of
                       suicide. If there are effective mechanisms, that  too
                       will weigh heavily against an applicant's claim  that
                       removal will violate his or her article 3 rights."


           15.   The first three points set out the basic  requirements  to
                 show a breach of Article 3. The third point made clear that
                 there is an enhanced threshold in cases  that  come  within
                 the N paradigm. The  last  three  points  went  beyond  the
                 decision in N to consider the context  in  cases  involving
                 the assessment of suicide risk. The Court of Appeal in  the
                 Y (Sri Lanka) modified the fifth point as follows:

                       "15.  ..... The corollary of the  final  sentence  of
                            �30 of J is that in the absence of an objective
                            foundation for the fear some independent  basis
                            for it must be established if weight is  to  be
                            given to it. Such an independent basis may  lie
                            in  trauma  inflicted  in  the  past   on   the
                            appellant in (or, as here,  by)  the  receiving
                            state: someone who has been tortured and  raped
                            by his or  her  captors  may  be  terrified  of
                            returning  to  the  place  where  it  happened,
                            especially  if  the  same  authorities  are  in
                            charge, notwithstanding that the objective risk
                            of recurrence has gone.


                       16.   One can accordingly add to the fifth  principle
                            in J that what may  nevertheless  be  of  equal
                            importance is whether any  genuine  fear  which
                            the appellant may establish, albeit without  an
                            objective foundation, is such as  to  create  a
                            risk  of  suicide  if  there  is  an   enforced
                            return."

           16.   The assessment of suicide risk is a discrete aspect of the
                 extension to Article  3  considered  in  D  and  N.  In  MM
                 (Malawi) v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  2482  Counsel  for  the
                 Secretary of State accepted that it was a distinct area  of
                 assessment under Article 3 [63]. The Court of Appeal  in  J
                 made clear that there was  a  high  threshold  in  'foreign
                 cases', and acknowledging the decisions in D  and  N,  made
                 clear that the threshold was even  higher  in  cases  where
                 "the  alleged  inhuman  treatment  is  not  the  direct  or
                 indirect responsibility of the public  authorities  of  the
                 receiving state".

           17.   The nature of the potential harm in a suicide risk case is
                 sufficiently serious to engage the operation of  Article  3
                 within the meaning of the N paradigm. If a person can  show
                 that there is a real risk that they will commit suicide  on
                 return to the receiving  state,  the  feared  harm  clearly
                 meets the minimum level of severity required  i.e.  intense
                 mental suffering leading to their imminent death.

           18.   The fifth and sixth points highlighted in J, modified in Y
                 (Sri Lanka), simply focus the assessment on issues specific
                 to the circumstances relating to suicide  risk.  First,  an
                 initial assessment of whether there is a real risk that the
                 person is likely to  commit  suicide  if  returned  to  the
                 receiving state.  This  would  normally  be  assessed  with
                 reference to expert psychiatric evidence.  Second,  whether
                 effective measures can be put in place before,  during  and
                 after removal to reduce the risk of suicide  below  a  real
                 risk. This would normally be  assessed  with  reference  to
                 evidence relating to the  circumstances  in  the  receiving
                 state."

9.    Since the error of law decision,  the  Upper  Tribunal  published  AXB
      (Art 3 health: obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT  00397.  Much
      of the decision is not relevant to the issue to be determined in  this
      case. In so far as the Upper Tribunal concluded that the N paradigm is
      the threshold that must be met in a case involving the  assessment  of
      suicide risk, it says nothing more  than,  and  does  not  alter,  the
      approach taken by the Court of Appeal in J. In that case, the Court of
      Appeal incorporated the high threshold into the six-point approach  to
      the assessment of suicide risk. As made clear in the previous decision
      in this case, it is self-evident that the nature of  suicide  is  such
      that it reaches the N threshold because a person who is at  real  risk
      of killing themselves is likely to experience intense mental suffering
      leading to the risk of death. The focus of the assessment  in  a  case
      involving potential suicide risk is  not  usually  the  threshold  but
      whether the evidence shows that  there  is  a  real  risk  of  suicide
      happening before, during or after  removal  of  the  person  to  their
      country of origin.

10.   The Supreme Court also handed down the judgment  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v
      SSHD [2019] UKSC 17. It contains  a  helpful  analysis  of  the  ECtHR
      decision in Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867. In particular, the
      Supreme Court clarified what was meant by the modest extension of  the
      N test at [183] of the ECtHR decision with reference to:

           "...situations involving the removal of a seriously  ill  person
           in which substantial grounds have been shown for believing  that
           he or she, although not at imminent risk of dying, would face  a
           real risk, on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in
           the receiving country or the lack of access to  such  treatment,
           of being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in
           his or her state of health resulting in intense suffering or  to
           a significant reduction in life expectancy."

11.   The Supreme Court did not  make  specific  findings  relating  to  the
      effect of  Paposhvili  on  the  assessment  of  suicide  risk.  In  my
      assessment,  the  substantive  Article  3  issues  discussed   in   AM
      (Zimbabwe) do  not  alter  the  position  relating  to  the  six-point
      approach outlined in J. The nature of the risk of suicide is likely to
      meet the N paradigm or the Paposhvili extension for the reasons I have
      already given. Again, the focus of the assessment is  usually  on  the
      likelihood of suicide happening, taking into account relevant  medical
      evidence and any evidence relating to the availability of support  and
      treatment that might ameliorate the risk.

12.   The Supreme Court identified several procedural requirements  outlined
      by the ECtHR in Paposhvili at [23] and went on to analyse the decision
      as follows:

           "32.  The Grand Chamber's pronouncements in the Paposhvili case
                 about the procedural requirements of article 3, summarised
                 in para 23 above, can on no view be regarded as mere
                 clarification of what the court had previously said; and we
                 may expect that, when it gives judgment in the Savran case,
                 the Grand Chamber will shed light on the extent of the
                 requirements. Yet observations on them may even now be made
                 with reasonable confidence. The basic principle is that, if
                 you allege a breach of your rights, it is for you to
                 establish it. But "Convention proceedings do not in all
                 cases lend themselves to a rigorous application of [that]
                 principle ...": DH v Czech Republic (2008) 47 EHRR 3, para
                 179. It is clear that, in application to claims under
                 article 3 to resist return by reference to ill-health, the
                 Grand Chamber has indeed modified that principle. The
                 threshold, set out in para 23(a) above, is for the
                 applicant to adduce evidence "capable of demonstrating that
                 there are substantial grounds for believing" that article 3
                 would be violated. It may make formidable intellectual
                 demands on decision-makers who conclude that the evidence
                 does not establish "substantial grounds" to have to proceed
                 to consider whether nevertheless it is "capable of
                 demonstrating" them. But, irrespective of the perhaps
                 unnecessary complexity of the test, let no one imagine that
                 it represents an undemanding threshold for an applicant to
                 cross. For the requisite capacity of the evidence adduced
                 by the applicant is to demonstrate "substantial" grounds
                 for believing that it is a "very exceptional" case because
                 of a "real" risk of subjection to "inhuman" treatment. All
                 three parties accept that Sales LJ was correct, in para 16,
                 to describe the threshold as an obligation on an applicant
                 to raise a "prima facie case" of potential infringement of
                 article 3. This means a case which, if not challenged or
                 countered, would establish the infringement: see para 112
                 of a useful analysis in the Determination of the President
                 of the Upper Tribunal and two of its senior judges in AXB v
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] UKUT 397
                 (IAC). Indeed, as the tribunal proceeded to explain in para
                 123, the arrangements in the UK are such that the decisions
                 whether the applicant has adduced evidence to the requisite
                 standard and, if so, whether it has been successfully
                 countered fall to be taken initially by the Secretary of
                 State and, in the event of an appeal, again by the First-
                 tier Tribunal.


           33.   In the event that the applicant presents evidence to the
                 standard addressed above, the returning state can seek to
                 challenge or counter it in the manner helpfully outlined in
                 the judgment in the Paposhvili case at paras 187 to 191 and
                 summarised at para 23(b) to (e) above. The premise behind
                 the guidance, surely reasonable, is that, while it is for
                 the applicant to adduce evidence about his or her medical
                 condition, current treatment (including the likely
                 suitability of any other treatment) and the effect on him
                 or her of inability to access it, the returning state is
                 better able to collect evidence about the availability and
                 accessibility of suitable treatment in the receiving state.
                 What will most surprise the first-time reader of the Grand
                 Chamber's judgment is the reference in para 187 to the
                 suggested obligation on the returning state to dispel "any"
                 doubts raised by the applicant's evidence. But, when the
                 reader reaches para 191 and notes the reference, in
                 precisely the same context, to "serious doubts", he will
                 realise that "any" doubts in para 187 means any serious
                 doubts. For proof, or in this case disproof, beyond all
                 doubt is a concept rightly unknown to the Convention.

13.   In my assessment, the  procedural  issues  discussed  in  AXB  and  AM
      (Zimbabwe) do nothing more than clarify the usual principles  relating
      to the assessment of a human rights claim. The overall burden of proof
      is on the appellant  to  produce  evidence  to  show  that  there  are
      substantial grounds for believing that there is a real risk of serious
      harm amounting to a breach of Article 3.  The  threshold  is  high  in
      health cases if the risk does not emanate from the authorities in  the
      receiving state. It is  always  open  to  the  respondent  to  produce
      evidence to show that  appropriate  health  care  or  other  effective
      mechanisms are available to reduce the risk of Article 3 ill-treatment
      below a real risk.

Decision and reasons

14.   It is not necessary to set out the full  history  of  the  appellant's
      protection claim or the  previous  medical  evidence  in  detail.  The
      appellant's account of past trauma was accepted by a  previous  First-
      tier Tribunal judge. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hoffman concluded  that
      there was no reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant was at
      risk of persecution if returned to  Sri  Lanka  at  the  date  of  the
      hearing. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal relating  to  the
      appellant's mental health and the medical  opinions  on  suicide  risk
      were summarised in the error of law decision:

           "4.   The judge considered a set of  medical  reports  outlining
                 the effect of past trauma and the risk of suicide  [15-27].
                 It was not disputed that the appellant continued to have  a
                 subjective fear of return [49]. In 2015 Dr Obuaya concluded
                 that return to Sri Lanka would lead to deterioration in the
                 appellant's mental  health.  His  subjective  fear  of  the
                 authorities was likely to act as a "significant barrier" to
                 him accessing mental health services,  even  if  they  were
                 available. At the time, he assessed the appellant to be  at
                 low risk of attempting suicide or self-harm. There  was  no
                 known history of previous suicide  attempts.  When  he  had
                 suicidal ideations, his family appeared to be a  protective
                 factor. In 2017 Dr  de  Pentheny's  opinion  was  that  the
                 appellant was at increased risk of suicide since 2015.  The
                 appellant disclosed past trauma not mentioned to Dr Obuaya.
                 In 2016 he attempted to commit suicide  by  taking  several
                 pills with alcohol. She considered that there  would  be  a
                 serious deterioration in his mental health and would be  at
                 high risk of suicide if returned to Sri  Lanka.  Dr  Obuaya
                 conducted a further assessment in July  2019  and  had  the
                 opportunity to review Dr de  Pentheny's  report.  He  noted
                 that  there  were  further  incidents  of   the   appellant
                 attempting to 'overdose' in 2017 and 2018 albeit the number
                 of pills that he took were  not  excessive.  He  considered
                 that the appellant's symptoms were best understood  in  the
                 context of depressive illness rather than  PTSD.  He  still
                 considered the appellant to be a low  to  moderate  suicide
                 risk in the UK. However, the risk of suicide  or  self-harm
                 was likely to increase to a moderate to high  level  if  he
                 were to be informed that he was going to be removed to  Sri
                 Lanka.

             5.  Similar information was recorded elsewhere in the  medical
                 records. The judge observed that  a  GP  trainee  noted  in
                 March 2019 that the appellant had  ""fleeting  thoughts  of
                 suicide" which he does not act upon because  he  thinks  of
                 his family and no thoughts of self-harm." [27]."

15.   The First-tier Tribunal judge conducted  a  structured  assessment  of
      the six-point approach in J. He made sustainable findings relating  to
      the first five points, which were open to him to make on the evidence.
      The Upper Tribunal only set aside the findings relating to  the  sixth
      point in J. The judge's finding that no adequate medical treatment was
      likely to be available in Sri Lanka was preserved. Having  noted  that
      Dr Obuaya and Dr de Pentheney did not address the question of  whether
      the appellant's family members in Sri Lanka might act as a  protective
      factor to ameliorate the risk of suicide in the  absence  of  adequate
      medical treatment, the First-tier Tribunal failed to  make  any  clear
      findings on the issue.

16.   The appellant produced further evidence seeking  to  address  the  gap
      identified by the First-tier Tribunal. First, a supplementary  witness
      statement dated 18 February 2020. Second, the addendum  report  of  Dr
      Obuaya dated 06 March 2020.

17.   In his  statement,  the  appellant  says  that  his  parents  and  two
      siblings live in Sri Lanka. He says that his mother is suffering  from
      a chronic mental illness. The appellant does not say whether there has
      been a formal diagnosis but describes his  mother  as  suffering  from
      "acute paranoia". He says that on the occasions he has spoken  to  her
      on the phone she did not recognise him. He says that his mother  often
      shouts and becomes agitated. She is 73 years old  and  lives  at  home
      with his 72-year-old father. The appellant says that he does not think
      that he would feel safe living with his parents. He  thinks  that  his
      mother's poor  mental  health  would  worsen  his  own  mental  health
      condition. They do not own a house. His father no  longer  works,  and
      his parents struggle financially.  His  sister  is  dependent  on  her
      husband and  cannot  offer  regular  support  to  their  parents.  The
      appellant's parents live in Colombo. Neither  sibling  lives  near  to
      their parents. His  sister  lives  in  Galle.  His  brother  lives  in
      Negombo. The appellant says that his brother is unemployed  and  often
      moves around staying with friends. He wants to leave Sri Lanka to look
      for work in another country. He does not know the whereabouts  of  any
      extended family members and does not think that  his  parents  receive
      support from any other family members.

18.   The appellant receives treatment for his  mental  health  and  support
      for drug and alcohol dependency in the UK. He says that  he  has  been
      prescribed anti-depressant medication. He continues to receive support
      from the Helen Bamber Foundation where he attends weekly group therapy
      sessions.  The  appellant  thinks  that  his   mental   health   would
      deteriorate without this support. When he thinks about being forced to
      return to Sri Lanka he often thinks of suicide. He is still frightened
      that he would be ill-treated by the Sri Lankan authorities because  of
      his past experiences. He does not want to expose his family members to
      risk. He does not have anyone who would be able to give  him  adequate
      support in Sri Lanka.

19.   Dr Obuaya is a consultant psychiatrist for the  Camden  and  Islington
      NHS Foundation Trust. He has assessed the appellant on at least  three
      occasions and on the second occasion also had the  benefit  of  Dr  de
      Pentheny's opinion. By 2019  there  was  evidence  to  show  that  the
      appellant  had  self-harmed  on  several  occasions.  Dr  de  Pentheny
      considered  that  there  would  be  a  serious  deterioration  in  the
      appellant's health if he were forced to return to  Sri  Lanka,  giving
      rise to a high risk of suicide. Dr Obuaya considered the  risk  to  be
      low to moderate while in the UK, but the risk of suicide would rise to
      moderate to high if he was told that he would be removed to Sri Lanka.
      The doctors noted the appellant had family in Sri Lanka, but  did  not
      comment on whether they had taken this fact into account in  assessing
      the risk of suicide.

20.         Dr Obuaya's  initial  report  prepared  in  2015  mentioned  the
      appellant's family as a protective factor. This initial assessment was
      made before the appellant made subsequent attempts to harm himself  in
      2016, 2017 and 2018.

21.         The appellant's  family  was  also  mentioned  as  a  protective
      factor by a GP trainee to Dr Singh  (Consultant  Psychiatrist  at  the
      Redbridge Integrated Care Directorate) in  correspondence  to  his  GP
      dated 25 September 2019. Dr Morris noted that the appellant  presented
      with low mood and  thoughts  of  self  harm.  Triggering  issues  were
      previous trauma in Sri Lanka, separation from his family and delays in
      the asylum process. The appellant reported that  he  occasionally  had
      nightmares about his  previous  experiences  in  Sri  Lanka.  He  also
      reported suicidal ideation when  thinking  about  previous  trauma  or
      missing his family. The doctor did not appear  to  have  a  record  of
      previous attempts to self-harm because he  noted  that  the  appellant
      denied any plans to  commit  suicide  and  "has  never  acted  on  any
      thoughts". The correspondence states that the  appellant's  family  is
      also a protective factor. The correspondence  was  broadly  consistent
      with an earlier letter written by the same clinic on 30 July  2019.  I
      observe that the correspondence  from  the  GP  trainees  was  not  an
      assessment of suicide risk if returned to Sri Lanka and appeared to be
      describing the circumstances as they stand while the appellant  is  in
      the UK. Nor is it clear whether the GP trainees had  a  full  history,
      including information about previous attempts to self-harm.

22.         Dr Obuaya was asked to provide an addendum  report  specifically
      addressing the question of whether family  support  might  affect  his
      assessment of moderate to high risk of suicide  if  the  appellant  is
      returned to Sri Lanka. Dr Obuaya made clear that  the  further  report
      should be read with the earlier reports he prepared in 2015 and  2019.
      He spoke to the appellant again on 04 March 2020 in order  to  prepare
      the report. Dr  Obuaya  confirmed  that  the  appellant's  psychiatric
      symptoms  were  unchanged  since  his  last  report.  Since  the  last
      interview the appellant had not attempted suicide although he admitted
      to "fleeting non-specific suicidal thoughts". The appellant  described
      a good relationship with his parents who he speaks to  about  twice  a
      week. He told Dr Obuaya that  his  siblings  live  about  half  a  day
      journey from his parents. He speaks to them from time to time  but  is
      not especially close to them. Dr Obuaya's conclusions were:

                      "24.   In my first report, at Paragraph 38,  I  stated
                 that:  "Without  adequate  support,  (Mr  [AA])  would   be
                 vulnerable to experiencing a deterioration  in  his  mental
                 state, making it difficult for him to engage in  the  tasks
                 needed to establish a new life for himself in  Sri  Lanka".
                 The emphasis here was on professional  support  that  might
                 afford Mr [AA], as opposed to any personal support.

                        25.  In my second report, I opined that the risk  of
                 suicidal  behaviour  or  serious  self-inflicted  harm   is
                 likely, in my view, to increase to a moderate to high level
                 upon hearing that he would definitely be returning  to  Sri
                 Lanka, during the transit there and once he was back there.
                 The basis of this was that in my clinical opinion it  would
                 be less likely that Mr [AA] would be able to take stock  of
                 his  situation  and  make  a  considered  decision  in   an
                 environment he regards to be full of danger.

                         26.  My  view  about  Mr  [AA]'s  suicide  risk  is
                 unchanged.

                         27. I note from Paragraph 68 of  the  Determination
                 promulgated  14  August  2019  that   it   was   considered
                 unsatisfactory that my previous reports had not  considered
                 whether or [not] Mr [AA]'s family in Sri Lanka could act as
                 a support network on return and therefore mitigate the risk
                 of him committing suicide.

                          28.     I have not considered whether my  view  as
                 to Mr [AA]'s suicide risk upon removal (moderate to high on
                 return) takes into account the presence of  family  in  Sri
                 Lanka. I usually refrain from commenting explicitly on this
                 area, unless it has been brought to  my  attention  that  a
                 member of the personal support network is actively involved
                 in providing care for the affected person and that  support
                 is likely to be halted in the event of removal. It is in my
                 opinion speculative to comment  on  a  support  network  in
                 another country that I have not interacted with directly.

                          29.     However, I  note  that  Mr  [AA]'s  mother
                 appears to have significant mental health difficulties  and
                 I have deduced that his father is  an  informal  carer  for
                 her. His brother and sister both live far from his parents.
                 I understand that his brother may have no fixed  abode  and
                 his sister is financially constrained.

                          30.     My clinical  impression  is  that  of  his
                 family members in Sri  Lanka,  only  Mr  [AA]'s  father  is
                 likely to be in a position to offer him support in relation
                 to his mental health difficulties. His  siblings  live  far
                 away from home and his (sic) may not  be  able  to  provide
                 adequate  support  given  their  respective   housing   and
                 financial challenges.

                          31.     Mr [AA]'s  mother  is  likely  to  be  too
                 unwell to  provide  reliable  or  consistent  support.  The
                 burden of also caring for Mr [AA]'s  mother  falls  on  his
                 father, so this is likely to limit the  effectiveness  with
                 which he is able to support Mr [AA].

                           32.      I  would  emphasise  that  neither   the
                 professional nor personal support systems should be  viewed
                 in isolation.  However,  I  am  concerned  that  Mr  [AA]'s
                 personal support will be limited and I am  of  the  opinion
                 that  it  would  not  be  robust  enough  to  mitigate  the
                 aforementioned risk on return."

23.   There is no dispute about Dr Obuaya's qualification to comment on  the
    appellant's mental health. He is a Consultant Psychiatrist. His opinion
    should be given weight. I find that the addendum report, similar to the
    previous reports, is written in a careful and thoughtful way. Dr Obuaya
    clearly was aware that the appellant had family members  in  Sri  Lanka
    when he made his earlier  assessment  relating  to  the  likelihood  of
    suicide. He provides specific consideration of the issue  in  the  most
    recent report. Having considered the family circumstances described  by
    the appellant, the presence of family members  in  Sri  Lanka  has  not
    changed his overall assessment of the risk of suicide.

24.   It is accepted that the appellant suffered past-ill treatment  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities. It is accepted that he has a subjective fear of
    return as a result of that past-ill treatment. As with  many  cases  of
    this kind,  the  appellant's  mental  health  is  affected  by  several
    different factors. Past trauma plays a  role  as  does  the  continuing
    uncertainty surrounding his  immigration  status  in  the  UK  and  the
    ongoing risk of removal. The appellant's mood is described as low  with
    some suicidal ideation. There is some evidence to suggest that  he  has
    self-harmed in the past although the suicide attempts did not appear to
    be concerted. Nevertheless, he made these attempts while he was in  the
    relative safety of the UK, was in receipt of treatment from his GP  and
    local  care  team  and  had  therapeutic  support  from  a   specialist
    organisation. The good relationship that he continues to have with  his
    parents is said to act as a protective factor while he is in the UK but
    despite this level of support the appellant has still  be  sufficiently
    distressed to seek to harm himself on several occasions.

25.   There can be no doubt that the respondent has procedures  for  removal
    cases of this kind and can put in place measures to ameliorate the risk
    of suicide during removal to Sri  Lanka.  However,  the  situation  the
    appellant would face on arrival in Sri Lanka would be  quite  different
    to his current circumstances in the UK. With the  professional  support
    available to him in  the  UK,  alongside  emotional  support  from  his
    parents in Sri Lanka, the risk of suicide is not high.  But  even  with
    that support the appellant's mental health is poor and he  is  reported
    to have attempted to self-harm in the past.

26.   I am satisfied that I can place  weight  on  Dr  Obuaya's  assessment.
    The appellant's  subjective  fear  of  return  would  be  significantly
    heightened if that which he fears comes to pass.  Dr  Obuaya's  opinion
    is that this is likely to lead to a significant  deterioration  in  his
    condition with a moderate to high risk of suicide if  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka. The appellant is unlikely to be able to access adequate clinical
    treatment to ameliorate the risk of suicide either with or without  the
    support of family members. I have been given no  reason  to  doubt  the
    appellant's description of his family circumstances in Sri Lanka, which
    has been broadly consistent and is generally consistent with background
    information relating to the conditions in Sri  Lanka.  The  appellant's
    elderly father appears to be the only person  who  could  provide  some
    emotional or practical  support  to  the  appellant  but  the  evidence
    indicates that what limited support  he  might  be  able  to  offer  is
    unlikely to be enough to ameliorate  the  risk  of  suicide  given  the
    heightened fear that the appellant is  likely  to  experience  and  the
    absence of adequate clinical treatment. For the purpose  of  the  sixth
    point in J, I find that there is unlikely to be an effective  mechanism
    to reduce the risk below a real risk.

27.    For  the  reasons  given  above,  I  am  satisfied  that  there   are
    substantial grounds for believing that there would be a  real  risk  of
    suicide if the appellant is returned to Sri Lanka. I conclude that  the
    appellant's removal would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998.


DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed                               M.                              Canavan
         Date   29 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

ANNEX

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02084/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 30 October 2019                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
original  appellant  (AA)  is  granted  anonymity.  No   report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.


Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Ms A. Patya, instructed by Virgo Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I shall refer to the parties as they  were
      before the First-tier Tribunal although technically this is an  appeal
      by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant (AA) appealed the respondent's (SSHD) decision dated  19
      February 2019 to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

3.    In a decision promulgated on 14 August 2019 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Hoffman ("the judge") dismissed the appeal in so far as it  relied  on
      protection grounds but allowed the appeal in so far as  it  relied  on
      human rights grounds. The judge considered an earlier decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal in 2016,  in  which  a  judge  accepted  that  the
      appellant was arrested and detained in  2009  but  concluded  that  he
      would not be of continued interest to the Sri Lankan  authorities  [2-
      3]. In this appeal, the appellant only sought to argue that the effect
      of past ill-treatment was such that his removal  to  Sri  Lanka  would
      breach his rights under Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  as  a
      result of past persecution.

4.    The judge considered a set of medical reports outlining the effect  of
      past trauma and the risk of suicide [15-27]. It was not disputed  that
      the appellant continued to have a subjective fear of return  [49].  In
      2015 Dr Obuaya concluded that  return  to  Sri  Lanka  would  lead  to
      deterioration in the appellant's mental health. His subjective fear of
      the authorities was likely to act as a "significant  barrier"  to  him
      accessing mental health services, even if they were available. At  the
      time, he assessed the appellant  to  be  at  low  risk  of  attempting
      suicide or self-harm. There was no known history of  previous  suicide
      attempts. When he had suicidal ideations, his family appeared to be  a
      protective factor. In 2017 Dr  de  Pentheny's  opinion  was  that  the
      appellant was at increased risk of suicide since 2015.  The  appellant
      disclosed past trauma not mentioned to Dr Obuaya. In 2016 he attempted
      to commit suicide by taking several pills with alcohol. She considered
      that there would be a serious deterioration in his mental  health  and
      would be at high risk of suicide if returned to Sri Lanka.  Dr  Obuaya
      conducted a further assessment in July 2019 and had the opportunity to
      review Dr de Pentheny's report.  He  noted  that  there  were  further
      incidents of the appellant attempting to 'overdose' in 2017  and  2018
      albeit the number of  pills  that  he  took  were  not  excessive.  He
      considered that the appellant's symptoms were best understood  in  the
      context of depressive illness rather than PTSD.  He  still  considered
      the appellant to be a low to moderate suicide risk in the UK. However,
      the risk of suicide or self-harm was likely to increase to a  moderate
      to high level if he were to be  informed  that  he  was  going  to  be
      removed to Sri Lanka.

5.    Similar information was recorded elsewhere  in  the  medical  records.
      The judge observed that a GP trainee noted  in  March  2019  that  the
      appellant had ""fleeting thoughts of suicide" which he  does  not  act
      upon because he thinks of his family and no  thoughts  of  self-harm."
      [27].

6.    The judge began his findings under the heading "Article  3  ECHR:  The
      medical claim". The judge conducted an analysis of the medical reports
      and noted where they diverged. He  accepted  that  significant  weight
      should be given to  the  expert  opinions  of  Dr  Obuaya  and  Dr  de
      Pentheny. Dr Obuaya concluded that the appellant was suffering from  a
      Severe Depressive Episode while Dr de Pentheny concluded that  he  was
      suffering from Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) [51].  The  judge
      gave greater weight to Dr Obuaya's opinion because  he  had  seen  the
      appellant over a longer  period  of  time  and  had  not  changed  his
      diagnosis  even  after  having  had  the  opportunity  to  review  new
      information contained in Dr de Pentheny's report [52].  Regardless  of
      the exact diagnosis, it  was  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  was
      suffering from mental health problems. The  doctors  agreed  that  his
      removal to Sri Lanka would lead to deterioration in his  mental  state
      and an increased risk of suicide [53].

7.    The judge directed himself to the legal framework  for  medical  cases
      with reference to the line of authorities in D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR,  N
      v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 and Bensaid v UK (2001) EHRR 205 [54].  The  key
      issue was whether the appellant  would  be  able  to  access  adequate
      treatment in Sri Lanka. The judge considered  what  was  said  in  the
      Secretary of State's decision  letter  [55].  Although  he  found  the
      decision letter to be lacking in detail he reminded himself  that  the
      burden of proof was on the appellant to show that he would  be  unable
      to access adequate treatment because of  his  vulnerability,  combined
      with the deficiencies in the provision of mental health  care  in  Sri
      Lanka, identified by the Upper Tribunal in GJ and  others  (post-civil
      war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  [56].  The  judge
      considered what the  Tribunal  in  GJ  said  about  the  provision  of
      healthcare for an appellant in that case (MP) and concluded:

           "57.  Like MP, the appellant in the present appeal has been ill-
                 treated by the Sri Lankan authorities and  suffers  from  a
                 serious mental health disorder. Like MP, the appellant  has
                 also been assessed by experts of posing a risk  of  suicide
                 if removed from the UK. Furthermore, I find the contents of
                 paragraphs 48 and 49 of the Refusal Letter are too vague to
                 demonstrate that there has been a significant change in the
                 availability of mental healthcare facilities in  Sri  Lanka
                 since the Upper Tribunal made its findings in GJ.


           58.   Moreover, as Dr Obuaya and Dr de Pentheny have  found,  if
                 the appellant was removed to Sri Lanka  this  would  likely
                 lead to  a  deterioration  of  his  mental  health  and  an
                 increase in the risk of him self-harming. Furthermore, both
                 doctors agree that the appellant's fear of the  Sri  Lankan
                 authorities would act as  a  barrier  preventing  him  from
                 accessing mental healthcare facilities in Sri Lanka.


           59.   Having considered the medico-legal reports  in  the  round
                 with the above-mentioned paragraphs from GJ, as well as the
                 case law mentioned in paragraph 54 above, on the  facts  of
                 the present appeal I accept that [it] is unlikely that  the
                 appellant would  be  able  to  access  the  limited  mental
                 healthcare facilities available  in  Sri  Lanka.  In  those
                 circumstances, I find that if he was removed from the UK at
                 this time it is likely that the deterioration of his mental
                 health i.e. his severe  depression),  if  untreated,  would
                 likely  expose  him  to  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment
                 contrary to Article 3."

8.    Under a separate heading entitled "Article 3 ECHR: Suicide risk",  the
      judge went on to consider the discrete issue relating to the  risk  of
      suicide. He noted the six-stage test outlined in J v SSHD [2005]  EWCA
      Civ 629 and conducted a structured analysis with  reference  to  those
      stages [62-71]. Earlier in the decision, he also noted a reference  to
      Y (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362 [10]. He was  satisfied  that
      the risk of harm was sufficiently serious to engage the  operation  of
      Article 3. He was satisfied that there was a causal link  between  the
      risk of suicide and the act of  return.  Both  Dr  Obuaya  and  Dr  de
      Pentheny considered that the suicide risk would increase to a moderate
      to high level if he were to be forcibly returned. He took into account
      the high threshold in 'foreign cases'. In relation to the fifth  point
      highlighted in J, the judge was satisfied that  the  appellant  had  a
      genuine subjective fear of return and that  this  would  increase  the
      suicide  risk  if  returned.  This  was  consistent  with   what   was
      subsequently said in Y (Sri Lanka) at [16], where the Court of  Appeal
      noted that a genuine subjective fear of persecution could  still  give
      rise to a real risk of suicide even if the fear is  not  well-founded.
      In considering the sixth point highlighted in J, the  judge  made  the
      following findings:

           "67.  Sixthly, I must consider whether the removing state and/or
                 the receiving state has effective mechanisms to reduce  the
                 risk of suicide. In terms of the risk of suicide  posed  by
                 the appellant on notification of removal to Sri  Lanka,  in
                 my view this could be managed by those treating him for his
                 depression. Furthermore, I accept that it  is  likely  that
                 the Home Office would be able to put measures in  place  to
                 mitigate the risk of the appellant  committing  suicide  in
                 transit to Sri Lanka.


           68.   Before I consider whether effective  mechanisms  could  be
                 put in place in the receiving state, it is  at  this  point
                 necessary to point to an unsatisfactory aspect of  both  Dr
                 Obuaya's and Dr de Pentheny's reports. That is that neither
                 doctor has considered whether the appellant's family in Sri
                 Lanka  could  act  as  a  support  network  on  return  and
                 therefore mitigate the risk  of  the  appellant  committing
                 suicide. This is despite Dr de Pentheny recording that  the
                 appellant misses  his  family  and  has  "developed  loving
                 relationships  with  his  parents,  sister   and   brother"
                 (paragraphs 14 and 24) and Dr Obuaya recording at paragraph
                 16 of his first report that the appellant would  "think  of
                 his family" in order to  prevent  himself  from  acting  on
                 suicidal thoughts (a point which is supported by Dr  Rahman
                 in her letter). Neither was I assisted on this point by the
                 fact that the appellant did not provide any evidence to the
                 tribunal  on  this  occasion,  although  given   that   the
                 respondent acquiesced to this, I do not  make  any  adverse
                 inferences against the appellant.


           69.   With the above in mind, having considered the totality  of
                 the medical evidence, I am willing to accept that given  my
                 findings that the appellant would  [be]  unable  to  access
                 mental health treatment in Sri Lanka, it is  unlikely  that
                 the Sri Lankan authorities would be able  to  mitigate  the
                 risk of the appellant committing suicide on return  to  Sri
                 Lanka on return.


           70.   I therefore conclude that the appellant's removal  to  Sri
                 Lanka would breach Article 3 on suicide grounds.


           71.   It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  appellant  is
                 currently receiving treatment from the NHS for  his  mental
                 health problems. Further, as mentioned above,  the  medical
                 evidence does confirm  that  thoughts  of  the  appellant's
                 family have dissuaded him from taking his own life  in  the
                 past. Dr Rahman's letter records that the appellant  is  in
                 regular contact with his family and he longs to  see  them.
                 It therefore seems likely that the appellant  is  close  to
                 his family in Sri Lanka and that they would  [be]  able  to
                 provide a support network for him if and when his condition
                 improves, which could mean that his  return  to  Sri  Lanka
                 would no longer violate Article 3."

9.    The Secretary of State's grounds are not  clearly  particularised  and
      tend towards general submissions. However, the following points can be
      discerned.

      (i)   The appellant's case could be distinguished from the case of  MP
           referred to in GJ. This appellant did not have severe  PTSD  and
           did not have clear plans to commit suicide.

      (ii)  The judge failed to make any clear finding as to whether support
           from the appellant's family might act  as  a  protective  factor
           reducing the risk of suicide.


      (iii) The judge failed to consider the case of KH (Afghanistan) v SSHD
           [2009] EWCA Civ 1354, which was decided after Y (Sri Lanka). The
           appellant could not have succeeded in showing that he came  with
           the 'very exceptional'  category  of  cases  that  might  engage
           Article 3 even if he did not have family in Sri Lanka. The judge
           failed to apply the stringent test in J properly.

10.   Ms Cunha argued that the judge failed to consider  adequately  whether
      the  availability  of  family  support  in  Sri  Lanka  would  make  a
      difference. This undermined the judge's finding in relation to  the  J
      line of authorities and the N line of authorities. The evidence showed
      the appellant had strong family ties in Sri Lanka and that this was  a
      protective factor when he had suicidal thoughts.  She  submitted  that
      the appellant could approach psychiatrists  in  Sri  Lanka  or  "could
      treat himself and prevent suicide risk".

11.   In response, Ms Patya argued that the judge had found that  there  was
      no evidence to suggest that the availability of mental health care was
      any different to the position when the Upper Tribunal decided GJ.  The
      expert  evidence  indicated  that  the  appellant's  condition   would
      deteriorate and there would be an increased risk of suicide if he were
      to be returned to Sri Lanka.  His  needs  were  not  just  limited  to
      limiting the risk of suicide. Even if he did have family  support  the
      judge found that adequate treatment was unlikely to be available.

Decision and reasons

12.   Claims involving medical issues  and  suicide  risk  are  particularly
      difficult to decide. A case brought on human rights grounds based on a
      person's medical condition is one that comes within the 'N  paradigm'.
      In such cases the threshold for showing a breach of  human  rights  is
      particularly high. The European Convention on Human  Rights  does  not
      place an obligation on a host state to refrain from removal where  the
      feared harm does not emanate from intentionally inflicted acts of  the
      public  authorities  in  the  receiving  state,  but  instead  from  a
      naturally occurring illness.  It was  only  in  the  most  exceptional
      circumstances of the kind faced by the applicant in the  D  case,  who
      was in the final stages of a terminal  illness  facing  a  distressing
      death without family or other support in  the  receiving  state,  that
      compelling  humanitarian  considerations  were  found  to  engage  the
      operation of Article 3.

13.   Some aspects of the law relating to the assessment of medical  claims,
      which are not 'deathbed cases', are currently in  flux  following  the
      decision of the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) in Paposhvili  v
      Belgium [2016] ECHR  1113.  In  that  case  the  ECHR  considered  the
      potential category of "other exceptional  cases,  with  other  extreme
      facts, where the humanitarian considerations are  equally  compelling"
      identified by Baroness Hale in the House of Lords decision in N [70].

14.   The Court of Appeal  decisions  in  J  and  Y  (Sri  Lanka)  govern  a
      discrete area of assessment under Article 3 relating to suicide  risk.
      The decisions in J and N were heard at around the  same  time  in  May
      2005. By the time the Court of Appeal in J handed down  its  decision,
      it had the benefit of the House of Lords decision in N. The  Court  of
      Appeal conducted a detailed review of the European and  domestic  case
      law. The six points it drew from these authorities for the purpose  of
      assessing Article 3 in the context of suicide risk were:
           "26.  First, the test requires an assessment to be made  of  the
                 severity of  the  treatment  which  it  is  said  that  the
                 applicant would suffer  if  removed.  This  must  attain  a
                 minimum level of severity. The court has said on  a  number
                 of occasions that the assessment of its severity depends on
                 all the circumstances of the case.  But  the  ill-treatment
                 must "necessarily be serious" such that it is  "an  affront
                 to  fundamental  humanitarian  principles  to   remove   an
                 individual to a country where he is at risk of serious ill-
                 treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].
           27.   Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the
                 act or threatened act  of  removal  or  expulsion  and  the
                 inhuman treatment relied on as  violating  the  applicant's
                 article 3 rights. Thus in Soering at para [91],  the  court
                 said:
                       "In so far as any liability under the  Convention  is
                       or may be incurred, it is liability incurred  by  the
                       extraditing Contracting State by reason of its having
                       taken action which has as a  direct  consequence  the
                       exposure  of  an  individual   to   proscribed   ill-
                       treatment."(emphasis added).
                 See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the court said that
                 the examination of the article 3 issue "must focus  on  the
                 foreseeable consequences of the removal of  the  applicants
                 to Sri Lanka..."
           28.   Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the  article  3
                 threshold is particularly  high  simply  because  it  is  a
                 foreign case. And it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged
                 inhuman  treatment  is   not   the   direct   or   indirect
                 responsibility of the public authorities of  the  receiving
                 state, but results from some naturally  occurring  illness,
                 whether physical or mental. This is made clear in para [49]
                 of D and para [40] of Bensaid.
           29.   Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a
                 suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).
           30.   Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a  real  risk  of  a
                 breach of article 3  in  a  suicide  case,  a  question  of
                 importance is whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment
                 in the receiving state upon which the risk  of  suicide  is
                 said to be based is objectively well-founded. If  the  fear
                 is not well-founded, that will tend to weigh against  there
                 being a real risk that the removal will  be  in  breach  of
                 article 3.
           31.   Sixthly, a further question of considerable  relevance  is
                 whether  the  removing  and/or  the  receiving  state   has
                 effective mechanisms to reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If
                 there are effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily
                 against an applicant's claim that removal will violate  his
                 or her article 3 rights."
15.   The first three points set  out  the  basic  requirements  to  show  a
      breach of Article 3. The third point  made  clear  that  there  is  an
      enhanced threshold in cases that come within the N paradigm. The  last
      three points went beyond the decision in N to consider the context  in
      cases involving the assessment of suicide risk. The Court of Appeal in
      the Y (Sri Lanka) modified the fifth point as follows:

           "15.  ..... The corollary of the final sentence of �30 of  J  is
                 that in the absence of an objective foundation for the fear
                 some independent basis for it must be established if weight
                 is to be given to it. Such an independent basis may lie  in
                 trauma inflicted in the past on the appellant  in  (or,  as
                 here,  by)  the  receiving  state:  someone  who  has  been
                 tortured and raped by his or her captors may  be  terrified
                 of returning to the place where it happened, especially  if
                 the same authorities are in  charge,  notwithstanding  that
                 the objective risk of recurrence has gone.


           16.   One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in  J  that
                 what may nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any
                 genuine fear which  the  appellant  may  establish,  albeit
                 without an objective foundation, is such  as  to  create  a
                 risk of suicide if there is an enforced return."

16.   The assessment of suicide risk is a discrete aspect of  the  extension
      to Article 3 considered in D and N. In MM (Malawi) v SSHD [2018]  EWCA
      Civ 2482 Counsel for the Secretary of State accepted  that  it  was  a
      distinct area of assessment under Article 3 [63]. The Court of  Appeal
      in J made clear that there was a high threshold  in  'foreign  cases',
      and acknowledging the decisions in  D  and  N,  made  clear  that  the
      threshold  was  even  higher  in  cases  where  "the  alleged  inhuman
      treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the  public
      authorities of the receiving state".

17.    The  nature  of  the  potential  harm  in  a  suicide  risk  case  is
      sufficiently serious to engage the operation of Article 3  within  the
      meaning of the N paradigm. If a person can show that there is  a  real
      risk that they will commit suicide on return to the  receiving  state,
      the feared harm clearly meets the minimum level of  severity  required
      i.e. intense mental suffering leading to their imminent death.

18.   The fifth and sixth points  highlighted  in  J,  modified  in  Y  (Sri
      Lanka),  simply  focus  the  assessment  on  issues  specific  to  the
      circumstances relating to suicide risk. First, an  initial  assessment
      of whether there is a real risk that the person is  likely  to  commit
      suicide if returned to the receiving state.  This  would  normally  be
      assessed  with  reference  to  expert  psychiatric  evidence.  Second,
      whether effective measures can be put  in  place  before,  during  and
      after removal to reduce the risk of suicide below a  real  risk.  This
      would normally be assessed with reference to evidence relating to  the
      circumstances in the receiving state.

19.   Having analysed the relevant legal framework, I turn to  consider  the
      First-tier Tribunal decision in this case. There is  no  challenge  to
      the judge's findings  relating  to  the  availability  of  psychiatric
      treatment in Sri Lanka. The judge considered the evidence  before  the
      Upper Tribunal in GJ (Sri Lanka). It was open to him to conclude  that
      the more recent evidence before him did not change the position  since
      in relation to the scarce or inadequate  availability  of  psychiatric
      treatment.

20.   When the judge went on to consider  "Article  3:  The  medical  claim"
      i.e. the N paradigm, it seems clear that  he  relied  heavily  on  the
      findings made by the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  MP  in  GJ  (Sri
      Lanka) [56-59]. However, when that part of the decision relating to MP
      is considered in full, the Upper Tribunal found that there would be  a
      breach of Article 3 based on the discrete issue of suicide  risk,  not
      in relation to the wider N paradigm applicable in other medical cases.
      At [449-456] the Upper Tribunal considered the  evidence  relating  to
      suicide risk and quoted the relevant parts of the decisions in J and Y
      (Sri Lanka). The First-tier Tribunal's comparison with  the  appellant
      in MP was inaccurate in so far as the judge placed weight on what  was
      said in GJ (Sri Lanka) for the purpose  of  "the  medical  claim".  In
      reality, MP was a suicide risk case. Any error in characterising  this
      case as a medical claim for the purpose of the wider N paradigm  would
      not be material if the judge's subsequent findings relating to suicide
      risk were nevertheless sustainable.

21.   Under the separate heading of "Article  3:  Suicide  risk"  the  judge
      conducted a structured assessment of the six points identified  in  J.
      It was open to him to find that the risk of suicide  was  sufficiently
      serious to engage the operation of Article 3 and that there would be a
      causal link between the act of removal and the potential suicide  risk
      [62-63].  He  considered,  quite  properly,  the   particularly   high
      threshold in Article 3 cases [64].  It  was  open  to  him  to  remind
      himself that an Article  3  claim  based  on  suicide  risk  could  in
      principle succeed.

22.   The judge went on to consider the more  specific  issues  relating  to
      suicide risk identified by the Court of Appeal in J.  In  relation  to
      the fifth point, it was open to him to conclude that the appellant had
      a genuine  subjective  fear  of  return.  It  was  accepted  that  the
      appellant suffered past persecution albeit his current  fear  was  not
      objectively well-founded. Based on the psychiatric  evidence,  it  was
      open to the judge to conclude that the appellant continues to  have  a
      genuine subjective fear, which would lead to a moderate to  high  risk
      of suicide on return [66].

23.   The judge's treatment of the sixth point in J is more  problematic.  I
      quoted his findings in full at [8] above. It was open to the judge  to
      conclude that the respondent would be able to put in place measures to
      mitigate the suicide risk before and during removal to Sri Lanka.  The
      crucial assessment was the evidence relating to risk on return to  Sri
      Lanka. His finding  relating  to  the  lack  of  adequate  psychiatric
      treatment is unchallenged. It was open to the judge to  find  at  [69]
      that the authorities in Sri Lanka would be unable to mitigate the risk
      of suicide due to inadequate provision of mental health treatment.

24.   Whether the risk of  suicide  arising  from  the  appellant's  genuine
      subjective fear of return  could  be  mitigated  by  other  means  was
      considered. At [68] the judge observed that there was evidence to show
      that the appellant had a close relationship with  his  family  in  Sri
      Lanka, which was said to have acted as a protective factor in relation
      to suicide risk while he is in the UK. The  judge  observed  that  the
      expert reports did not comment on whether the appellant's family might
      act as a protective factor to mitigate the risk of suicide on  return.
      In the end he concluded that the risk could not be  mitigated  because
      inadequate treatment was available.

25.   It is common for  judges  to  be  faced  with  an  incomplete  set  of
      evidence, but that does  not  detract  from  the  obligation  to  make
      findings on issues that are relevant to the proper determination of an
      appeal. In this case it would have been open to the judge to take into
      account the fact that both doctors were aware that the  appellant  had
      close family members in Sri Lanka, yet still assessed the suicide risk
      to be moderate to high as a result of the heightened fear that he  was
      likely to experience upon return as a result of past  persecution.  It
      would have been open to him to weigh up the evidence showing that  his
      family were a protective factor while he  is  in  the  UK,  where  the
      suicide risk was assessed to  be  lower,  against  the  evidence  that
      showed that his fear was likely to be increased along with the risk of
      suicide if returned to the place of his past persecution. Even in  the
      absence of specific expert opinion, it might have been  reasonable  to
      infer that the protective effect of his family might be reduced in the
      different and far  more  fearful  context  of  return  to  Sri  Lanka.
      Conversely, it would have been open to the judge to consider the  more
      direct support that he is likely to have from his family if he were to
      be returned to Sri Lanka. None of these matters were considered.

26.   Although it was open to the judge to conclude  that  it  was  unlikely
      that the Sri Lankan authorities would be able to mitigate the risk  of
      suicide due to unavailable or inadequate mental  health  care  in  Sri
      Lanka, the question of whether the protective  effect  of  his  family
      might nevertheless reduce the suicide risk below that of a  real  risk
      thereby reducing the need for treatment was a relevant  consideration.
      The fact that the appellant might benefit  from  other  treatment  and
      support that is not likely to be available in Sri Lanka  is  unlikely,
      taken alone, to reach the very high threshold in cases of this sort in
      the absence of evidence to show that there would be  a  real  risk  of
      suicide.

27.   Having identified the issue  of  family  support  at  [68]  the  judge
      failed to resolve it before concluding  that  the  lack  of  available
      treatment alone gave rise to a real risk of suicide.  The  judge  then
      muddied the waters at [71] by observing, apparently as an aside,  that
      the appellant's family would be able to provide support "if  and  when
      his condition improves". The combination of comments in [68] and  [71]
      leaves the reader of the First-tier Tribunal decision  unclear  as  to
      what the judge's conclusions were regarding the  potential  protective
      effect the appellant's family might have in terms  of  mitigating  the
      risk of suicide if he were to return to Sri Lanka,  whether  treatment
      is available or not.

28.   I conclude  that  the  absence  of  clear  findings  relating  to  the
      potential mitigating effect of family support amounts to an  error  of
      law. For the reasons given  above  the  First-tier  Tribunal  findings
      relating to "the medical claim" are set  aside  as  are  the  findings
      relating to the sixth point in J. The rest of the First-tier  Tribunal
      findings relating to the first five points in J  are  sustainable  and
      are preserved.

29.   The normal course of action would be for the Upper Tribunal to  remake
      the decision. Although the Supreme Court  is  due  to  consider  wider
      issues relating to the N paradigm and the effect of  the  decision  in
      Paposhvili in AM (Zimbabwe), it is unclear to what  extent  the  court
      will consider the discrete issue of suicide risk. Nevertheless, it was
      agreed that it would be sensible to relist this case for  remaking  to
      allow for the possibility of AM (Zimbabwe) being  decided  before  the
      next hearing. However, given the discrete nature of the assessment  in
      suicide risk cases, and the narrow issue that must be  remade,  it  is
      unlikely that the case will be adjourned to await the outcome  of  the
      Supreme Court decision if the judgment has not been handed down before
      the resumed hearing.

30.   Allowing some  time  before  the  next  hearing  will  also  give  the
      appellant the opportunity to plug the gap in the  evidence  identified
      by the First-tier Tribunal, which would assist the Upper Tribunal when
      it remakes the decision.

DIRECTIONS

31.   The parties are granted permission to file any up to date evidence  at
      least seven days before the next hearing.

32.         The resumed hearing will be listed on the first  available  date
      after ten weeks.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a point
of law

The decision will be remade at a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal



Signed   [pic]   Date   04 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan









