
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02260/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2016                  |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     z s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph instructed by Turpin & Miller,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  1  January
    1965.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 July 2015 and  claimed
    asylum.  He claimed that he faced persecution on return  on  the  basis
    that he feared an Afghan warlord, ["H"] because he had made two  police
    reports on 8 and 28 June 2015 as a result of his brother  being  killed
    in the crossfire between rival warlords in  Afghanistan  involving  H's
    son.  He feared retribution on  return.   In  addition,  the  appellant
    claimed that he was at risk from the Taliban having received  a  "night
    letter" from them.  In addition, he feared being accused  of  being  an
    apostate after H's son had spread false rumours that the appellant  had
    converted to Christianity.

 4. On 16 October 2015, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for international protection.  The Secretary  of  State  did  not
    consider as credible the appellant's claim to be at risk on  return  to
    Afghanistan on any of the bases relied  upon  by  the  appellant.   The
    respondent also rejected  the  appellant's  claim  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  regards  the
    appellant's claim to be at risk because he had reported H's son to  the
    police, the judge accepted the appellant's account.  However, the judge
    did not accept that the appellant would be identified by  H  on  return
    unless he made a further report to the police.

 6. In his written statement, the appellant had said that if he returned he
    would make a further report to  the  police.   However,  in  answer  to
    questions from the judge he stated that he would not raise a  complaint
    to the police again (see para 16 of the determination).  However, in re-
    examination, having been reminded  of  what  he  said  in  his  witness
    statement, the appellant again said he would complain to the police.

 7. In the light of this evidence,  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant would make a complaint and, therefore, he would  be  at  risk
    from H's son.

 8. In addition, the judge was not satisfied that the appellant would be at
    risk from the Taliban or as a result of false accusations of  apostasy.



 9. The judge, therefore, dismissed the appellant's appeal on international
    protection grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    single ground that the judge had  been  wrong  in  law  to  reject  the
    appellant's evidence in his witness  statement  and  in  re-examination
    that he would make a complaint to the police on return.

11. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 9 August 2016, the Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Canavan)  granted  the
    appellant  permission  to  appeal.   UTJ  Canavan  gave  the  appellant
    permission to appeal on the basis of his grounds of appeal  challenging
    the judge's factual finding that the appellant had not  established  he
    would make a complaint about H's son on return.

12. In addition, UTJ Canavan identified what she described as  a  'Robinson
    obvious' point - one not raised in the appellant's grounds of appeal  -
    that the judge had erred in law by failing to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's expert report in concluding that the appellant could safely
    internally relocate.  In addition, the judge had failed to consider the
    evidence concerning the risk to  the  appellant  on  arrival  at  Kabul
    Airport.

13. On 31 August 2016, the Secretary  of  State  filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

14. Mr Joseph submitted that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons
    why he preferred the evidence of the appellant in answer to a  question
    by the judge rather than the evidence in his witness statement  and  in
    re-examination.   Mr  Joseph  did  not  suggest  that  there  was   any
    impropriety in the judge's conduct which is, in part, suggested in para
    7 of the grounds.  He accepted that the judge's questions were entirely
    proper.  However, given that the judge accepted the  remainder  of  the
    appellant's account and the appellant's credibility, he failed to  give
    adequate  reasons  for  preferring  the  appellant's  answer  given  in
    response to the judge's questions.

15. The judge's reasoning is set out at paras 37-38 of his determination as
    follows:

         "37. In short, I accept that  the  Appellant  has  established  his
             account to the necessary standard.  However, I do  not  accept
             that the Appellant would, in the face of  the  danger  created
             through in June 2015, be motivated to raise any further police
             reports if he returned to Afghanistan.  He had let matters lie
             for three years after making the  initial  report  because  he
             realised that further reports would be futile.  I accept  that
             the Appellant made a further police report  on  28  June  2015
             notwithstanding the difficulties that had arisen following the
             report on 8 June 2015, however  he  explained  in  his  asylum
             interview that the later report was made specifically with the
             aim of making matters better for his family.   Of  course,  by
             then the Appellant had gone into hiding and was  planning  his
             escape from the country.

         38.  Therefore,  notwithstanding  the  appellant's  claims  in  his
             witness statement and re-examination  that  he  would  make  a
             further report if returned, I prefer the evidence he  gave  to
             me that he would not.  My view is fortified by the  fact  that
             it is not suggested that the appellant has  made  any  further
             complaint to the police in Afghanistan from the safety of  the
             United Kingdom in the year or so that has passed."

16. As Mr Richards pointed out, UTJ Canavan granted permission on the  sole
    ground relied upon by the appellant essentially on the basis that there
    was an implication of misconduct by the judge which Mr Joseph  did  not
    seek to pursue.  Mr Richards submitted that it was clear from  para  16
    of the judge's determination, where he set out the appellant's  answers
    in response to his questions, that  the  judge  had  not  asked  closed
    questions and the judge was perfectly entitled to place weight  on  the
    response given to  his  question  rather  than  the  appellant's  other
    evidence.  Mr Richards pointed out that it was not unexpected that  the
    appellant would reverse his evidence in re-examination,  in  line  with
    his witness statement, when it was pointed out  to  him.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that the judge's positive credibility finding was  about  the
    past.  There was no inconsistency since the issue concerning  what  the
    appellant would do on return to Afghanistan was about the  future.   Mr
    Richards submitted that the judge had  not  disbelieved  the  appellant
    rather he had, faced with conflicting evidence, preferred one answer to
    the other.  That was not a material error of law.

17. In my judgment, the judge did not materially err in law in reaching his
    adverse credibility finding.

18. In assessing the appellant's evidence, the judge  was  no  doubt  aware
    that he had made  a  positive  credibility  finding  in  accepting  the
    appellant's  account  of  what  had  occurred  to  him  previously   in
    Afghanistan.  That did not absolve the  judge  from  having  to  assess
    conflicting statements about his future intention made at the  hearing.
    This was not a case where the appellant had said, for example,  in  re-
    examination that he had misunderstood the judge's question and that  he
    had all along intended to say that he would make a complaint about  his
    brother to the police on return to Afghanistan.   Rather,  this  was  a
    case where the judge was simply faced with  conflicting  evidence  from
    the appellant.  It was not a case of whether the appellant was  telling
    the truth but rather which aspect of his conflicting statements were to
    be accepted as his future intention.

19. I accept Mr Richards' submission that it is clear from para 16  of  the
    judge's determination that the appellant  gave  a  number  of  detailed
    answers to the judge's questions, including the relevant  one  for  the
    purposes of this appeal, which could not have been given as a result of
    closed questions.  So, in relation to the issue of what he would do  on
    return, the judge stated that the: "appellant said that he would  never
    forget his brother and what happened to him but said that he would  not
    raise the complaint to the police again."  That cannot be the answer to
    a question which elicited either a 'yes' or 'no' answer.

20. At paras 37-38, the judge took into account that the appellant had made
    a second complaint on 28 June 2015 even though difficulties had  arisen
    after the first complaint made on 8 June 2015.   I  do  not  accept  Mr
    Joseph's criticism that the judge was wrong to take into account in the
    final sentence of para 38, in assessing what the appellant might do  on
    return to Afghanistan, that he had not made a further complaint to  the
    Afghan police whilst in the  UK.   Whilst  Mr  Joseph's  point  is  not
    without merit that this is  not  something  that  could  reasonably  be
    expected of the appellant, it is clear from the  judge's  reasons  that
    this did not form a basis for  his  finding  in  respect  of  what  the
    appellant would do on return to Afghanistan.   The  final  sentence  in
    para 38 begins "my view is fortified by ...".  It  is  clear  that  the
    judge has already reached his factual finding  and  that  this  reason,
    even if inappropriate, played no material part in  the  judge  reaching
    his factual finding.

21. The judge  plainly  made  his  finding  fully  aware  of  his  positive
    credibility finding in relation to  the  past  events  upon  which  the
    appellant relied.  Given the discrepant account in his  oral  evidence,
    and the absence of any explanation as to why the  appellant  had  given
    conflicting answers in his oral evidence, it was properly open  to  the
    judge to find that the appellant had failed to establish, even  on  the
    lower standard applicable in international protection  cases,  that  he
    would make a complaint to the police on return.  The judge, of  course,
    did this by preferring the evidence given to him by  the  appellant  in
    his oral evidence.  That the judge made a positive finding against  the
    appellant rather than simply one that the appellant had not proved this
    aspect of his claim, cannot, in my judgment, amount to a material error
    of law.

22. I turn now to the two points raised by UTJ  Canavan  in  her  grant  of
    permission. Mr Joseph (who  had  drafted  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal) placed reliance upon these new points.

23. First, at paras 39-40, the judge reached his finding that the appellant
    would not be at risk from the Taliban, as an apostate or from  H's  son
    outside Nangarhar Province:

         "39. It was the Appellant's own evidence that he was untroubled  by
             [H's son], the Taliban or any accusations of  apostasy  during
             the period of time he spent in Kheva,  having  fled  his  home
             town and before leaving  the  country.   It  was  Mr  Foxley's
             opinion that the Appellant would not be a  likely  target  for
             the Taliban (in the expert's words, he would be 'small  fry').
             Neither have I any grounds to believe to conclude  that  there
             is a real risk that the Appellant would come to the  attention
             of [H's son] if he  returned  to  a  place  outside  Nangarhar
             Province, given that he would  be  unlikely  to  make  further
             reports about his brother's death.

         40.  In  conclusion,  I  accept  the  Appellant's  account  of  the
             troubles he suffered in Afghanistan in 2015.   However,  I  do
             not believe that there is a real risk of the  Appellant  being
             persecuted for imputed religious belief if returned outside of
             Nangarhar nor do I believe that there is a real  risk  of  his
             suffering significant harm from H or others.  The  threat  the
             Appellant faces comes not from state actors but  from  private
             individuals.   In  the  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that
             internal relocation to Kabul would be reasonable and that  the
             Appellant would not be at risk in such a location."

24. Mr Joseph relied upon para 40 of the expert report  of  Mr  Foxley,  in
    particular that it stated that it was "very  plausible"  that  H  would
    have connections and supporters in Kabul and  central  government  such
    that "this could put the appellant at risk if he were returned to Kabul
    and Nangarhar Province."

25. It is clear from the judge's determination at para 21  that  Mr  Joseph
    (who then also represented the appellant) in identifying  any  risk  to
    the appellant outside Nangarhar Province placed  reliance  solely  upon
    him being located as a result of a further complaint  being  made.   Mr
    Joseph accepted that, although he had referred to Mr Foxley's report in
    para 3 of his skeleton argument including para 40, he had not taken the
    point further.  Indeed, in para 5 of Mr Joseph's skeleton argument,  it
    is clear that Mr Joseph's reliance upon Mr Foxley's report was only  to
    establish that the appellant would be at risk  if  he  made  a  further
    complaint.  That may well explain why Mr Joseph did not  seek  to  make
    this point  in  his  grounds  of  appeal  seeking  to  challenge  Judge
    O'Brien's decision.

26. In para 39, Judge O'Brien noted that the appellant  had  been  able  to
    spend some time outside  his  home  town  before  leaving  the  country
    without any difficulty whether from H's son or from the Taliban or as a
    result of the accusations of apostasy.

27. Judge O'Brien was plainly aware of Mr Foxley's report and at para 32 he
    described him as giving some "useful evidence about the situation  both
    in 2012 and afterwards in  Afghanistan  and  also  some  useful  expert
    opinion on the influence of [H's son]".  He clearly had  that  in  mind
    when he reached his finding in paras 39 and 40 that the  appellant  had
    failed to establish that he would be at risk from H's son.

28. Having noted the fact that the appellant was safe in Afghanistan  prior
    to leaving the country, and taking all the matters  into  account  that
    were relied upon, I am unable to say that the judge's finding that  the
    appellant failed to establish that he would not be safe  in  Kabul  was
    irrational or inadequately reasoned.

29. The second point made by the Mr  Joseph,  relying  upon  the  'Robinson
    obvious' points raised by UTJ Canavan, relies upon paras  54-56  of  Mr
    Foxley's report and a potential risk to the  appellant  on  arrival  at
    Kabul Airport.  It is far from clear to me that Mr  Joseph  placed  any
    weight upon this evidence before Judge O'Brien.  Paragraph  54  of  the
    report is referred to in para 3 of Mr Joseph's  skeleton  argument  but
    nothing further is made of that in the detail of the skeleton  argument
    thereafter.  It also does not appear to have formed part of Mr Joseph's
    oral submissions  summarised  at  paras  20-22  of  the  determination.
    Before me, Mr Joseph submitted that Mr  Foxley's  report  identified  a
    risk of the appellant, being questioned on arrival  at  Kabul,  and  it
    being discovered that he had been accused of apostasy  and  had  become
    entangled with a prominent Nangarhar warlord family.

30. As Mr Foxley makes plain at para 54:

         "I cannot give a confident assessment about the level  of  risk  he
         might face from security forces upon his arrival at Kabul Airport."

31. I accept Mr Richards' submission that Mr Foxley's  views  expressed  at
    paragraph 54-56 are largely speculative.  He offers no basis upon which
    the appellant's background would become apparent.  There is no  obvious
    reason why the appellant would disclose his  "entanglements"  with  H's
    family or that he had been wrongly accused of apostasy.  It  is  simply
    wrong to suggest that the appellant might have to lie  on  return.   Of
    course, an appellant cannot be  expected  to  lie  about  an  important
    aspect of his life, for example his sexual orientation, but there is no
    reason why he would be required  to  disclose  a  false  accusation  of
    apostasy or,  indeed,  his  entanglement  with  a  prominent  Nangarhar
    warlord family.  Mr Foxley's report at paragraphs 55-56 which is relied
    upon provides no basis as  to  how  the  appellant's  background  would
    otherwise become known.

32. For all these reasons, I see no basis upon which  the  appellant  could
    succeed in reliance upon Mr Foxley's report at paragraphs 54-56.   Even
    if, despite Mr Joseph's lack of specific  reliance  upon  any  risk  on
    return at Kabul Airport, it could be said  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider this evidence, that failure could not, in my  judgment,  be  a
    material error and which would justify setting  aside  Judge  O'Brien's
    determination.

Decision

33. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal on international protection grounds did not  involve
    the making of an error of law.  Its decision stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

