

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02839/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Tribunal                             |                                     |
|On 1 May 2018                        |On 8 May 2018                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Miss H Masih instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Hall, promulgated on 29  March  2017,
        in which the Judge allowed RS's appeal on asylum and  human  rights
        grounds.



Background


     2. RS claimed international protection on the basis of a real risk  on
        return as a lesbian in Ghana. It appears to have been  accepted  in
        the reasons for refusal letter before the Judge that the key  issue
        in the appeal was the credibility of the claim in relation to  RS's
        sexual identity.
     3. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  by  the  First-tier
        Tribunal  but  granted  on  a  renewed  application  by  the  Upper
        Tribunal; although not in  relation  to  the  Secretary  of  States
        challenge to the credibility findings made in  RS's  favour.  Those
        grounds were found to be no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
        findings available to the Judge on the evidence before  the  First-
        tier tribunal.
     4. The Upper  Tribunal  Judge  granting  permission  states  that  the
        Judge's finding at [93] was arguably unclear  and  it  is  arguable
        that the Judge's analysis  on  the  point  of  internal  relocation
        failed to provide cogent reasons as to why the appellant could  not
        relocate.
     5. The application is opposed by Miss Masih  whose  Rule  24  response
        refers to the reasons for refusal letter in which it is written "in
        conclusion, it is accepted that the available  country  information
        indicates that lesbian/bisexual people may be able to demonstrate a
        well-founded fear of persecution  in  Ghana.  However,  it  is  not
        accepted that you  have  sufficiently  demonstrated  that  you  are
        lesbian/bisexual.".
     6. The Secretary State's case was based upon  her  not  accepting  the
        appellant is a lesbian. It is a preserved finding of the Judge that
        this has now been established.
     7. The question of whether the appellant is entitled to the protection
        sought is a factual issue based  upon  a  proper  analysis  of  the
        evidence.
     8. Having found it proven that to a reasonable degree of likelihood RS
        is a lesbian [35], the Judge was required  to  consider  whether  a
        lesbian who lived openly would be liable to persecution  in  Ghana.
        The Judge noted the above quote from the  refusal  letter  together
        with the Guidance on  Orientation  and  Gender  Identity  in  Ghana
        document published by the Home Office in February 2016.  The  Judge
        analyses the provisions of  that  document  at  [86  -  89]  before
        concluding at [91] that if RS attempted to live openly as a lesbian
        in Ghana there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that  she  will
        be liable to persecution.
     9. The Judge went on to consider HJ (Iran) and found that if RS  chose
        to live discreetly it will be because she  was  frightened  of  the
        consequences of living openly.
    10. The Judge concludes there would not be a sufficiency of  protection
        or reasonably internal relocation option open to the appellant  and
        that the real risk she faced as a result of her sexuality  entitled
        to her to a grant of asylum.
    11. It is not made out the finding of a real  risk  of  persecution  in
        Ghana as a result of RS living openly as a lesbian is  outside  the
        range of reasonable findings open to the Judge on the evidence. The
        Judge clearly considered the material with the required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons in support  of  all
        the findings made. It has not been made out the factual finding are
        in any way perverse or irrational or contrary to the evidence.
    12. The Secretary State fails to make  out  any  basis  for  the  Upper
        Tribunal interfering with this decision.
    13. Up-to-date documents produced by Miss Masih, in the event of  error
        of law had been  found,  have  not  been  considered  as  this  was
        evidence not before the Judge. If it had been appropriate to do  so
        those documents clearly support the  Judge's  findings  which  does
        raise the question of whether any alleged error was material in any
        event.
    14. No arguable legal error made out. The Secretary of States appeal is
        dismissed.

Decision

    15. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 1 May 2018












