

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02298/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 December 2018                  |On 20 February 2019                  |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                  YAHIA [A]

                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Lemar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal") which it sent to the parties on
15 August 2018; whereupon it dismissed his appeal from  the  Secretary  of
State's decision of 3 February 2018 refusing to  grant  him  international
protection.

2.    The claimant, who was born  on  [~] 1978,  is  an  Iraqi  citizen  of
Kurdish ethnicity.  He had entered  the  United Kingdom  as  a  student  in
September 2011 and had claimed asylum on 5 September 2016.  The basis  of
his claim to be entitled to international protection  was  that  his  father
had been a high-ranking officer within the Ba'ath Party, had been  involved
in what was described as "the ethnic cleansing of Kurds"  during  the  Anfal
campaign. It was said that  those  activities  had  drawn  the  ire  of  the
Kurdish community to the extent that they would seek to achieve  revenge  by
harming the claimant himself.

3.    The tribunal accepted what the claimant  had  had  to  say  about  his
father's previous activities for the Ba'ath Party and accepted that if  the
claimant was to return to the part  of  Iraq  under  Kurdish  administrative
control ("the IKR") which was treated as being his home area, then he  might
encounter persons who  would  wish  to  harm  him.   However,  the  tribunal
concluded that there would be available to him within the IKR a  sufficiency
of protection which would be provided by  the  authorities  there.   But  it
also accepted that if he were to be returned to Baghdad then he would be  at
risk.  As to all of that it said this:

      "     43.  I take judicial notice of the fact that direct  flights  to
           IKR have resumed since the decision in AAH.  Having stated  that
           AAH remains good law in relation to any potential removal is via
           Baghdad (sic) or to Baghdad as a  final  destination.   In  this
           appellant's circumstances, taking due account of  the  state  of
           health of his children, it will not be appropriate for him to be
           removed anywhere other than the IKR and then  only  directly  to
           the Region.  Any attempt to remove to or via Baghdad  would  put
           the appellant and his family in significant danger."

4.    So, given that returns in recent times have only ever been to  Baghdad
or to the IKR, its conclusion on the appeal was dependent upon its  apparent
finding that return in his case would actually be to the IKR.

5.    Mr Lemar, in his grounds  of  appeal,  criticised  the  tribunal  for
taking "judicial notice" of the fact that direct flights from the UK to  the
IKR  had  resumed.   He  suggested,  in  his  grounds  of  appeal   to   the
Upper Tribunal, that it had not been appropriate for the tribunal  to  take
judicial notice of the matter but that, rather, the point should  have  been
put to the parties and an evidence based decision as to the likely point  of
return ought to have been taken.  He also asserted  that  the  tribunal  had
erred in failing to consider whether the claimant  might  benefit  from  the
content of paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.

6.    I have not found it necessary to deal with Mr Lemar's  second  ground
of appeal. As to the first, I rather  suspect  that  the  tribunal  was,  in
fact, correct in saying that, at the time of the hearing before it,  flights
from the UK to the IKR had resumed.  But I do not think that was  quite  the
point.  The question was not whether commercial flights between the  UK  and
the IKR had resumed but, rather, where this  particular  claimant  would  be
returned to.  Mr Diwnycz agreed that that was the central  issue  and  that
returns, at the material time, had been to  Baghdad  and  not  to  the  IKR.
Accordingly, the tribunal erred through failing to identify  that  that  was
the key issue for it to decide.  In these circumstances Mr Diwnycz did  not
argue that I should not set aside the tribunal's  decision.   I  do  set  it
aside.

7.    My having done that, Mr Lemar urged me  to  remake  the  decision  in
favour of the claimant.  As he points out, what the tribunal had to  say  at
paragraph 43 demonstrates that it had concluded (and its conclusion  as  to
this has not been challenged) that return to Baghdad would  expose  him  to,
as it put it "significant danger".  Whilst it does  not  say  so  in  terms,
that clearly amounts to a finding that if he were to be returned to  Baghdad
he would suffer persecution or serious harm in consequence of  his  father's
previous activities.  I agree with Mr Lemar and I do remake the decision in
favour of the claimant on that basis.  I allow the appeal on asylum  grounds
because I conclude that the persecution the claimant will  receive  will  be
in consequence of a political opinion which will be  imputed  to  him  as  a
result of his father's activities.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law and is set aside.

In remaking the decision I allow the claimant's appeal  from  the  Secretary
of State's decision of 3 February 2018.  I do so on asylum grounds (imputed
political opinion) and, on the basis of the same reasoning, on human  rights
grounds under Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).


Signed:                      Date: 28 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


Anonymity

I do not grant anonymity  in  this  case.   The  claimant  was  not  granted
anonymity by the First-tier Tribunal and nothing was said about the  matter
before me.


Signed:                      Date: 28 December 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is payable there can be no fee award.


Signed:                      Date: 28 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

