
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/02137/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 February 2017                       |On 9 May 2017                       |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe, instructed by Duhra Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, S M, was born in 1970 and is a female citizen of Gambia.
     The appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2004 with entry  clearance
    valid until November 2004.  Thereafter, she remained  living  illegally
    in the country having overstayed.  She was arrested in  March  2015  on
    suspicion of being an immigration offender.  In May 2015,  she  claimed
    asylum.  By a decision dated 16 October 2015,  the  respondent  refused
    the appellant's application for asylum.  The appellant appealed to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  A  M  S  Green)  which,  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 2 August 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant  asserts  that
    the judge made a material direction in law.  In making his  assessment,
    the judge dealt first with the appellant's delay in claiming asylum and
    a criminal conviction.  The appellant asserts that the judge had  found
    that the appellant was not a  credible  witness  before  moving  on  to
    consider her account of past events in Gambia.

 3. I find that the ground has no merit.  The judge had to start  somewhere
    in his assessment and I see no problem at all  with  his  having  dealt
    first with the appellant's immigration  history.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant had only  claimed  asylum  after  having  been  arrested  was
    plainly a material consideration in the assessment of credibility.

 4. Secondly, the appellant claims that the judge made a material error  of
    law in the treatment of evidence concerning the New  Millenium  Airline
    of Gambia.  At [33] the judge  had  considered  the  appellant's  claim
    regarding the New Millenium Airline.  He wrote:

         ... I am satisfied on the evidence the New Millenium Airline should
         not be considered or regarded  as  a  commercial  airline.   I  was
         persuaded by what Mr Pipe had to say in this regard.  It was little
         more than a single Russian built aircraft used by the president  or
         Baba Jobe [a notorious Gambian politician] to  fly  around  African
         countries facilitating illegal arms  trafficking  which  ultimately
         led to the United Nations sanctions against it and Baba Jobe.   Far
         fetched as it may seem, I am prepared to accept that the  appellant
         was "employed" by the New Millenium Airline.

 5. The judge went on to record that the appellant had claimed that she had
    continued working for the airline until "she fell from favour  in  2004
    because  of  her  association  with  Baba  Jobe."   The  judge   stated
    categorically, "I do not believe her."  The judge noted that;

    according to evidence offered by  the  respondent,  the  New  Millenium
    Airline was active between 1999 and 2002.  Other than saying that  'the
    World's Airlines' was printed off a UK website, Mr Pipe has not offered
    any credible objective evidence that the airline was  still  active  in
    April 2004.  The fact that the airline was subject to being  listed  on
    the United Nations sanctions list on 30 November 2005 does not prove on
    its own that the airline was active at that time.  It may suggest  that
    the United Nations believe that the airline still exists and had assets
    worth freezing.  But just because an entity exists does not mean it  is
    active (i.e. operational).  I believe that the airline became  inactive
    in 2002.  This undermines the appellant's claim because  she  said  she
    lost her job in 2004 and was still flying at that time.

 6. Before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Pipe drew attention  to  an  entry  on  a
    website (the Independent (Banjul)) entitled "Gambia: the  Sun  sets  on
    Millenium Airline; conflicting signals conjure up winding enigma."  The
    article is dated 27 September 2004.  The article refers to "conflicting
    signals about the operational status of the New Millenium Airline since
    a United Nations Security Counsel Resolution (1532)  outlined  punitive
    measures against Baba Jobe one of which is to ground the airline."  The
    article then refers to the "fate of [the airline] ...  hanging  in  the
    balance  as  reports  surface  ..."   Reference  is  also  made  to  "a
    probability that the government  would  bow  to  more  UN  pressure  to
    discontinue the operation of the airline ..."  Mr Pipe  submitted  that
    evidence in September 2004 that the fate of the  airline  was  at  that
    time "hanging in the balance" indicated  that  the  airline  was  still
    operating at that date.

 7. The difficulty with the internet evidence is that, whilst it appears to
    have been sent by fax and email from the appellant's solicitors to  the
    First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham, I could find no copy of the document
    on the Tribunal file.  The copy which now appears on the Tribunal  file
    is that which I had copied from Mr Pipe's copy on 6  February  2017  at
    the Upper Tribunal hearing.  The printout is dated on the same date  as
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing (25 July 2016).  I have  to  say  that,
    having conducted an extensive search of the file, the fact  that  there
    is no copy of the document on the file indicates to me that it was  not
    before the judge when he prepared his decision.  Although the  decision
    was promulgated some days after  the  hearing,  I  have  no  reason  to
    believe that Judge Green did other than to prepare his decision on  the
    same day as the hearing; the promulgation date is a matter outside  the
    control of the judge and depends upon the administrative staff  of  the
    Tribunal.  If the evidence had reached the file after it had  left  the
    judge's hands (and  following  his  dictation  or  preparation  of  the
    decision) there is no reason to believe that it would have been brought
    to the judge's attention by the administrative staff of  the  Tribunal.
    I find, therefore, that the judge's findings of fact in respect of  the
    New Millenium Airline are entirely sound on the basis of  the  evidence
    before him. On the standard of proof of the balance of probabilities, I
    find that the internet document was not before the judge  at  any  time
    before his decision was promulgated. Even if I am wrong, and the  judge
    has overlooked the evidence, his conclusion remained available  to  him
    on consideration of all the evidence.  The internet  article  does  not
    categorically establish that the airline was still operating  in  2004;
    indeed, having read the article, one is left with the  impression  that
    the continued existence  of  the  airline  was  entirely  a  matter  of
    conjecture. In other words the evidence did not  compel  a  finding  of
    fact different from that reached by the judge.  Further, the judge  had
    dealt with the fact that  the  United  Nations  sanctions  list  of  30
    November 2005 (i.e. postdating the internet article) continued to refer
    to the airline.  The judge found that this did not "prove  on  its  own
    that the airline was active at the time  and  may  suggest  the  United
    Nations  believe  the  airline  still  existed  and  had  assets  worth
    freezing.  Just because an entity exists  does  not  mean  that  it  is
    active  (i.e.  operational)."   The  internet  evidence   is   entirely
    consistent with that finding.

 8. The third ground of appeal challenges  the  judge's  use  of  the  verb
    'convince' when determining the credibility of the appellant's account.
    At [33], the judge wrote, "I have given [the statement of the man  whom
    the appellant claimed was her husband]  little  weight  and  I  am  not
    convinced that the appellant was married to him."  Later  in  the  same
    paragraph, the judge refers to the appellant having "not convinced  the
    respondent and she has not convinced me."  The  appellant  asserts  the
    use of the word "convinced" here indicates that the judge  has  applied
    an inappropriately high standard of proof  in  his  assessment  of  the
    claim.  I disagree.  The judge has set out in considerable  detail  the
    correct standard and burden of proof at [7].  Having done so, I have no
    reason to believe that the judge has departed from that standard in any
    part of his analysis.  Indeed, I find that the word "convinced"  is  to
    be read by reference to and within the context of the correct  standard
    of proof as stated by the judge; he is, in effect, saying no more  than
    that he was not at all satisfied that it was reasonably likely that the
    appellant's account was true and accurate.

 9. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 20 April 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date 20 April 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

