
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02808/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2019                           |On 18 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AY
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Caswell, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

    Introduction

      1. I have made an anonymity order because this decision refers to  the
         appellant's asylum claim.


      2. The appellant has appealed, with permission granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Keane, against a decision of FTT Judge Drake
         dated 1 June 2018, in which his asylum and Article 8  appeals  were
         dismissed.

Background facts

      3. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, claims to have entered the UK
         with a student visa in January 2010.  The visa expired on  21  July
         2011, and the appellant overstayed.


      4. The appellant married RZ, a citizen of Pakistan, in February  2014.
         She arrived in the UK as a student in  September  2013.   She  also
         overstayed when her visa expired on 30 October 2015.

      5. RZ claimed asylum on 12 May 2016, with  the  appellant,  and  their
         child born in the UK in 2015, as her dependents.  She claimed  that
         she was at risk of persecution by reason of threats made toward her
         uncle in Pakistan.  He was unhappy that she married  the  appellant
         when there was a family agreement for her to marry one of his  sons
         in around 2012.  RZ's family was told about the 2014 marriage which
         resulted in the threats from the uncle.


      6. RZ's asylum claim was refused and certified as clearly unfounded in
         a decision dated 7 March  2017.   At  the  hearing  before  me,  Mr
         Caswell confirmed that this decision was not  the  subject  of  any
         legal challenge.  The appellant separated from his  wife  in  March
         2017, when she was pregnant with their second child (born  in  July
         2017).  The appellant  claimed  asylum  in  his  own  right  on  11
         February 2018.  This was  based  entirely  upon  the  same  claimed
         threats from RZ's uncle because of their marriage.  The  Respondent
         refused  the  appellant's  asylum   claim   in   a   detailed   and
         comprehensive decision letter dated 13 February 2018.

      7. In a succinct decision, the FTT accepted that RZ's uncle would have
         been unhappy about her marriage to the appellant but concluded that
         the appellant was not at risk from the uncle as  the  threats  made
         were very vague, with the last dating back by some four years.   In
         any event, the FTT noted that if the uncle's objective was to force
         a separation, that had already taken place.  The FTT also  accepted
         the reasoning in the decision letter that the appellant  would  not
         be found by RZ's uncle as he did not have the  influence  to  track
         him down to his home area.

      8. The FTT also dismissed the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  and
         agreed with the reasons in the decision letter, given the  lack  of
         evidence regarding the claimed family life and  in  any  event  the
         inability to meet the Immigration Rules.

Grounds of appeal and hearing

      9. The  grounds  of  appeal  have  been  drafted  by  the  appellant's
         solicitors in handwriting.  They are short and vague.  Two  grounds
         are relied upon:

               1) The FTT accepted the plausibility and credibility  of  the
                  claim relevant to RZ's family and  therefore  should  have
                  regarded the threats emanating from them as plausible  and
                  credible.


               2) The FTT failed to  properly  address  Article  8  and  the
                  children's best interests, given  the  evidence  that  the
                  appellant has contact with his children and RZ's statement
                  in support of this.

     10. FTT Judge Keane granted permission to appeal on both grounds.


     11. At the hearing before me Mr Caswell sought permission to amend  the
         grounds.  I  refused  his  application  without  hearing  from  Mrs
         Pettersen.  The application was made very late and  for  the  first
         time and without notice at the hearing before me.  Mr  Caswell  did
         not rely upon written draft grounds.   The  grounds  he  identified
         were limited to minor factual errors.  Mr Caswell therefore  relied
         upon  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  drafted  by   his   instructing
         solicitors.  He acknowledged that even if the appellant's claim was
         considered at its  highest,  it  was  difficult  to  challenge  the
         finding that he could internally relocate in  Pakistan.   For  this
         reason, he said  little  of  substance  regarding  ground  (1)  and
         focussed his attention upon ground (2).  Mr Caswell invited  me  to
         find that even though RZ and the children did not have leave at the
         time of the FTT hearing and were liable to removal, the FTT  should
         have assessed their circumstances on the basis that the  respondent
         would not in reality remove them.

     12. I did not need to hear from Mrs Pettersen,  the  respondent  having
         relied upon a rule 24 notice dated 6 September 2018.

     13. After hearing from Mr Caswell, I indicated I  would  be  dismissing
         the appeal for the reasons I now provide.

Error of law discussion

Ground 1 - asylum

     14. I have no hesitation in rejecting the submission that the FTT erred
         in law in finding there was no current credible threat against  the
         appellant from RZ's uncle or family members.  The FTT was  entitled
         to regard the threats that were made as very vague and not directed
         against  the  appellant  for  the  reasons  provided  at  [9]-[10].
         Moreover, the FTT was entitled to find that the  last  threat  took
         place over four years ago and there was  insufficient  evidence  of
         the uncle having the intent or ability to track the appellant  down
         in his home area (see the FTT decision  at  [20]-[21]),  such  that
         internal relocation was inevitably available to the appellant, even
         when his claim was considered at its highest.


     15. The reasoning offered by the FTT may be succinct but when viewed in
         context is adequate.  The appellant's asylum claim was  based  upon
         the same asylum claim made by RZ.  The decision that her claim  was
         bound to fail was not challenged.  The respondent  noted  that  the
         uncle did not hold any power or influence in Pakistan and would  be
         unable to track RZ, an educated woman, if she relocated to a  large
         city.  The same reasoning applies to this appellant.

Ground 2 - Article 8

     16. The reasoning provided by the FTT regarding Article is very  brief.
         It is however clear that the FTT endorsed the  conclusions  in  the
         respondent's decision letter.  The FTT has adequately explained its
         reasons for doing so.  I address these below.  The decision  letter
         made clear points that have not been the subject of  any  criticism
         on the appellant's behalf either before the FTT or me:  refusal  of
         leave would not lead to unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  any
         member of the family; consideration was given the  children's  best
         interests and it was decided that the appellant's relationship with
         his children could  continue  in  Pakistan,  where  they  would  be
         supported by both parents (living separately) in a country in which
         they spoke the language and would be educated.  The FTT did not err
         in law in not considering the children's best  interests  expressly
         when it clearly endorsed and agreed with the  respondent's  reasons
         in his decision letter at [65]-[71].


     17. The FTT regarded there to be a lack of evidence  in  the  case.  Mr
         Caswell reminded me that insufficient attention was given  to  RZ's
         statement.  This supported the appellant's claim that  although  he
         was separated from RZ, he  saw  his  children  very  regularly  and
         played an active role in their lives.    Mr  Caswell  was  entirely
         unable to respond to my suggestion that this family life could take
         place in any large city in Pakistan.  He acknowledged  that  as  at
         the date of the FTT hearing, RZ and the children did not have leave
         to remain and RZ was an unlawful overstayer.  I entirely reject the
         submission that the FTT ought to have ignored the practical reality
         of the situation and assessed the appellant's claim  on  the  basis
         that he would  be  separated  from  his  children.   The  practical
         reality is that if successful the appellant  would  be  removed  to
         Pakistan, as would RZ and their children.


     18. The FTT considered that there was "a lack  of  basic  qualification
         for such rights".  The FTT explained that the requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules could not be met.  Mr  Caswell  did  not  dispute
         this. In particular it was not disputed that as RZ has no leave  to
         remain, and the children are not "qualifying children", the  family
         (including the appellant) could be removed to Pakistan at the  same
         time and could set up home near to  each  other  in  a  large  city
         there.

     19. When the decision is read as  a  whole  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         grounds of appeal are not  made  out  and  the  decision  does  not
         contain any error of law.

Decision

    19.  The FTT decision did not involve the making of a material error of
         law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 January 2019

