
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/02555/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 21 February 2019                      |On 25 February 2019       |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                 Mr OMAR [A]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Loughran, Counsel
                    (instructed by Wilsons Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS






      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Cruthers on 5 October 2018 against the determination of
           First-tier Tribunal Judge G Wilson who had dismissed the  appeal
           of the  Appellant  against  the  refusal  of  his  international
           protection claim.  The decision and reasons was  promulgated  on
           14 September 2018.


      2.    The Appellant claimed he was a stateless Palestinian, born on 11
           April 1996 in the United Arab Emirates ("UAE").   The  Appellant
           claimed that he was at risk on return from the government of the
           UAE as a suspected supporter  of  the  Syrian  opposition.    He
           claimed that he and his brother had been  collecting  money  for
           Syrian refugees, a task they had  willingly  undertaken  at  the
           request of a man they had never met previously, and who did  not
           work alongside them in making the collections.   They  had  been
           suspected of assisting Syrian rebels and were  detained  by  the
           police daily for questioning each  evening  and  then  released,
           over the course of a week.  The Appellant and his  brother  were
           not charged with any offence but were given a week to leave  the
           UAE.  They came to the United Kingdom  on  visit  visas  already
           issued to them and claimed  asylum  on  arrival.   International
           protection was refused by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
           Department and the Appellant's claim was dismissed on appeal  to
           the First-tier Tribunal.  An error of law was subsequently found
           by the Upper Tribunal and the appeal was remitted for  rehearing
           before another First-tier Tribunal judge.


      3.    After reviewing the evidence  at  the  rehearing,  Judge  Wilson
           found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  excluded   from   Refugee
           Convention protection pursuant to Article 1D, as  he  had  never
           availed himself on UNWRA protection in Lebanon, albeit  eligible
           to do so. The judge found that the Appellant was  stateless  and
           that the assessment of his entitlement  to  refugee  status  was
           accordingly to be determined by his country of  former  habitual
           residence, i.e., the UAE. The judge went on  to  find  that  the
           Appellant's story was not credible for a number of  reasons  and
           that he was not at risk on return to the UAE.  In any event, the
           Appellant could be returned to  Lebanon  safely,  which  he  had
           visited on numerous occasions previously on his own account, and
           where his family could if necessary support him.


      4.     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  (with   several   express
           reservations) in summary because it was considered arguable that
           the  judge  had  placed  too  much  emphasis   on   matters   of
           implausibility.  It has to be said that the terms of  the  grant
           were distinctly ambivalent and warned against ultimate success.


      5.    Notice under rule 24 in the form of a letter  dated  7  December
           2018 had been served by the  Respondent,  opposing  the  onwards
           appeal.




      Submissions


      6.    Ms Loughran for the Appellant relied on the grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and the grant of permission.  In summary, counsel mounted
           an extensive and detailed assault  on  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           determination, contending that the judge had erred  by  reaching
           adverse   credibility   findings   solely   on   the    inherent
           implausibility of the Appellant's account.  Each of the  reasons
           given was vitiated by a failure to take  into  account  material
           evidence such as the country background information for the UAE.
            That included the arbitrary deportation of persons suspected of
           links to groups in Syria.   The  judge's  approach  to  inherent
           implausibility was flawed and failed to apply the guidance in HK
           v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.  The judge had relied  on  his  own
           perceptions of plausibility.  The judge had  also  misunderstood
           the standard of proof and had misdirected  himself.   The  judge
           had not factored in the Appellant's youth and the recent  nature
           of the UAE laws concerning charity  collection.  The  judge  had
           speculated and had not considered the  country  expert's  views,
           making the whole determination  problematic.  The  decision  and
           reasons was unsafe and  should  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal
           reheard before another judge.


      7.    It was not necessary to call on Ms Cunha, given the terms of the
           rule 24 notice which  supported  the  judge's  approach  to  the
           (im)plausibility of the Appellant's story.










      No material error of law finding


      8.    The tribunal reserved its  decision,  which  now  follows.   The
           tribunal must reject the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
           Appellant. In the tribunal's view, the errors asserted to  exist
           in  the  decision  and  reasons  are  illusory.   The  grant  of
           permission to appeal was  tentative  as  well  as  very  liberal
           indeed, particularly given the reservations expressed.   In  the
           tribunal's view, permission to appeal ought  not  to  have  been
           granted.  Essentially the dispute is over the  adverse  findings
           of fact with which the Appellant disagrees.


      9.    The determination was meticulously prepared  by  an  experienced
           judge who stated specifically that all of the evidence had  been
           considered: see [29]  of  the  determination.   The  judge  also
           correctly directed himself as to the correct burden and standard
           of proof: see [9].  The suggestion as to the standard  of  proof
           to the contrary made in submissions on behalf of  the  Appellant
           is unsustainable, and is a generic assertion made too readily in
           this jurisdiction.


      10.   The judge placed his consideration  of  the  Appellant's  claims
           into the correct context of the country  background  information
           and the Appellant's  personal  history  of  lacking  full  civil
           rights in a strictly controlled state.   The  judge  engaged  in
           detail with the Appellant's  country  expert's  report  and  the
           expert's opinion on plausibility.  It was not  in  dispute  that
           the Appellant  had  lived  his  whole  life  in  the  UAE  in  a
           comfortable existence and is educated and has  travelled,  i.e.,
           he is well aware of the world around him.  His age  was  not  in
           dispute.  He is an adult.  Those were the markers against  which
           the Appellant's story fell to be evaluated.


      11.   The judge noted at [33] of his decision:


           "I can see no support in the  background  information  that  the
           questioning and release in this manner (detention,  release  and
           recall on a daily basis) is a recognised  tactic  of  the  [UAE]
           authorities.   The   Appellant's   country   expert   highlights
           significant human rights abuses including allegations of torture
           in  detention,  arbitrary   arrest   and   detention   including
           incommunicado detention... the  UAE  has  little  tolerance  for
           certain political activities including those involving  sympathy
           for political Islam."


           The judge reached his plausibility findings on the basis of  the
           extensive country background evidence and was entitled  to  find
           that the Appellant's story was inherently  implausible  for  the
           reasons he gave.


      12.   Indeed, the judge might well have observed what level  of  folly
           would be needed for an educated person such  as  the  Appellant,
           whose right to remain in the UAE was circumscribed  by  law,  to
           run  the  risk  of  associating  with  an  unknown  person  with
           connections to Syria during a period of high political  tension.
           The answer is obvious: it would have been such madness as to  be
           wholly  implausible.   The  judge   also   explained   why   the
           Appellant's story was vague.   Again,  the  judge's  conclusions
           were open to him on the evidence.


      13.    In  the  tribunal's  view,  the  submissions  advanced  on  the
           Appellant's behalf amount to no more than disagreement with  the
           judge's adverse findings of fact, all of which were available to
           him on  the  evidence  presented,  which  evidence  was  plainly
           sufficiently considered and the consequent  findings  thoroughly
           and logically reasoned.  There was no  departure  from  relevant
           judicial guidance such as that  in  HK  (above).   The  tribunal
           finds that there was no error of law in the decision challenged.






      DECISION


      The appeal is dismissed


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
      error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.

      Signed                                  Dated 21 February 2019




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


