
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02433/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6th October 2017                   |On 31st October 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [M M]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Draycott (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This was an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Butler,  promulgated  on  29th  March  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 26th January  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Egypt, and he was  born  on  [  ]
    1999.  He is a minor.  The essence of his claim is  that  when  he  was
    about 7 year old he was kidnapped by an unknown person who held him for
    two days and then returned him back to his family.  He  further  states
    that this was the reason why his  father  possibly  joined  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood, or alternatively that this was because after the  uprising
    in 2011, the Muslim  Brotherhood  defended  his  village  from  escaped
    prisoners and he joined to help fight that cause.  The  Appellant  also
    states that his father was an Imam at  the  local  mosque  and  he  led
    prayers there.  His father was arrested and imprisoned.  The  Appellant
    was moved by his mother to Alexandria.  He then travelled  by  boat  to
    Italy.  He came through France and he eventually applied for asylum  in
    the UK and was interviewed on 3rd September 2015  and  his  substantive
    asylum interview was on 25th January 2016.  In the  UK,  the  Appellant
    also claims to have converted to Christianity during the course of 2016
    and had attended church ceremonies  of  various  denominations,  before
    ultimately joining the Mormon Church.

The Judge's Determination

 3. The judge prefaced the determination with the remarks that, "I have had
    regard to his age and to the fact that some of the events  he  referred
    to in his account allegedly happened when he was only 7  years  old..."
    (paragraph 50).  It was also noted by the judge that the Appellant  was
    only 7 years old  when  he  was  allegedly  kidnapped  (paragraph  51).
    Nevertheless, the judge did  not  find  the  Appellant  to  be  putting
    forward a credible account (paragraphs  52  to  57).   There  was  also
    inconsistent  evidence  regarding  the  Appellant's   date   of   birth
    (paragraph 58).  The Appellant's evidence that he  had  approached  the
    British Red Cross to try  and  trace  his  mother  was  also  "entirely
    unconvincing" (paragraph 59).  Accordingly, the  judge  concluded  that
    the Appellant's account of his involvement with the Muslim  Brotherhood
    and that of his father was untrue (paragraph 60).

 4. In relation to the claim that he had  converted  to  Christianity,  the
    judge had regard to the fact that the Appellant attended  a  church  as
    stated by Mr Sevit-Berridge who had said he went to  the  service  with
    him and he confirmed this in his letter that he  met  two  missionaries
    who also stated that the Appellant had been attending church every week
    from the end of October 2016 (paragraph 63).  The  judge  observed  how
    the Appellant was an intelligent young  man  who  claims  to  have  now
    converted to Christianity "some time  after  he  received  his  refusal
    letter" (paragraph  66).   The  judge  did  not  regard  the  claim  of
    conversion to be plausible.

 5. Finally, consideration was  given  by  the  judge  to  the  Appellant's
    medical condition on the basis of two psychiatric reports  prepared  by
    Dr Vinod Kumar.  It was  observed  by  the  judge  that  the  essential
    difference in the two reports is that the second  report  by  Dr  Kumar
    changes the diagnosis from adjustment disorder to PTSD.  The  basis  of
    this change is that at the  time  of  the  second  interview  with  the
    Appellant, the Appellant "gave additional symptoms  of  nightmares  and
    flashbacks that his symptoms overall  were  deteriorating  rather  than
    getting better" (paragraph 73).  Consideration was thereafter given  by
    the judge to this change of diagnosis by Dr  Kumar  (paragraphs  74  to
    77).  The account was, however, rejected.

 6. With respect to Article 3 of the ECHR, the judge had regard to the high
    threshold in N v SSHD (paragraph 80) and observed  that  "there  is  no
    evidence in this appeal to suggest the Appellant has ever  self-harmed"
    (paragraph 80).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law in respect
    of the analysis of the psychiatric reports and failed  to  make  proper
    findings in respect to them.  It was also alleged that  the  judge  did
    not give proper regard to the Appellant's mental health when  assessing
    his credibility.   Finally,  it  was  said  that  the  judge  erred  in
    considering the Appellant's conversion to Christianity.

 9. On 9th August 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 5th September 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Secretary
    of  State  to  the  effect  that  the  judge   had   directed   himself
    appropriately and there was no error of law.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me  Mr  Draycott,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant submitted that there were three  essential  errors  that  the
    judge made.  First, that, in concluding that  the  Appellant's  account
    was inconsistent in relation to the events described  by  him,  and  in
    stating that his account was vague and erratic,  the  judge  failed  to
    take into account that there was a Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  2
    of  2010  with  respect  to  "child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    Appellant  guidance".   Whereas  it  was  a  case   that   this   Joint
    Presidential Guidance did not terms have to be  expressly  referred  to
    nevertheless, there had to be recognition in the determination  of  the
    Appellant's status as a vulnerable or sensitive witness.  This was  not
    the case here.

12. Instead, the judge had blamed a minor Appellant  in  court  for  giving
    evidence that was erratic and  vague,  notwithstanding  the  fact  this
    account was based upon traumatic events in the life  of  the  Appellant
    going back to his time as a 7 year old child in Egypt.

13. Second, the judge did not make an express finding  that  the  Appellant
    was suffering from PTSD, even  though  this  evidence  was  extensively
    related to by the judge from paragraphs 73 to 77.  Instead,  the  judge
    had simply held that, "no  objective  evidence  has  been  produced  to
    suggest that the Appellant could not receive treatment for  his  mental
    health and emotional issues in Egypt" (paragraph 81).

14. Furthermore, in relation to the Appellant's conversion to Christianity,
    the Appellant's case was that this had occurred  on  a  cumulative  and
    holistic basis, and  the  judge  made  erroneous  general  findings  in
    stating that the Appellant had failed to provide evidence of his visits
    to various churches (paragraph 61), and that  he  could  not  genuinely
    have converted to Christianity (paragraph 66).

15. Finally, it was not true that the Appellant did not present  a  suicide
    risk, if consideration was given to JL (medical reports -  credibility)
    China [2013] UKUT 00145, because Dr Kumar's clinical  opinion  was  the
    Appellant, if returned to Egypt, would present  a  moderate  to  severe
    risk of suicide, due to CPN and at CAMHS assessing the Appellant on 7th
    November 2017.

16. For her part, Ms Aboni relied upon the Rule 24 response.  She submitted
    that the judge had made perfectly adequate findings of  fact.   It  was
    not insignificant that the judge had observed (at  paragraph  66)  that
    the Appellant was  "an  intelligent  young  man  who  claimed  to  have
    converted to Christianity some  time  after  he  received  his  refusal
    letter".  This was suggestive of the fact that the judge did not accept
    that the Appellant had not contrived to put forward a claim in order to
    succeed in his application for refugee asylum status.  Second,  it  was
    not true that the judge had overlooked the joint Presidential  Guidance
    for child and vulnerable adults.  Mr Draycott had accepted that such  a
    reference did not expressly be made to this guidance, and it was  plain
    that the judge had begun from the premise that, "I have had  regard  to
    his age and to the fact that some of the events he referred to  in  his
    account allegedly happened when he was only  7  years  old"  (paragraph
    50).

17. Finally, the fact here was that the Appellant had  presented  a  highly
    inconsistent account in relation to  all  aspects  of  his  claim  (see
    paragraphs 58 to 61).  There was no evidence ever presented that he had
    converted from Islam to Christianity.  No one from the church  came  to
    give evidence on his behalf.  He was not a genuine convert.

18. In reply, Mr Draycott submitted that there was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's protective status had been approached  on  the  basis  that
    there was recognition of his vulnerable and sensitive condition.  There
    was also no finding that the Appellant suffered from  PTSD.   He  asked
    that there be a finding of an error of  law  and  that  the  matter  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

20.  First,  in  what  is  otherwise  a  comprehensive   and   well-crafted
    determination, it remains the case that the judge did not approach  the
    facts of this case on the basis of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note
    2 of  2010  in  relation  to  child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    Appellant guidance.  The recent case of AM  (Afghanistan)  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1123 is significant in this respect.  On the facts  of  this  case,
    there was evidence, which the judge carefully set out (at paragraphs 73
    to 77) that the Appellant's diagnosis had been shifted from  adjustment
    disorder to PTSD.  The judge did not accept this observing that, "there
    is no explanation in the report for the Appellant's evidence as to  why
    he failed to mention nightmares and flashbacks in his  first  interview
    with Dr Kumar" (paragraph 76).  In fact,  Dr  Kumar  had  recorded  (at
    paragraphs 16) that, "I asked him for the  reason  for  not  mentioning
    these last time when I saw him.  He told me that this was because I did
    not ask him about it".  On this basis, the appeal clearly ought to have
    been approached on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  was  a  vulnerable
    witness.  There is no reference to the fact that  he  is  a  vulnerable
    witness.

21. Second, despite the fact that  the  judge  refers  on  at  least  three
    occasions (at paragraphs 73, 74, and 76) to the Appellant  alleging  to
    have PTSD, there is no express finding that the  Appellant  was  indeed
    now suffering from PTSD.  Yet, that was the medical opinion of Dr Vinod
    Kumar.  The judge had to make a finding on  this  aspect,  particularly
    given that the diagnosis had shifted from adjustment disorder to  PTSD.



22. Third, there does appear to be some reference of the  Appellant  having
    suicidal ideation and  the  judge,  however,  wrongly  concluded  that,
    "there is no evidence in this appeal to suggest the Appellant has  ever
    self-harmed", because the GP notes (at pages 110 to 111)  that  such  a
    risk existed and there is additional evidence at page 83.  The  CPN  at
    CAMHS assessment on 7th November 2016 had also concluded that there was
    a  moderate  to  severe  risk  of  suicide.   For  all  these  reasons,
    notwithstanding  what  is  an   otherwise   clear   and   comprehensive
    determination, there is an error of law in this determination.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge  other
    than Judge Butler on a de novo basis.

24. An Anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 30th October 2017
