
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02498/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 October 2019                   |On 31 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                    t s m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Boylan-Kemp, promulgated on 2  July  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on 2 September 2019.



Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously,  and  as  this  is  a  protection
    claim, a further direction is set out below.

Background

 3. The appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom from  Iraq  in  March
    2013. His asylum claim, made on the basis of a being a gay  man  and  a
    Christian convert, was refused and his appeal against that decision was
    dismissed on 29 May 2013. The appellant left the United  Kingdom  on  4
    February 2014,  having  applied  for  assisted  voluntary  return.  The
    appellant returned to the United Kingdom with his wife during September
    2017 and claimed asylum. The new claim concerned the  appellant's  fear
    of persecution in Iraq on account of his religion and membership  of  a
    social group as a man at risk of honour killing because he started  his
    relationship with his wife when she was already married.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the appellant's asylum claim on 1  March
    2019. It was accepted that he was a national of  Iraq  and  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity. The respondent  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a
    convert to Christianity  because  this  aspect  of  his  case  was  not
    accepted by the judge who determined his previous  asylum  appeal.   In
    addition, the appellant had described himself as a  Muslim  during  his
    most recent screening interview, he had been  married  by  an  Imam  in
    Turkey and that his responses in interview were inconsistent and lacked
    detail. The appellant's claim that he was at risk from his own  or  his
    wife's family members was also rejected.  It  was  suggested  that  the
    appellant could relocate to Erbil or another part of the Iraqi  Kurdish
    Region (IKR).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, both the  appellant  and
    his wife gave evidence. The judge rejected the appellant's  claim  that
    he was a Christian or that he  was  at  risk  of  honour  killing.  His
    Article 8 claim was also dismissed.

The grounds of appeal

 6. There were four grounds of appeal. Firstly, that the judge did not make
    findings as to whether the appellant was in a genuine relationship with
    his wife or whether they were married. Secondly, the  judge  failed  to
    consider the evidence in the round and applied a higher  standard  when
    assessing the evidence. Thirdly, the judge  erred  in  his  credibility
    assessment. Fourthly, there was a failure to  adequately  consider  the
    country guidance of AAH (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG
    UKUT 212 (IAC).

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds, with  the  second  and
    third grounds being less meritorious.

 8. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

 9. The appellant's previous solicitors wrote to the Upper Tribunal  on  21
    October 2019 in order to state they were no longer representing him. An
    employee of the British Red Cross also wrote on the appellant's  behalf
    to request a postponement of the hearing of 25 October 2019  to  enable
    the appellant to find  alternative  representation.  That  request  was
    refused by a duty judge on 23 October 2019.

The hearing

10. The appellant attended the hearing unrepresented. He explained that the
    Red Cross had informed him that if he was able to obtain an adjournment
    of his appeal, they would be able to assist him in finding a legal  aid
    solicitor.

11. Mr Tarlow indicated that he accepted that the First-tier Tribunal erred
    in failing to consider AAH.

12. Given Mr Tarlow's concession regarding the  fourth  ground,  I  decided
    that there was no need to adjourn the hearing. I announced that  I  was
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal judge made a material  error  of
    law in having no regard to the decision in AAH.

Decision on error of law

13. It is a clear material error of law for a judge to make no reference to
    a relevant Country Guidance case. It is accepted by the respondent that
    the appellant is from the IKR and the appellant's case is that  he  has
    no passport nor identity documents and that he has no contact with  his
    family members nor those of his wife. There was no exploration of these
    issues by the judge. Nor did the judge make a decision  as  to  whether
    the appellant's relationship/marriage with his wife, who  is  dependent
    on his claim, was accepted. These errors are material  and  render  the
    judge's decision unsound. Out of an abundance of caution, I  set  aside
    the previous decision in its entirety, with no findings preserved.

14. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that  the  appellant  is
    currently unrepresented and has yet to have an  adequate  consideration
    of core aspects of his asylum appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and  it
    would be unfair to deprive him of such consideration.  In  addition,  a
    further relevant Country Guidance  decision  is  awaited.  I  therefore
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Birmingham IAC, with a time estimate of  3  hours  by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

