
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02841/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 26 August 2021                    |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On 29 July 2021                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     NF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Iran.  He was born  on  16  May
    1994.

 3. The appellant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  27  February  2019
    clandestinely and claimed asylum.  He claimed that he  and  his  family
    lived in the IKR (the Iraqi Kurdish Region) in Iraq and that  both  his
    and his father's involvement with the KDPI put him  at  risk  from  the
    Iranian authorities, in particular the Etelaa't in the IKR.

 4. On 8 March 2020, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.  In particular,
    the Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant was an Iranian
    citizen but rather concluded that he was an Iraqi citizen.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 5 February 2021, Judge L Murray dismissed the appellant's appeal  on
    all grounds.  The judge also did not accept the appellant's claim  that
    he was an Iranian national but found, instead, that he was a citizen of
    Iraq and did not accept that it was credible that he would be  at  risk
    in Iraq from the Etelaa't.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    challenging the judge's finding that he is not a national of  Iran  but
    rather that he is a citizen of Iraq.

 7. Initially, permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Beach) on 17 March 2020.

 8. On a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal,  on  18  May  2021  UTJ
    Allen granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 9. On 16 June 2021, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 notice  seeking
    to uphold the judge's findings and decision.

10. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice
    Centre on 29 July 2021.  I  was  based  in  court  and  Mr  Gayle,  who
    represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Avery,   who   represented   the
    respondent, joined the hearing remotely by Microsoft Teams.

The Judge's Decision

11. The judge's reasoning is set out, including evidence  relevant  to  her
    finding, principally at paras 31-36 as follows:

         "31. It is the appellant's case that the respondent  has  erred  in
             concluding there is sufficient evidence to conclude  he  is  a
             national of Iraq.  I have  assessed  the  credibility  of  his
             claim to be an Iranian national against all  of  the  evidence
             before me.  In relation to the answers which  he  supplied  in
             relation to  his  nationality  I  accept  that  the  appellant
             asserted in his screening questionnaire at question  1.5  that
             he was Iranian and that he had  no  other  nationalities.   He
             also said he never had a passport.  At question 3.3 he said he
             departed Iran when he was 4 years  old  and  that  his  family
             moved to Sulaimanyah.  He said at question 4.1 that his father
             was a member of the KDPI and that was the reason he left  Iran
             and brought his family to the Kurdish part of Iraq.   He  says
             that he was afraid of returning to Iran.

         32.  His asylum interview was conducted in the absence of  a  legal
             representative in Kurdish-Sorani.  According to page 2 of  the
             interview it was recorded and he  was  given  a  copy  of  the
             recording.  He confirmed that he understood  the  interpreter.
             At question 31 he said that he feared the Iranian  Etelaat  in
             Iraq and at question 33 the Iranian government  in  Iran.   In
             answer to question 38 he said that they had  status  in  Iraq.
             He was asked at question 39 if he had citizenship and he asked
             whether when the interpreter said citizenship he meant status.
              He then said he had status.  He was asked at question  42  if
             he had a CSID and he  asked  'like  a  passport'  and  it  was
             explained to him that it  was  an  Iraqi  document  needed  to
             access services, sometimes called a tasker.  He answered  that
             he only had a passport.  In answer to question 45 he  said  he
             had an Iraqi passport.  In answer to question 54 he said  that
             they went to renew their status.  At question 72 he said  that
             he was not an Iraqi citizen so Iraq would not accept him back.
              He was asked what documents he had in Iraq at  question  111.
             He said that he had a national ID card and that for school  it
             was a civil status ID.  He was then asked what he did with his
             CSID and he said that they left  it  in  Kurdistan  when  they
             fled.  He said that his parents got his CSID for him  when  he
             was a child (question 116).

         33.  The appellant states at paragraph 19 of his statement at p4 of
             the appellant's bundle  dated  3  December  2020  that  he  is
             dismayed that the respondent maintains that he is a citizen of
             Iraq.  He  never  had  Iraqi  citizenship  and  had  temporary
             residence there which was renewed annually.  He sets  out  the
             answers in his interview and says he was confused when he  was
             asked about his status as opposed to citizenship.   Throughout
             his interview he made clear that he was not a citizen of Iraq.
              If they had citizenship they would not have needed  to  renew
             their status.  He says that he was  not  entitled  to  a  CSID
             card.  The appellant has produced photographs on his  Facebook
             account of taking part in a demonstration against the  Iranian
             regime.  The appellant also deals with the  individual  points
             taken against him in the RFRL.  I  have  taken  all  of  these
             answers into account.

         34.  Whilst I accept that the appellant may have been  confused  by
             some of the questions in interview and that when asked for his
             nationality in his screening interview,  he  asserted  it  was
             Iranian, he expressly confirmed in his asylum [interview] that
             he had an Iraqi passport and CSID.  The appellant's answers in
             interview were recorded  and  he  was  given  a  copy  of  the
             recording.  He has not produced a transcript of the  interview
             by an independent translator showing  the  interpretation  was
             wrong.  He also did not address the fact  that  the  interview
             contained the  alleged  errors  until  he  filed  his  witness
             statement in December 2020.

         35.  I find that there is force in the respondent's points made  in
             the Response in  relation  to  the  appellant's  answers  with
             regard to the documentation and that, contrary  to  indicating
             that there was confusion, he had a good understanding of  what
             was being asked.  He expressly confirmed in his own  words  in
             answer to question 43 that he had a passport and when asked at
             question 45 whether his passport was  Iraqi  or  Iranian  said
             that it was Iraqi.  At 111 the appellant confirmed that  other
             than a passport 'I had a national ID card, and  as  they  call
             it, intelligence card (Asaysh)'.  At q112 he confirmed that in
             order to access school (which he said he attended until year 6
             of Primary) he had a Civil status ID  is  required.   He  then
             confirmed at  q113  that  the  CSID  was  left  in  Iraq.   At
             questions 113-120 he continued to provide answers in  relation
             to the CSID he claimed to have.  I agree with the  point  made
             in the Response, that, given the appellant had confirmed  what
             a CSID was only a few seconds earlier, it cannot be said  that
             he was simply confused and was instead simply referring to the
             Status document which had to be renewed yearly.  I  find  that
             the answers at interview, clearly expressed in his  own  words
             and  not  just  as  yes  or  no  answers,  indicate  that  the
             appellant,  when  living  in  Iraq  was  in  possession  of  a
             passport, a CSID and an intelligence card  (q110-120).   These
             answers, I  find,  indicate  that  he  is  in  fact  an  Iraqi
             national.

         36.  I have considered the evidence  in  relation  to  his  Iranian
             nationality.   I  accept  that  the   appellant   consistently
             maintained in his screening interview that he was Iranian and,
             in his asylum interview, that he left Iran at the age of 4.  I
             also accept that the appellant has given a consistent  account
             of his father's activities in the mountains in the  IKR  as  a
             KDPI Peshmerga fighting (sic).   He  gave  answers  consistent
             with the background evidence about his claimed home area,  the
             Iranian currency, towns and cities and the  Iranian  flag.   I
             also accept that had he left Iran at the age  of  4  he  would
             have limited if any memory of Iran and what he knew  would  be
             second hand".

12. The judge then went on to consider background evidence  concerning  the
    influence of Iran in the IKR and concluded that the appellant's answers
    were not consistent with the background evidence (see paras 37-41).  In
    particular, the judge did not accept that the appellant's answer  given
    at Q53 of his asylum interview  that  "Iraq  is  completely  under  the
    control of the PMF and Iranian government"  was  plausible  as  it  was
    clearly not the case.

13. Thereafter, the judge identified  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    account about his family hiding from the Etelaa't in the IKR (para  42)
    and that it was implausible that the appellant  and  his  family  would
    leave because a person in the passport office informed  him  that  Iraq
    was under the control of the PMF and the Iranian authorities (para 43).
     The judge also dealt with the appellant's attendance  at  anti-Iranian
    demonstrations in London and Facebook posts (at paras 44-46).

14. At para 48, to which I shall return shortly under ground 3,  the  judge
    observed  that  the  appellant  had  not  taken  reasonable  steps   by
    approaching the Iraqi Embassy as to his nationality.

15. Then at para 49 the judge reached the following conclusion:

         "49. Having taken all of the evidence into account I find that  the
             appellant's account is not a credible one.  I  do  not  accept
             that the appellant is a national of  Iran.   I  find,  on  the
             evidence before me, that, as clearly asserted by  him  in  the
             interview, he had an Iraqi passport and CSID.  I find that his
             claim that he would be at risk in Iraq from the Etelaat is not
             credible for the reasons set out above.  He claims that he was
             never threatened or targeted by Etelaat and he left because of
             what was said to him by a passport officer.  I do  not  accept
             that this is plausible, in the view of [ ] both the background
             evidence and inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence.   I
             also find, given the contradictions between his oral  evidence
             and evidence in interview, that he has aunts and uncles in the
             KRI.  The appellant has not argued he would  not  be  able  to
             obtain a CSID or redocumentation within a reasonable time  and
             find that he has relatives in the KRI who  would  be  able  to
             assist him".

16. As a  consequence,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    international protection grounds.

The Appellant's Grounds

17. The appellant relies upon the grounds upon which permission was  sought
    and which  Mr  Gayle  developed  in  his  oral  submissions.   Although
    unenumerated, there are essentially three grounds which  I  shall,  for
    convenience, refer to as Grounds 1, 2 and 3.

18. First, the judge erred in law in finding that the appellant was not  an
    Iranian national but was a citizen of Iraq by  failing  to  fully  take
    into account the appellant's answers in his asylum  interview  relevant
    to his nationality.  In particular, the judge failed  to  resolve  what
    she herself recognised  was  "confused"  evidence  in  his  answers  at
    interview.  (Ground 1)

19. Secondly, the judge  erred  in  finding  it  was  implausible  that  he
    appellant and his family fled Iraq after being warned by an official of
    Iranian influence  in  the  IKR  when  that  was  consistent  with  the
    background evidence.  (Ground 2)

20. Thirdly, the judge erred in law in finding that  the  appellant  was  a
    national of Iraq rather than Iran  by  taking  into  account  that  the
    appellant had failed to take steps to approach  the  Iraqi  Embassy  in
    order to establish that he was not a national of that country.  (Ground
    3)

Discussion

21. I will deal with each ground in turn.

    Ground 1

22. Under ground 1, the appellant relies upon a number of answers given  by
    him in his asylum interview which it is said demonstrate that he was an
    Iranian national rather than an Iraqi national.

23. Mr Gayle took me to a number  of  answers  in  the  appellant's  asylum
    interview, for example Qs 11, 13, 18, 31, 37, 39, 42-46, 54, 64-67, 71-
    72, 110-113, 115, 117.  In these answers, Mr Gayle submitted  that  the
    appellant had repeatedly identified that  he  was  an  Iranian  citizen
    rather than an Iraqi citizen.  He submitted that  the  judge  had  been
    wrong to find, and  rely  upon  in  reaching  her  findings,  that  the
    appellant had said that he was in possession of an Iraqi passport and a
    CSID.  Both of those documents, of course, are documents issued only to
    Iraqi nationals.  Mr Gayle submitted that the appellant had  said  that
    the answers he had given were mistranslated.  He had not said  that  he
    had a passport but rather that he had  a  "temporary  residence  card".
    That was a document which he required  as  a  non-Iraqi  national.   Mr
    Gayle submitted that the appellant had, at a number of  points  in  his
    interview, referred to his status and seeking to  renew  it  which  was
    only relevant if he was not an  Iraqi  national.   Mr  Gayle  accepted,
    however, that there was no evidence before the judge (or indeed  before
    me) as to the nature of any temporary residence cards that a  non-Iraqi
    national would require or as to when they would be renewed.  There  was
    also no evidence concerning when a CSID would need to be  renewed.   Mr
    Gayle submitted that,  as  the  judge  recognised,  the  appellant  was
    plainly confused and she,  in  reaching  her  adverse  finding,  failed
    properly to engage with the confusion and resolve it  in  reaching  her
    findings.

24. On behalf of the  respondent,  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the  judge's
    finding was  properly  open  to  her.   He  submitted  that  there  was
    obviously conflicting evidence which the judge  had  to  weigh  up  and
    consider.  He submitted that the  fact  was  that  the  appellant  gave
    inconsistent evidence that he was an Iraqi citizen and was  an  Iranian
    citizen.  He relied on what the judge  had  said  at  para  34  of  her
    determination that the appellant had clearly said that he had an  Iraqi
    passport and CSID.  Mr Avery submitted that at paras  31-36  the  judge
    had adequately dealt  with  the  evidence  and  reached  a  sustainable
    finding.

25. There is no doubt, as the  judge  accepted,  the  appellant  has  given
    inconsistent evidence as to his nationality.  He has said  that  he  is
    both Iranian and Iraqi.  He says that he had an Iraqi passport and CSID
    which would only be consistent with his being an  Iraqi  national.   He
    has also said that he had a temporary status document - which would  be
    consistent with him being a non-Iraqi national - and that it  was  that
    document which he was referring to, and  which  was  mistranslated,  as
    being his passport.

26. Faced with this conflicting evidence, the judge had to  decide  whether
    the appellant had discharged the burden of proof, albeit to  the  lower
    standard of real risk or reasonable  likelihood,  that  he  was  as  he
    claimed an Iranian national.

27. The judge dealt with the appellant's claim that he had not said that he
    had an Iraqi passport and his claim that there  was  a  mistranslation.
    The judge pointed out that this was not raised after the interview  and
    before his witness statement prepared for the hearing despite the  fact
    that he was given a copy of the recording of that interview.  The judge
    also pointed out that the appellant had referred to a CSID on a  number
    of occasions and that, given the context and content of his answers, he
    could only have been referring to a CSID.  It is not, so far  as  I  am
    aware, suggested that  the  reference  to  a  civil  status  ID  was  a
    mistranslation.  Mr Gayle's point in relation  to  these  documents  is
    that if the appellant were seeking a  renewal  of  his  status,  as  he
    claimed he was on a number of occasions in the interview, he could only
    have been talking about a document which  a  non-Iraqi  national  would
    require.

28. The difficulty with this argument, as I pointed to Mr Gayle during  his
    submissions, is that there was no evidence before the judge, and  there
    is still no evidence in this appeal, as to the nature of any  temporary
    residence document that a non-Iraqi national would require or  that  it
    would be renewed  at  a  certain  interval.   Likewise,  there  was  no
    evidence as to whether the CSID which  the  appellant  referred  to  as
    possessing, would itself require renewal and so the  renewal  exercise,
    to which the appellant referred, would not necessarily be  inconsistent
    with his referring to a CSID.

29.  The  plain  fact  is,  as  Mr  Avery  submitted,  the  appellant  gave
    conflicting evidence which the judge had to  resolve  and,  in  effect,
    concluded that the  detail  was  problematic  and  consistent  with  an
    individual not telling a truthful account.  Having taken  into  account
    all the evidence that was available at the hearing in  both  interviews
    and for the purposes of the appeal, and having considered the  specific
    points raised in  the  appellant's  favour  in  particular  as  to  the
    mistranslation of what he had said at his asylum interview,  the  judge
    gave detailed and cogent reasons for concluding that  she  should  give
    weight to the  appellant's  answer  that  he  had  possessed  an  Iraqi
    passport and CSID and was, therefore, an Iraqi national.  Those reasons
    can only be challenged now if no reasonable  judge  properly  directing
    herself could reasonably and rationally reach the finding that she did.
     I am wholly unpersuaded that the judge's finding,  having  taken  into
    account all  the  evidence  and  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, was outside the range of reasonable findings that the  judge
    was entitled to make on that evidence.

30. For those reasons, I reject ground 1.

    Ground 2

31. Mr Gayle submitted that the judge had been wrong to  find  in  para  43
    that it was implausible that the appellant and his  family  would  have
    been advised by a person in the passport office to leave because of the
    influence of the Iranian government in the  IKR.   Mr  Gayle  submitted
    that what was said was not inconsistent with the background evidence.

32. The judge set the background evidence out at paras 37-41  and  accepted
    that there was evidence of Iran's influence in the  IKR  and  of  armed
    attacks and assassinations (see para  41).   However,  the  appellant's
    case was that he and his family had been advised to  leave  Iraq  by  a
    person in the passport office because Iraq was  "completely  under  the
    control of the PMF and Iranian government".  It was that aspect of  the
    appellant's evidence which the judge found was implausible  because  it
    is clearly not the case that the Iranian government and PMF (an Iranian
    backed militia) are completely in control of Iraq, including  the  IKR.
    It was what the appellant claimed the passport officer  had  told  them
    that was implausible - and undoubtedly that  was  a  finding  that  was
    reasonably open to the judge - rather than the entirety of the  account
    that he had been advised to  leave  the  IKR  by  an  official  in  the
    passport office.  The basis on which he was said to have  been  advised
    undercut the veracity of that aspect  of  his  account.   There  is  no
    proper basis for concluding that  the  judge  was  not  reasonably  and
    rationally entitled to reach that finding even taking into account  the
    background evidence that the Iranian authorities had some influence  in
    the IKR.

33. For these reasons I reject ground 2.

    Ground 3

34. The appellant's third ground contends that the judge was wrong in  para
    48 of her determination to take into account, as  relevant  to  whether
    the appellant had established he was a national of Iran rather  than  a
    national of Iraq, he had not taken reasonable steps by approaching  the
    Iraqi Embassy.

35. At para 48, the judge said this:

         "48.  The  appellant's  answers  in  interview  provide  sufficient
             evidence to show that he could assert citizenship of Iraq.   I
             find  that  according  to  the  principles  set  out   in   MW
             (Nationality; Art 4 QD;  duty  to  substantiate)  Eritrea  the
             appellant has failed to substantiate his nationality as he has
             not taken reasonable steps to  establish  that  he  is  not  a
             national of Iraq.  He has not approached  the  Iraqi  Embassy.
             He  has  also  made  no  attempts  to  contact  his  remaining
             relatives in Iraq which he said he had in interview".

36. Mr Gayle did not seek to contend that the legal approach adopted by the
    judge was necessarily wrong.  In a number of cases to which  the  judge
    refers at paras 28-30, the Court of Appeal and the Upper  Tribunal  has
    held that, in determining whether an  individual  is  of  a  particular
    nationality, a claimant should act bona fide and  take  all  reasonable
    practical steps.  Instead,  Mr  Gayle  submitted  that  it  was  not  a
    "reasonable step" to  require  the  appellant  to  approach  the  Iraqi
    Embassy as there was no evidence that the Iraqi Embassy  would  respond
    to an approach in which an individual sought to assert they were not an
    Iraqi national.

37. In MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  289,  Elias  LJ  at  [50]-[53]
    identified the requirement that an applicant act  bona  fide  and  take
    "all reasonable practical steps" to obtain documents to enable  her  to
    return.  Elias LJ referred to the so-called Bradshaw principle  ([1994]
    Imm AR 359) and that this may  include  obtaining  evidence  concerning
    enquiries made to an embassy.  He said this:

         "50. In my judgment, where the essential issue before  the  AIT  is
         whether someone will or will not be returned, the  Tribunal  should
         in the normal case require the applicant to act bona fide and take
         all reasonably practicable steps to seek to  obtain  the  requisite
         documents to enable her to return. There  may  be  cases  where  it
         would be unreasonable to require this, such  as  if  disclosure  of
         identity might put the applicant at risk, or perhaps third parties,
         such as relatives of the applicant who may be at risk in  the  home
         state if it is known that the applicant has claimed asylum. That is
         not this case, however. There is no reason why the appellant should
         not herself visit the  embassy  to  seek  to  obtain  the  relevant
         papers. Indeed, as I have said, she did so  but  wrongly  told  the
         staff there that she was Eritrean.

         51.  I am satisfied that there is no injustice to the appellant  in
         this approach: it does not put her at risk. The real risk  test  is
         adopted in asylum cases because of  the  difficulty  of  predicting
         what will happen in the future in another country, and because  the
         consequences of reaching  the  wrong  decision  will  often  be  so
         serious for the applicant.  That  is  not  the  case  here.  As  Ms
         Giovannetti pointed out, there is no risk of ill  treatment  if  an
         application to the embassy is made from the United Kingdom, even if
         it is refused.

         52.  Furthermore, this approach to the issue of return is  entirely
         consistent with the  well-established  principle  that,  before  an
         applicant for asylum can claim the protection of a surrogate state,
         he or she must first take all steps to secure protection  from  the
         home state. That was the approach adopted in Bradshaw, to which  I
         have made reference. It can be seen as an aspect of the duty placed
         on an applicant to co-operate in the asylum process. Paragraph  205
         of the UNHCR handbook expressly states that an applicant for asylum
         must, if necessary, make an effort to procure  additional  evidence
         to assist the decision maker. Bradshaw is an example  of  such  a
         case. The issue was  whether  the  applicant  was  stateless.  Lord
         MacLean held that before a person could be regarded  as  stateless,
         she should make an application for  citizenship  of  the  countries
         with which she was most closely connected.

         53.  Any other approach leads, in my view, to  absurd  results.  To
         vary an example given by my Lord, Lord Justice Stanley  Burnton  in
         argument: the expert evidence might show that three out of  ten  in
         the appellant's position  were  not  allowed  to  return.  If  that
         evidence were accepted it would plainly be enough to  constitute  a
         real risk that the appellant would not  be  successful  in  seeking
         authorisation to  return.  But  it  would  be  strange  if  by  the
         appellant's wilful inaction she could  prevent  the  Tribunal  from
         having the best evidence there is of the state's  attitude  to  her
         return. She could refuse to put to the test whether  she  might  be
         one of the seven who would be successful. It would in  my  view  be
         little short of absurd  if  she  could  succeed  in  her  claim  by
         requiring the court to speculate on a question which she was  in  a
         position actually to have resolved."

38. The need for a claimant to take "all reasonable and practical steps" in
    relation to nationality issues identified in MA(Ethiopia) applies  also
    where the individual claims to be  stateless  (see  AS(Guinea)  v  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 2234 at [57] per Lord Kitchen).




39. In MW (Nationality; Art 4 QD; duty to substantiate) Eritrea [2016] UKUT
    00453 (IAC), the UT applied the approach in MA (Ethiopia) in  the  case
    of an individual whose nationality was in issue and whom  it  was  said
    should have approached the Ethiopian Embassy.  The UT accepted  that  a
    judge had not erred in law when he had  taken  into  account  that  the
    individual had not taken "all reasonable steps" when engaging with  the
    Ethiopian Embassy by the provision only of partial information.

40. In this appeal, the appellant made no  attempt  to  contact  the  Iraqi
    Embassy to establish that he was not, in fact, an Iraqi  national.   It
    is not suggested that the appellant, given his  fear,  should  approach
    the Iranian Embassy  given  the  appellant's  claimed  fear  (see  e.g.
    MA(Ethiopia) at [50] per Elias LJ and [79] per Stanley Burnton LJ).  Mr
    Gayle submitted that there was no evidence  that  the  appellant  would
    have received a response from the Iraqi Embassy.  But, of course,  even
    if that was the case - and there was no evidence before the  judge  (or
    before me) as to how the Iraqi Embassy might or might  not  respond  to
    such an approach - there would at least  have  been  evidence  of  that
    approach and, if it be the case, a lack  of  response  from  the  Iraqi
    Embassy.  Of course, there might have been a response  but  without  an
    approach the judge could not know what the  Iraqi  Embassy  would  have
    done or said.

41. In my judgment, the judge was  properly  entitled  to  take  that  into
    account as relevant to establishing the bona fides of  the  appellant's
    claim to be an Iranian (rather than an Iraqi)  national.   It  was,  of
    course, only one of a number of reasons that led the judge to reach her
    finding as to the appellant's nationality.  In doing so, the judge  did
    not err in law and her approach was consistent with the case  law  both
    in the Court of Appeal and the Upper Tribunal.

42. For these reasons, I reject ground 3.

Decision

43. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law.  That decision, therefore, stands.

44. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               6 August 2021



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Murray,  having  dismissed  the  appeal,  made  no  fee  award.   That
decision also stands.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               6 August 2021

