
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02795/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2019                      |On 15 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'RKM'
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
were given ex tempore at the end of the hearing on 30 July 2019.

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision (the 'Decision') of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot, (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 20 May 2019,
by which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
refusal of his protection and human rights claims on 13 March 2019.  That
decision in turn refused the appellant's application for leave to remain
based on his claim of asylum and under articles 2 and 3 of the European
Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').

In essence, the appellant's claims involved the following issues: whether
the appellant's father, who had been a member of the PUK, but who had left
it because of corruption within the party, was tortured and murdered in
February 2017 at the behest of the PUK and KDP, as a result of having
documents implicating them in corruption.  It was said that the father had
shown these to a friend, who was a judge.  The appellant claimed to have
reported to the police his father's murder and the associated corruption,
as a result of which he himself was threatened by local police and received
threatening phone calls.  He claimed to have reported matters again and was
then shot at outside a supermarket on 19 March 2017.  He claimed that on 5
April 2017, men tried to seize his wife as she was picking up their son
from school.  She resisted, the family went into hiding, and fled.

The core points taken against the appellant by the respondent related to
her rejection of the appellant's father being involved in the PUK, because
of inconsistencies in the appellant's account at interview; her rejection
of his father's death at the hands of the PUK and KDP, which, the
respondent said, was based on what the appellant had been told by a family
friend; her view that the reason why the appellant was shot at, if at all,
was speculative, as was the attempted kidnapping of the appellant's wife.
The respondent also took issue with the fact that the appellant had
travelled through, but not claimed asylum in, Italy, so that section 8 of
the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004 applied.

The FtT's Decision

The FtT made an analysis of the evidence, running from paragraphs [22] to
[34] of the Decision.  The FtT was not impressed by various aspects of the
evidence, finding there to be a lack of plausibility and a lack of what he
believed to have been reasonably obtainable supporting documents such as
the death certificate of the appellant's father.  Having considered the
evidence as a whole, the FtT found that there was not sufficient evidence
that the father was killed. Even if he had died, the FtT was not satisfied
as to the plausibility of the death being attributable to the PUK or the
KDP, who were political rivals in the area.  The FtT was not satisfied that
the appellant or his wife suffered adverse interest.  In terms of risk on
return, there was no reason why the appellant and his family could not
obtain fresh passports and return to the IKR.  Even if he were of adverse
interest to the PUK in Sulaymaniyah, there was no reason to think he would
be of adverse interest to the KDP in Erbil.

The Grounds of Appeal and Grant of Permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially that the FtT
failed to make any findings on the evidence of the appellant's wife, which
the FtT described as being consistent with the appellant's account, at [17]
of the Decision.  It was said that the appellant's wife's witness evidence
was not limited to the claimed abduction, but also gave details of the
kidnapping and murder of her father-in-law; how she found out about that
incident, the discussion, in its aftermath, amongst other women in the
family; the conversation with the appellant's father's friend who was a
judge; and the injuries sustained by her husband following the shooting.
At [30] of the Decision, the FtT had referred to not accepting that
attempts were made to kidnap the appellant's wife, but without reasons for
that finding.  The failure to make findings on the appellant's wife's
evidence or explain why he did not accept her account was material.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey granted permission to appeal on 28 June
2019.  He regarded the Decision as containing an arguable error of law in
relation to the adequacy of findings as to the corroborative evidence of
the appellant's wife.  It was not clear from the Decision whether her
evidence was accepted; what weight, if any, was given to it; and if it was
rejected, the reason why.  Judge Povey regarded the wife's evidence as
potentially material to the assessment of the appellant's credibility.  The
grant of permission was not limited in its scope.

The Hearing before us

The Appellant's submissions

Ms Sanders asked us to consider, particularly at [25] of the Decision, that
the FtT's credibility assessment had focussed on the appellant, rather than
his wife.  There had not been a separate criticism of the wife's
credibility, other than to note that her version of events was consistent
with the appellant's.  There was no separate consideration of the wife's
credibility and the extent to which it was corroborative of the appellant's
evidence. Instead, at [29] and [30] of the Decision, the FtT rejected the
appellant's wife's account of her kidnap, but with no explanation for that
rejection.   While Mr Clarke now sought to criticise a large part of her
evidence as being what others had told her, first, her evidence related to
discussions at the time of events, rather than months afterwards, and so
did have some evidential weight. Second, her evidence about the appellant's
father's coffin not being opened at his funeral and the reasons for that
(namely bullet wounds) was her own evidence, as was her experience of her
attempted kidnap.

The Respondent's submissions

Mr Clarke argued that the core focus of the appeal was the fact of, and
reasons for, the murder of the appellant's father.  The FtT had adequately
considered and explained his concerns about the lack of the death
certificate, which was readily obtainable; the quality of the written
correspondence from the father's friend; and the objective evidence about
the likely adverse relations between the PUK and the KDP. All damaged the
plausibility of the account.  The Decision had focussed less on the witness
evidence of either the appellant or his wife.  The FtT had based his
rejection of the appellant's account on the wider evidence and it would be
odd if the appellant's wife's evidence, most of which was hearsay, could
dispel the FtT's concerns based on the wider evidence.  There was a
substantial degree of overlap between the witness evidence of the appellant
and his wife. In reality, they were 'part and parcel' of the couple's
witness evidence.  It was implicit in the Decision that when the FtT did
not accept the appellant's evidence, he had also not accepted the
appellant's wife's evidence.

The FtT had adopted a balanced view when assessing the appellant's
credibility, finding that the appellant's father had been a member of the
PUK. The FtT had also recognised the risk to whistleblowers in relation to
corruption.  Nevertheless, the FtT had not accepted the account in relation
to the appellant's father's death and the subsequent adverse interest.
That was a finding open to the FtT on the evidence before him.

Our Decision on the Error of Law

On the one hand, we accept Mr Clarke's submission that there is a
substantial degree of overlap in the witness evidence of the appellant and
his wife. That is not something to be unexpected where people go through
shared experiences.  We also accept Mr Clarke's submission that the FtT
considered, and explained, his concerns about the wider evidence. This
included the absence of the appellant's father's death certificate and the
plausibility of PUK and KDP connivance in a murder, when the objective
evidence suggests fierce rivalry.

On the other hand, we accept Ms Sanders' submission that an assessment of
the appellant's wife's evidence was material and may have had an impact on
the FtT's conclusions about the appellant's credibility.  The crux of the
appeal is the appellant's credibility.  Even where, as here, a substantial
amount of the appellant's wife's evidence was to recount what she had heard
and been told, we accept that she was relaying what she had heard and been
told shortly after the events in question, so that her evidence was capable
of carrying some potential evidential weight.  We agree that it is not
clear what weight, if any, the FtT attached to her evidence; and if not,
why not.

We further accept Ms Sanders' submission that in an assessment of
credibility, it was not sufficient to reason, as the Decision possibly
suggests, that because the appellant's account is disbelieved, therefore
the appellant's wife's evidence is also to be disbelieved.  We accept the
submission that if the appellant's wife's account is assessed as not adding
any weight, the FtT must explain its rationale for that assessment.  Whilst
there was a substantial degree of overlap in relation to the evidence,
there was not an entire overlap.  One example is the appellant's wife's
evidence about discussions with relatives at the time of the appellant's
father's funeral, and the fact of the funeral not being an 'open coffin'
funeral, for reasons she explained.   The appellant's wife's evidence was
potentially corroborative and the FtT erred in failing to explain its
reasoning as to the weight he attached to her evidence.

The lack of adequate reasoning was material to the Decision.  There had
been positive findings in respect of the appellant's account such as the
appellant's father's membership of the PUK and the potential risks to
whistle-blowers.  Whilst other evidence was found as weighing against the
appellant, we are satisfied that the potentially corroborative evidence of
the appellant's wife was material when weighing up the credibility and
plausibility of the appellant's account, in the context of the lower
standard of proof and the need for anxious scrutiny of a protection claim.
The lack of reasoning in relation to the appellant's wife's evidence was a
material error of law. The Decision cannot stand and we set it aside.

Disposal

 1. With reference to paragraph 7.2  of  the  Practice  Direction  and  the
    necessary fact-finding, this is clearly a case that has to be  remitted
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for   a   complete   rehearing.    Both
    representatives were agreed on this course of  action  should  we  find
    there to be material errors of law.

 2. The remittal shall involve a complete  rehearing  of  the  appeal.  All
    aspects of the claims must be addressed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
we set it aside.

We remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

1. This appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
rehearing.

2. The remitted appeal shall not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Talbot.


Anonymity Order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court  proceedings.
We make this order because the subject matter of the  appeal  relates  to  a
protection claim.  The parties are at liberty to  apply  to  discharge  this
order, with reasons.


Signed   J Keith                             Date         9 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

While we have allowed the appeal, costs are reserved  until  the  First-tier
Tribunal has remade the Decision.


Signed   J Keith                             Date         9 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

