
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02091/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th September 2018                        |On 25th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Bernita [B]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Kouma (Solicitor), Migrant Legal Action
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Abebrese, promulgated on 29th March 2018, following a hearing  at
    Harmondsworth on 14th March 2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matters comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, a female, and was born  on  22nd
    September 1960.  She appealed against the decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 1st February 2018,  refusing  her  application
    for asylum and human rights protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC
    395.

The Judge's Determination

 3. At the hearing before Judge Abebrese,  the  Appellant's  representative
    informed the Tribunal that she was no longer relying  upon  the  asylum
    and humanitarian aspect of the claim, and that the sole  basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim was now on her private and  family  life.   This  was
    based upon the Appellant's claim that she had resided in the  UK  since
    30th June 2003,  had  no  home  to  return  to  in  Jamaica,  would  be
    unemployed there, and unable to support herself upon return, making her
    homeless and destitute.  As against this, the Appellant was living with
    her daughter in the UK for the last fifteen years,  was  providing  her
    with  support  and  assistance,  as  documented  in  a   psychologist's
    assessment report, by supporting her grandchildren there,  who  without
    her, would suffer significant disruption, because the Appellant was one
    of the primary carers for  these  children,  given  the  mental  health
    issues suffered by their mother (the daughter of the Appellant).

 4. At the hearing before Judge Abebrese, the Appellant's daughter was  not
    in attendance, although it was stated that she  had  intended  to  give
    evidence, but could  not  attend  because  of  her  medical  condition.
    Reliance at the hearing was placed upon the Appellant's  own  evidence,
    what was set out by the daughter, and what appeared in the  independent
    psychological assessment report.  The  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    accepted the relationship between the Appellant and  her  daughter  was
    one of a parental relationship, but the  daughter  was  an  adult,  had
    previously been  living  independently,  and  under  the  principle  in
    Kugathas, there was no special element of dependency in relation to  an
    adult daughter and her Appellant mother in this  case.   The  Appellant
    could only succeed if there were exceptional circumstances which  meant
    that removal would be unjustifiably harsh for the Appellant.

 5. With respect to the Appellant's relationship with  her  granddaughters,
    the Respondent did not accept that she had assumed sole  responsibility
    for any of the granddaughters.

 6. In her oral evidence before Judge Abebrese, the Appellant explained her
    relationship, with  the  grandchild,  [J]  (referring  to  her  witness
    statement at paragraphs 7 to 10), and pointing  out  that  this  is  an
    extremely close relationship, in that the Appellant has been  vital  in
    the child's upbringing, because of her  medical  condition,  which  has
    meant that it has been the Appellant who has been  taking  [J]  to  the
    doctor or the hospital for medical appointments.  With respect  to  the
    Appellant's other three children, from a different father, in this case
    the father does assist with his children and takes them  to  school  on
    some days during the week, and he has them in alternative weekends, but
    the Appellant takes his daughter's children to school two days a  week.
    One of the Appellant's daughters, [T] (being one of the  two  who  live
    with the Appellant's daughter in the same household) does not leave the
    house for several days  because  of  her  medical  condition,  and  the
    circumstances of this  child's  condition  are  also  set  out  in  the
    psychological assessment, it being the case that she has been diagnosed
    with social anxiety, depression, and phobia since 2008.  The  Appellant
    gave evidence before the Tribunal that it is the  Appellant's  presence
    which mitigates the medical condition of the children.   The  Appellant
    also stated that she cannot reside with her siblings in Jamaica because
    they would be looking to her for "favours", and she has  four  siblings
    in Jamaica, where she worked as a domestic worker, before coming to the
    UK.  She now has a defined role with her daughter as a full-time career
    because due to  her  condition,  it  is  the  Appellant  that  provides
    support, because her daughter is unable to leave the house.

 7. Against this background, the judge made  the  following  findings.   He
    found the evidence of the Appellant and her daughter to  be  consistent
    and credible and found  that  there  was  evidence  of  a  relationship
    between the Appellant and her daughter over and above the normal family
    ties as stated in Kugathas.  (See paragraph 20).   He  found  that  the
    decision of the Respondent did not comply with the Section 55 BCIA 2009
    obligations, given the reliance on the Appellant by her daughter, whose
    medical condition was not challenged by the Respondent at the  hearing.



 8. In addition, the conclusions of the independent assessment, in  respect
    of the relationship between the Appellant and  the  daughter,  together
    with the two granddaughters, especially [J],  whose  father  left  this
    country five years ago to return to Jamaica, means that  the  Appellant
    plays a key role in ensuring that the essential duties are carried  out
    in the household which her daughter is unable  to  do  because  of  her
    condition.  In the circumstances it would not be in the best  interests
    of the children  to  have  the  Appellant  removed  from  this  country
    (paragraph 20).

 9. In terms of the application of the law, the judge went on to state that
    the Appellant's removal from the UK would contravene the provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE because her return to Jamaica  would  mean  that  "she
    would face very significant  obstacles  because  even  though  she  has
    family in Jamaica she has very little contact with them on the evidence
    and she would find it difficult to settle and obtain employment at  her
    age and with very little skills".  This was despite the fact  that  the
    Appellant "does have a clear sense of the culture and societal norms in
    Jamaica where she was born and lived in for the majority of her  life",
    but it was the case that "she now has stronger  ties  in  this  country
    with her daughter and her grandchildren and to  remove  her  from  this
    would have a devastating  and  everlasting  impact  on  all  concerned"
    (paragraph 21).

10. The judge then went on to consider the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights, and applied the Razgar principles (see paragraphs  22  to  24),
    observing that the Appellant spoke good  English,  had  taken  positive
    steps to engage and make a contribution to her community  and  society,
    and not been a burden on the  taxpayer  in  this  country.   The  judge
    especially pointed that, "I have not taken into account any  period  in
    this country where her immigration status  was  precarious"  (paragraph
    24).

11. Applying the Razgar steps, the judge concluded that the decision of the
    Respondent was not  proportionate  because  the  Appellant  had  formed
    strong ties in this country with her  daughter  and  children  and  her
    presence in the country "is crucial because of the medical condition of
    her daughter which does require the presence of the  Appellant  in  the
    household,  the  Appellant's   daughter   has   four   children.    The
    relationship which the Appellant has with [J],  is  exceptional  in  my
    view because of the absence of her father  and  the  inability  of  the
    Appellant's daughter to carry out all of  her  duties  to  her  as  her
    mother because of her medical condition" (paragraph 25).

12. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

13. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    concluded that under paragraph 276ADE there would be "very  significant
    obstacles" to the Appellant integrating in Jamaica.  The  reasons  that
    the judge gave was that the  Appellant  had  little  contact  with  her
    family in Jamaica, and that she would find it hard to settle, and  hard
    to get work.  Such a conclusion did not satisfy the high  threshold  of
    "very significant obstacles".  The Appellant lived for 43 years of  her
    life in Jamaica.  She came  to  the  UK  as  a  visitor  and  then  she
    overstayed.  Her residence in the UK has been predominantly a matter of
    her personal choice.  There is no reason why she could not fit into her
    home country without a problem.  She had failed to show  that  she  was
    incapable of working in Jamaica or unable to find accommodation  there.



14. Second, the judge incorrectly applied the test in Kugathas because  the
    judge failed to show how the high threshold of elements  of  dependency
    beyond the normal emotional ties had been met.

15. Third, the Appellant's daughter herself can rely upon  other  childcare
    services or friends to look after her children.  The Appellant  herself
    had no legal basis to remain in the UK and  was  merely  acting  as  an
    unpaid carer for her grandchildren.  There were no  compelling  reasons
    why the Appellant could not return to Jamaica.  Section 55 of the  BCIA
    did not take matters further.

16. On 9th August 2018, permission to appeal was granted by  the  Tribunal.
    First, it was said that the judge erroneously concluded arguably,  that
    there were "very significant obstacles" to the Appellant's  integration
    into Jamaican society,  in  the  context  of  the  private  life  Rules
    requirements, where she held the nationality and lived in  Jamaica  for
    43 years, working as a domestic worker and having four siblings  there.
    Second, this arguably erroneous assessment was then taken  forward  and
    infected the proportionality assessment that the judge then carried out
    under Article 8, because although it was the case that  the  judge  has
    expressly stated that he would discount the precarious  period  of  the
    Appellant's stay, where, after the six month period of lawful entry  as
    a visitor, she had unlawfully then gone on to remain in  the  UK  since
    December 2003, such a statement was incoherent in the  context  of  the
    conclusion reached, by the judge, that removal of the  Appellant  would
    be disproportionate to her Article 8 interests.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me on 27th September 2018, Ms Pal,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,
    submitted that the judge in his Article 8 consideration failed to weigh
    in the proportionality consideration, in that the Appellant had come to
    the UK as a  visitor,  put  in  an  asylum  claim  which  he  had  then
    abandoned, and remained in the UK unlawfully, after  the  asylum  claim
    was refused in June 2013.  At the hearing in March 2014 she had decided
    not  to  pursue  her  asylum  appeal.   Importantly,  in  the   judge's
    assessment (at paragraphs 22 to 26) of how the provisions under Article
    8  of  the  ECHR  fell  to  be  applied,  there  is   no   mention   of
    proportionality, as a consideration, the factors in  also  the  Section
    117 requirement, to bear in mind that immigration  control  is  in  the
    public interest.

18. For her part,  Ms  Kouma  submitted  that  to  the  decision  of  Judge
    Abebrese, amount to nothing more than a disagreement with his findings.
     She carefully addressed this Tribunal on the judge's assessment of the
    facts before him.  The judge looked at the  position  of  each  of  the
    children of the  Appellant's  daughter,  in  the  lives  of  which  the
    Appellant played such  an  important  role,  and  this  is  clear  from
    paragraph 15 of the determination, very early on, as the  judge  begins
    to look at the situation before him.  There is the child, [J],  who  is
    "extremely close to her grandmother" because her father  has  left  her
    and gone  to  Jamaica,  and  the  Appellant  has  "been  vital  in  her
    upbringing because of her daughter's medical condition". There is  also
    the Appellant's other daughter, living in the same household, [T],  who
    also because of her medical condition does  not  leave  the  house  for
    several days, and here also her condition is mitigated by the  presence
    of the Appellant in the house (paragraph 15).

19. Thereafter, the judge considers whether, in these circumstances,  there
    is a relationship between the Appellant and her daughter which is  over
    and above the normal family ties, as  stated  in  Kugathas,  which  one
    would normally find, and against the background set out, the  judge  is
    clear, that this does go beyond normal family ties.  On any view,  this
    conclusion was one which was open to the judge, given the role that the
    Appellant played in the life of her own daughter, by looking after  her
    grandchildren, together with other children, namely the three that  are
    born of a different father, and who live elsewhere, where the Appellant
    also plays a role by taking these children to school when she can.  The
    findings reached by the judge are borne out by  the  evidence.   It  is
    unsurprising, therefore, that the judge does end  with  the  conclusion
    that, with respect to the Appellant "to remove her from this would have
    a devastating and everlasting impact on all concerned" (paragraph  21).



20. However, she submitted that it does not end there.  After  setting  out
    the applicable  legal  provisions,  which  do  refer  to  Section  117B
    expressly in terms of the law as it is (see  paragraph  24)  the  judge
    does go on to engage in the  balancing  exercise  at  the  end  of  the
    provisions that she has set out, before concluding  (at  paragraph  25)
    that "the decision of the Respondent is not proportionate  because  the
    Appellant has formed strong ties in this country with her daughter  and
    children and that her presence in this country is  crucial  because  of
    the medical condition of her daughter ..." (paragraph 25).

21. In reply, Ms Pal returned to say that the assessment at paragraph 24 is
    actually not clear.  The judge states that,  "I  have  not  taken  into
    account any period in this country where  her  immigration  status  was
    precarious", but then makes a finding that belies that statement.

Error of Law

22. I am satisfied, that notwithstanding  Ms  Kouma's  well-structured  and
    careful submissions before me, that the decision of the judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(1)(ii) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

23.  First,  in  what  is  an   otherwise   comprehensive   and   sensitive
    determination by the judge,  it  is  not  clear  that  the  concept  of
    "integration" was properly evaluated, in the context of the requirement
    that there needs to be "very significant obstacles" to the  Appellant's
    integration back in Jamaica, so  as  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraphs 276ADE.

24. In Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, it was explained  that  the  concept  of
    "integration" is one which  is  "a  broad  one"  because,  "it  is  not
    confined to the mere ability to find a job or sustain life while living
    in the other country."  Instead, the term "integration"  is  one  which
    "calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made  as  to  whether  the
    individual would be enough of an insider in terms of understanding  how
    life in the society, in that other country is carried on and a capacity
    to participate in it, so  as  to  have  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
    accepted there" (paragraph 14).  The  Appellant  in  this  case  is  an
    "insider" as far as Jamaican life and society is concerned.  She  holds
    Jamaican nationality, had lived there for 43 years,  and  worked  as  a
    domestic worker, with her family life of four siblings,  when  she  was
    there.  The assessment that there were "very significant obstacles" was
    accordingly not made out by the judge.

25. Second, this assessment was then fed into  the  Article  8  assessment,
    which required a consideration of how  the  balance  of  considerations
    fell to be applied.  It is a significant feature of  this  appeal  that
    the Appellant's daughter herself did not give evidence.  Yet the  judge
    found that, "I found the evidence of the Appellant and her daughter  to
    be consistent  and  credible"  (paragraph  20).   She  was  not  cross-
    examined.  On the other hand, I do not accept at all,  that  the  judge
    was wrong in concluding that the relationship between the Appellant and
    her daughter exceeded the normal family ties, as  stated  in  Kugathas,
    because since her arrival in the UK, the Appellant has been living with
    her daughter, and performing a undoubtedly valuable family role in  the
    household, which has been recognised expressly in the medical  reports,
    which the judge properly takes into account.

26. The judge may very well have been correct in the conclusion that  given
    this arrangement that the Appellant  now  has  with  her  daughter  the
    grandchildren that "to remove her from this would  have  a  devastating
    and everlasting impact on all concerned"  (paragraph  21).   Certainly,
    the judge  gives  adequate  reasons  for  coming  to  this  conclusion.
    However, that still does not get over the  fact  that  the  finding  in
    relation to there being "very significant  obstacles"  under  paragraph
    276ADE was flawed, in the light of the judgment in Kamara, and this was
    a finding which was then  carried  forward  into  the  Article  8  ECHR
    assessment that the judge undertook.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  reheard  pursuant  to
    practice statement 7.2(b) because the nature or extent of judicial fact-
    finding which is necessary in order for the decision in the  appeal  to
    be remade is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in
    Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



28. No anonymity direction is made.  The appeal of the Secretary  of  State
    is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th October 2018



