
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02701/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Columbus House, Newport   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 15 February 2018                 |On: 23 February 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     ASH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Counsel instructed by NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Fowell in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen
         of Iran, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum
         and issue removal directions.

      2. The application under appeal was refused  on  3  March  2017.   The
         Appellant exercised her right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.
          This is the appeal which came before Judge Fowell on 1  June  2017
         and was dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission  to  appeal
         to the Upper Tribunal.  The application was granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge O'Garro on 21 September 2017 in the following terms

             "The grounds of appeal assert that the judge did not  consider
             the appellant's evidence properly. That  he  misconstrued  the
             appellant's evidence relating to the detention and  harassment
             of  the  appellant's  family  in  Iran  which   affected   his
             assessment of the appellant's credibility.

             It is arguable that there was  some  misunderstanding  of  the
             appellant's  evidence  by  the  judge   which   affected   his
             assessment of the appellant's credibility and  his  conclusion
             that the appellant is not a genuine convert."

      3. By a rule 24 response dated 8 November 2017 the Respondent  opposed
         the appeal  arguing  that  the  Judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
         rejecting the appellant's account of events in Iran and for finding
         that she is not a genuine Christian convert.

      4. At the hearing before me Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
         Secretary of State and Mr Howells represented the Appellant. At the
         outset of the hearing Mr Richards said that, having  spoken  to  Mr
         Howells, he agreed that the Judge erred in his understanding of the
         Appellant's evidence. It was clear from the decision that the Judge
         was under the impression that the Appellant's parents  remained  in
         detention in Iran and that this was a  significant  factor  in  his
         adverse credibility finding whereas it was clear from  the  witness
         statement and the  Appellant's  oral  evidence  that  she  had  not
         suggested that her parents remained in detention.

      5. I gave an  oral  decision  announcing  that  the  appeal  would  be
         allowed, and I now give my written reasons.

    Background

      6. The history of this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
         challenged, are that the Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on  21
         September 1986. She left Iran on 12 September 2016  travelling  via
         Turkey to the United Kingdom arriving  on  20  September  2016  and
         claiming asylum the same day. The basis of her claim was  that  she
         was born Muslim but had converted to Christianity in Iran  and  had
         fled following  adverse  interest  from  the  authorities  and  had
         continued her  practice  of  the  Christian  faith  in  the  United
         Kingdom. The Respondent did not  accept  that  she  was  a  genuine
         convert.

    The Appeal hearing

      7. At the appeal hearing on 1 June 2017 the only issue was whether the
         Appellant's conversion was genuine. In dismissing the  appeal,  the
         Judge based his reasoning on the Appellant's account of  events  in
         Iran finding (at paragraph 36)

             "the  fact  that  the  family  are  still  in   detention   is
             particularly surprising"

         and referring to the background material (at paragraph 37) that

             "there is no real suggestion that  family  members  of  recent
             converts would be of interest, let alone that  they  might  be
             detained for extended periods ... What  is  suggested  by  the
             appellant is therefore completely at odds with this background
             information ..."

         and (at paragraph 43)

             "For the avoidance  of  doubt  however  it  is  the  prolonged
             detention of her family members that I regard as  particularly
             implausible."

    Error of Law

      8. As the grounds point out the Appellant, in her  witness  statement,
         stated that her family have been arrested and harassed  on  several
         occasions  because  the  authorities  are  looking  for  her.   The
         representatives agreed that in her oral evidence  to  the  Tribunal
         the Appellant did not  demur  from  this.  The  Judge's  record  of
         proceedings shows only one question in cross  examination  that  is
         relevant

             "You say that Ettela'at are interested in your family and keep
             calling at the house and have taken your family away"

         to which the Appellant answers

             "yes".

         There is no reference to this is the Respondent's  submissions  and
         it appears that the Respondent's representative was only asking the
         Appellant to confirm what was said in  her  witness  statement.  In
         considering  his  notes  the  Judge  appears  to  have  taken   the
         Appellant's single word answer to this question as a change in  her
         evidence suggesting that her family remained in detention.  Neither
         representatives suggested that this was a correct interpretation.

      9. In my  judgment  it  is  clear  that  the  Judge  misunderstood  or
         misinterpreted the Appellant's evidence and  it  is  equally  clear
         that this single element was held heavily against  the  Appellant's
         overall credibility. As is apparent  from  paragraph  7  above  the
         Judge felt so  strongly  that  this  point  mitigated  against  her
         overall credibility that he mentioned  it  three  times  concluding
         that it was this element that he  found  particularly  implausible.
         Bearing in mind that it was the Judge's findings  relating  to  the
         Appellant's account of events in Iran that caused  him  to  dismiss
         the  appeal  I  find  that  this  amounts  to  an  error  of   fact
         constituting a material error of law.

    Summary

     10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law. I allow the Appellant's appeal.

     11. The error of law identified goes to the heart  of  the  credibility
         finding made and, in these circumstances, I remit the matter to the
         First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.


Signed:     Date: 15 February 2018

[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
