
                             [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02202/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 August 2017                          |On 9 August 2017                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                Mr naser [s]
                        (No ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    v


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Brown, counsel instructed by Broudie, Jackson
      & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr. McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Iran, born on 20 March 1976. He arrived
in the United Kingdom on 23 October 2015 and claimed asylum the same day,
on the basis that he is a Christian covert and would be deemed an apostate
if returned to Iran. The Appellant was interviewed in respect of his claim
on 12 January 2016, following which in a decision dated 17 February 2016,
his asylum application was refused. The Appellant appealed against this
decision and his appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Parker for
hearing on 20 March 2017. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 3 April
2017, the Judge dismissed the appeal.

2. An application for permission to appeal was made in-time to the Upper
Tribunal on 13 April 2017, on the basis that the Judge had erred materially
in law in:

(i) adopting an unfair procedure during the course of the hearing ie. the
Judge did not raise concerns about the appellant's knowledge of
Christianity and unfairly comments that this was not tested at the hearing;
(ii) providing inadequate reasoning for material findings made - in respect
of the Appellant's ability to demonstrate knowledge of Christianity given
his poor literacy;
(iii) omitting to have regard to relevant evidence viz the evidence of a
minister of religion with respect to the Appellant's baptism; and
(iv) making a material misdirection on a legal matter related to the appeal
viz in requiring the Appellant to demonstrate knowledge greater than was
envisaged in Dorodian (01/TH/01537).

3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused in a decision by
First tier Tribunal Judge Froom dated 27 April 2017 but upon renewal to the
Upper Tribunal essentially on the same grounds, permission to appeal was
granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on the basis that all the grounds
are arguable.

Hearing

4. At the hearing before me, Mr Brown stated that he wished to rely on both
sets of grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal and that, in effect, the
challenge is two-pronged: (i) procedural irregularity and (ii) the Dorodian
point, which is particularly important because in making assessments of
this nature Dorodian provides guidance as to the nature of the evidence.
The Judge in this case considers Dorodian at [24] and [25]. The evidence it
relates to is at pages 53-56 of the bundle and it cannot be said that what
the Judge sets out at [25]-[27] is a proper consideration of that evidence.
It was not just the Minister himself but other members of his team shared
his view of the Appellant. The Judge at erred at [36] in that the role of
the Dorodian witness is not to comment on "inconsistencies and
implausibilities" and all that can be put is whether the witness is aware
that the Home Office are challenging the credibility of the Appellant's
account.

5. Mr Brown submitted that other features are troubling and these are
mentioned in the grounds: at [26] the suggestion that the Appellant should
have been questioned as to his knowledge in examination-in-chief when it is
not the role of a representative to deal with this in chief. In his
submission the approach of the Judge is potentially infected by procedural
irregularity. Dorodian does not suggest such an approach; at [28] the Judge
held it against the Appellant that he did not know the surname of Mehidi,
however, it is not unusual in certain cases not to know the surname of a
person eg Jesus Christ. The Judge adopted an approach to a lack of
information that he seems to wrongly blame the Appellant's representatives
and looking at the quality of the evidence the Judge was not entitled to
place less weight on it and has not reasoned it sufficiently.

6. On behalf of the Home Office, Mr McVeety accepted that the Judge's
finding at [26] is oddly worded and he agreed that it was not the job of
the representative to take the Appellant through a question and answer test
of Christianity in examination in chief. What the Judge has done is to
adopt the interview record, where the Appellant got everything confused eg.
he completely mixed up John the Baptist and the loaves and fishes stories
and it was clearly open to the Judge to rely on this and as the Judge said
with regard to the Dorodian witness, it cannot be viewed in isolation.
There was, in this case, a lot going against the Appellant eg not knowing
the surname of Mehidi despite the fact that he shared something which could
end up with the death penalty. The Dorodian witness does not get the full
picture. It was open to the Judge to make the findings he did although he
accepted on the face of it that the finding at [26] was a "strange
comment."

7. In response to my questions, Mr McVeety said that the Judge was entitled
to reach his conclusion at [29] and if the Appellant was an ambivalent
Muslim it was odd to change to Christianity rather than become a more
devout Muslim.

8. In reply, Mr Brown set out material aspects of the chronology in that,
the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 October 2015; he began
attending Church in November 2015 and his asylum interview with the Home
Office took place on 12 January 2016. It was only in late August 2015 that
he was introduced to the Christian faith and he attended two services in a
house Church. It would appear that the Judge uncritically adopted an
interview that took place only 4 months later and the Appellant's responses
in interview must be seen in light of that timeline. One also has to
consider the significant time spent by the Appellant in the United Kingdom
yet the Judge makes no other findings as to his knowledge of Christianity.
In respect of the Judge's finding at [29] it is odd and it may be that the
Appellant found that Christianity provided him with a better faith to deal
with that particular problem. He submitted that it is not a decision that,
when fairly read, provides proper reasons. The nature of those errors means
that the matter should be remitted back to the First tier Tribunal.

Decision and reasons

9. I find that the First tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law and I
announced my decision at the hearing. I now give my reasons.

10. The First tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence not only from the
Appellant but from the Rev Mohammed Edghaterian. The Judge recorded the
Reverend's evidence as to the Appellant as follows:

      "25. ...He presented himself as a Christian and he's been in regular
attendance at the church. He is keen to learn more about the faith.

      26. He does say in oral evidence that he believes he is a genuine
convert. He      did not say he has a good knowledge of Christianity as you
would expect from      such a convert. He was not questioned in evidence in
chief about his  knowledge of Christianity."

I find [26] confusing as to whether or not the Judge is referring to the
Reverend or to the Appellant, or both. In respect of the Judge's
conclusions as to the Reverend's evidence:

      "36. I place less weight on Rev. Mohammed Edghaterian's evidence as
he has      only heard part of the story. The inconsistencies and
implausibilities of the      appellant's story have not been commented on
by Rev Mohammed  Edghaterian. I have to take all the evidence into
account."

11. Reverend Edghaterian also provided a statement dated 18 October 2016 at
pages 53-55 of the Appellant's bundle, in which he states inter alia that
the Appellant has been attending worship at Liverpool Cathedral regularly
since 29 November 2015, including weekly involvement in Sepas the Persian
congregation; he completed the five session Baptism Preparation course and
was baptized on 27 March 2016; he expressly acknowledged that many have
"mixed motives" for seeking baptism, "not least the expectation that it
will assist their immigration process" and that he has declined to assist
where he has not had confidence in a person's conversion "however Naser has
been with us for nearly a year. During that time my team and I have come to
know him and become confident that his claim to be a Christian convert is
genuine. I am therefore glad to attend as a witness in support of his
case." The Reverend also refers to the fact that the Appellant has been
active evangelistically, having invited some new people to the Cathedral.

12. At [23] and [24] of his decision, the First tier Tribunal Judge noted
that the effect of Dorodian emphasized the need for a minister or pastor to
vouch for an appellant and that in SJ (Christian apostates  - evidence)
Iran [2003] UKIAT 00158 the Upper Tribunal held at [22] that Adjudicators
should be satisfied completely as to the bona fide not only of the
appellant but of the church to which the appellant maintains he adheres.
There can be, of course, no question as to the bona fides of Liverpool
Cathedral and I find that the Judge failed to properly apply the guidance
set out in these two decisions and failed to give proper and adequate
reasons for placing less weight on the evidence of Reverend Edghaterian. I
accept Mr Brown's submissions that it was not the task of the Reverend to
address issues arising from the asylum interview and decision but rather to
confirm that the Appellant had been attending Church and to provide his
view as to the genuineness of the Appellant's conversion. His evidence on
these issues is clear and cogent.

13. Whilst I accept the submission of Mr McVeety that the answers given by
the Appellant in his asylum interview were somewhat confused, Mr Brown
correctly drew attention to the chronology and the fact that the Appellant
had been introduced to Christianity only 4-5 months prior to this date. I
bear in mind that he was providing his answers through a Farsi interpreter
which may have some bearing (I note that at Q & A 140 it is recorded that a
pigeon rather than a dove came to Jesus Christ). I further bear in mind
that the Reverend's evidence was that the Appellant had been attending
Church regularly since November 2015 ie less than 6 weeks after his arrival
in the United Kingdom and about 6 weeks before his interview. These are
material issues and I find the Judge failed to consider the central issue
of the Appellant's conversion to Christianity in light of all the material
evidence.

Decision

14. For the reasons I find an error of law in the decision of First tier
Tribunal Judge Parker. I remit the appeal back to the First tier Tribunal
in Manchester for a hearing de novo with no findings of fact preserved.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

4 August 2017
