
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/02831/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2018                            |On 15 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     Wa
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Clark, Jackson and Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant has appealed  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal ('FTT') dated 28 April 2018 in which it dismissed his appeal
       on all grounds.

Background

    2. The appellant, his wife and child are citizens of Afghanistan.   They
       travelled from Afghanistan to the UK with him.  They arrived  in  the
       UK on 20 February  2017  and  claimed  asylum  that  same  day.   The
       appellant's application for asylum was refused in a decision dated 23
       January 2018.  The respondent summarised  the  appellant's  claim  as
       follows:

           "Approximately  seven  years  ago  your  sister  had  to   leave
           Afghanistan when a man wanted to  marry  her.   You  started  to
           receive death threats from him after your sister left.  You were
           detained for eight months in a private prison by this man.   You
           met your wife [FA] roughly five years ago when she was  studying
           next door to your house.  You were communicating with your  wife
           in secret for five months before her family found out about your
           relationship.  Your wife's  father  agreed  that  his  nephew  a
           governor could marry [FA].   Your  wife's  family  obtained  the
           details of your text messages and telephone conversations.  They
           beat her, forbid her from leaving the house and took her  phone.
           Your wife escaped her parents' home then you both  hid  at  your
           friends [E]'s for ten days.  You married your  wife  during  the
           time you were living in [E]'s house.  Your wife became  pregnant
           with your son and went to tell her family.  She was then  beaten
           by her brother.  You left Afghanistan on 10  October  2015  with
           your wife and child.  You have claimed that on return you,  your
           wife and son will be killed by your wife's family."

    3. The respondent went on to address each of the discrete aspects of the
       appellant's account in Afghanistan and did not regard his  claims  to
       be credible and therefore refused his asylum appeal.   The  appellant
       was not represented when he received the decision  dated  23  January
       2018 and made an application to appeal that was out  of  time.   That
       appeal was received on 7 February 2018.  In a decision dated 1  March
       2018 the FTT granted the appellant an extension of  time.   Some  two
       weeks after this on 15  March  2018  the  appellant  applied  for  an
       adjournment, but this was refused.  In a decision that same day there
       was a further application for an adjournment dated 22 March  2018  in
       which the appellant explained that he had an offer in principle  from
       a solicitor to represent him, but he needed to look at his  documents
       and needed more time given that the appeal  had  been  listed  for  3
       April 2018.  That application for an adjournment was  refused  on  26
       March 2018.  The matter therefore came before  the  FTT  on  3  April
       2018.  The appellant did not have any  legal  representation.   I  am
       also told that his wife did  not  attend  that  hearing  as  she  was
       considered too ill to do so.

    4.  At  the  hearing  before  the  FTT  the  appellant  made  a  further
       application  for  an  adjournment  to  enable  him  to   seek   legal
       representation.  He indicated that he had approached several  lawyers
       to see if they would represent himself, his wife and his child in the
       appeal but that they had all declined save that he had recently found
       representatives only able to take instructions to act after the month
       of April.  The FTT noted that the appellant did not provide the  name
       of the solicitor who had agreed to act  for  him  and  there  was  no
       documentary evidence to support him having obtained a solicitor.  The
       FTT refused to adjourn the hearing.  The FTT heard from the appellant
       and part of his evidence included an explanation that  his  wife  had
       suffered from mental health problems, that she was suicidal and being
       treated for depression.  The FTT  made  extensive  reference  to  the
       medical evidence that was before it concerning the wife at paragraphs
       23 to 25.  The FTT recognised that the wife had been  diagnosed  with
       depression and her health was somewhat fragile.  The FTT  noted  that
       she had been diagnosed by  a  psychologist,  Dr  Dalaji,  with  mixed
       anxiety depression and that he had stated that she needed to  have  a
       detailed assessment to exclude any  post-traumatic  stress  disorder.
       The FTT noted that there was no independent medical expert before  it
       but was prepared to find that there  were  concerns  surrounding  the
       wife's mental health and there  had  been  the  input  from  numerous
       medical professionals to corroborate this.

Discussion

    5. When  considering  whether  an  adjournment  was  necessary  for  the
       appellant to have a fair hearing, it was relevant for the FTT to take
       into account that there was  potential  evidence  from  his  wife  to
       corroborate his claim. After all, the appellant's claim turned mainly
       on what had actually happened to his  wife.   It  was  she  who  they
       claimed was subject to  serious  harm  by  family  members.   It  was
       therefore important for the FTT to  carefully  consider  whether  the
       hearing  could  fairly  proceed  without  having   updated   evidence
       regarding the wife's mental health and without  knowing  whether  she
       was able to give evidence in support of the appeal.

    6. Although I acknowledge that the application for  an  adjournment  did
       not have the detail that one  might  expect,  that  is  to  give  the
       specific name of the solicitor, it is significant that the  appellant
       had only been granted an extension of time relatively recently  on  1
       March 2018.   That meant that he had just  over  a  month  to  obtain
       legal representation.  He made two  adjournment  applications  during
       March wherein he explained that he was having difficulties  obtaining
       legal representation.  This is not therefore an appellant who  failed
       to act upon receiving the  notice  of  hearing  and  applied  for  an
       adjournment at the last minute.  He has been consistent in explaining
       that he did not have legal representation, although he was making his
       best efforts to obtain this.  That must be considered  alongside  the
       medical evidence demonstrating that the wife, a  potential  important
       witness in the appeal, may  be  a  vulnerable  witness  and  was  not
       available to give evidence on 3 April 2018.  In all the circumstances
       of this case fairness required an adjournment not  simply  to  obtain
       legal representation but  to  obtain  clarity  regarding  the  wife's
       ability to give evidence.

    7. In AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 Sir Ernest Ryder, the
       Senior President of Tribunals gave guidance  on  appeals  that  might
       involve vulnerable appellants or  vulnerable  witnesses.   This  drew
       attention to the Practice  Direction  on  vulnerable  appellants  and
       witnesses and said that that guidance ought  to  be  followed.   That
       guidance includes a key feature as being the early identification  of
       issues of vulnerability in order to determine how  best  to  approach
       that evidence.  That guidance also makes provision for those who  are
       unable to give oral evidence to provide evidence in  another  format.
       In refusing the adjournment request the Tribunal failed to take  into
       account the potential that the  appellant's  wife  was  a  vulnerable
       witness and that her evidence ought to have been taken  into  account
       with the necessary provisions made.  There is no recording within the
       decision as to whether or  not  the  wife  was  considered  to  be  a
       vulnerable witness and no recording as to whether or not her evidence
       was considered to be relevant to the fair disposal of the appellant's
       claim.  Although the wife was not present at  the  hearing,  the  FTT
       does not record in the decision that any enquiries were  made  as  to
       whether or not the appellant  wished  to  rely  on  her  evidence  to
       support and corroborate his.  In my judgment the FTT was  obliged  to
       take this into account and in failing to do so unfairly  refused  the
       adjournment request.

Remittal

    8. It follows that I find that there is an error of law in the  decision
       of the FTT.  I set it aside.  This is an appropriate case to remit to
       the FTT because completely fresh findings of fact are necessary.

    9. I do not make any directions because that will be a  matter  for  the
       FTT to address.  However, I observe that given the potential for  the
       appellant's wife to be a vulnerable witness,  this  is  a  case  that
       might benefit from a Case Management Review  hearing  at  which  time
       careful consideration can be given at an early stage to  that  issue.



Decision

   10. I allow the appellant's appeal and set aside the FTT decision.

   11. The matter is remitted to the FTT, which shall decide the appeal on a
       de novo basis.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     7 January 2019
