

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber                             Appeal Number:
PA/02734/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 16 June 2016                            |On 13 September 2016           |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between


                                    m m N
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ti, Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's claim for  asylum  in  the  United
   Kingdom and his application for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds
   on 4 November 2015. The Appellant appealed against this decision under  s
   82 (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act)
   on the grounds that he was a refugee and that his  removal  would  breach
   Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).   His
   appeal was heard and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale
   in a decision promulgated on 11 April 2016.  She dismissed the appeal  on
   asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.


2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  against  this  decision  which
   was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ransley  on  5  May  2016.
   Permission was granted on the  basis  that  the  following  grounds  were
   arguable:


     i) The Judge failed to give reasons for finding that the Appellant had
        legal residence status in South Africa;
    ii)  When  assessing  the  reasonableness  of  the   Appellant's   wife
        continuing family life with him in Somalia the Judge failed to take
        into account her evidence that it would be too  dangerous  for  her
        and her children to live in Somalia;
   iii) When assessing whether it was reasonable to expect the  Appellant's
        children to leave the UK the Judge failed to take into account  (a)
        the risk of serious harm in Mogadishu and South Africa; and (b) the
        benefits of the children accessing education and healthcare in  the
        UK long term;
    iv) The Judge failed to give reasons for finding that the Appellant had
        made a baseless asylum claim to circumvent  the  Immigration  Rules
        because he was unable to meet the financial requirements; and
     v) Failed to give reasons for finding that there were no obstacles  to
        the Appellant reintegrating into South Africa or Somalia.


3. The Respondent served a response to the grounds of appeal under  Rule  24
   dated 24 May 2016. The response argues that the First-tier Tribunal found
   that the Appellant was not at risk and had considered his ability to live
   in South Africa in some detail and came to the  correct  conclusion  that
   there was no well-founded fear either in Somalia  or  South  Africa.  The
   best interests of the children were considered and there was found to  be
   a benefit to growing up with their mother  and  father  in  Mogadishu  or
   South Africa. The First-tier Tribunal found that the  Appellant  did  not
   meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to remain  as  a
   partner and had failed to establish paragraph EX.1  applied.  The  First-
   tier Tribunal directed itself properly.


   The Hearing


4. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.  Mr  Ti
   relied on his skeleton argument. He submitted that the  first  ground  of
   appeal related to the legal right of residence in South Africa. The Judge
   started by saying she did not accept that he had refugee status  and  she
   said that she was prepared to accept that  he  had  some  form  of  legal
   residence and she moved on to a firm finding that he had legal residence.
   If she found that there was no status then there were no grounds to  find
   that he had legal residence. There were no obvious pointers as to how  he
   would have obtained status. Her finding of residence was unsubstantiated.
   If he had no legal residence the question of whether he could be returned
   there was an issue.


5. In relation to Ground  2  in  considering  insurmountable  obstacles  the
   Judge said that at no point in  the  course  of  the  Appellant's  wife's
   evidence was fear mentioned. The Appellant's wife said  in  both  witness
   statements that she felt it was too dangerous for her and her children to
   live in Somalia. The Country of Origin information  report  commented  on
   the high level of gender based violence at pages 7 to 10 of the objective
   evidence and it was clear that women and  girls  were  at  high  risk  of
   gender-based violence. They would be exposed to those dangers. It  was  a
   very significant error of fact to the extent that it should be deemed  to
   be an error of law.


6. Ground 3 concerned the  reasonableness  of  leaving  the  United  Kingdom
   under paragraph EX.1. When considering the various factors the Judge  did
   not consider the risk  of  physical  harm  to  the  children.  The  Upper
   Tribunal in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT  00442
   (IAC) held that there was not a  risk  of  serious  harm  such  that  the
   Appellant  would  be  entitled  to  rely  on  Article  15  (c)   of   the
   Qualification Directive but there would still be a very significant level
   of danger. In MOJ at paragraph 385 it was said that there were Al  Shabab
   attacks on a daily basis and a  probability  of  collateral  damage.  The
   children would be exposed to this risk potentially until the  age  of  18
   and beyond. If there were  three  children  then  the  weight  should  be
   greater. The eldest child was 8 years old at the date of the hearing.  In
   relation to the children the Judge should have taken  into  consideration
   the psychological impact of living in fear of such violence.  The  eldest
   child would be exposed to the high levels of sexual violence in  Somalia.
   By failing to looking at these factors  her  finding  that  it  would  be
   reasonable for them to live there was unsupportable. Her finding was that
   the Appellant  was  able  to  go  back  and  that  there  was  sufficient
   protection. In this very  case  the  Appellant  had  experienced  several
   episodes of xenophobic attacks in  South  Africa  and  yet  there  was  a
   finding of sufficient protection. He was not challenging that  there  was
   sufficient protection but there still could be a high level  of  risk  to
   the children. The Judge had failed to look at the relevant factors.


7. With regard to Ground 4 it was argued that when the Judge looked  at  the
   specific factors the weight that  she  gave  them  was  unreasonable.  At
   paragraph 79 she said the children would have the benefit of  growing  up
   amongst the culture of father and mother and there  would  be  long  term
   gains. Firstly, in making  that  conclusion,  she  failed  to  take  into
   account that they would they would lose the benefit of living in  British
   culture. She also failed to appreciate that if they  remained  here  they
   would not be deprived of Somali culture. They would be exposed here.  The
   same could not be said about British culture there. In South Africa there
   would be no gains.


8. With regard to Ground 5 the Judge concluded that the Appellant  had  made
   an abusive claim in an attempt to meet the Rules.  It  was  a  completely
   unreasonable conclusion that the claim was fabricated and unsupported  by
   evidence. He came from South Africa  and  claimed  asylum  against  being
   returned to South Africa. The Judge noted the clashes  in  South  Africa.
   Given  that  kind  of  evidence  it  seemed  unreasonable  for   her   to
   characterise his claim as baseless. At the very basic level one needed to
   consider whether the article 15 (c) threshold had been reached.  Even  in
   MOJ there was a recognition that there was a high level of violence. This
   was material because the Judge made it  very  clear  that  there  was  an
   objection to this unethical behaviour. The Judge also said  at  Ground  6
   that there was an attempt to circumvent the Immigration Rules. There  was
   no link between the asylum application and the  maintenance  requirement.
   If he succeeded it was on the basis that  he  needed  protection.  If  he
   failed it was irrational. There was a legal way to meet the  requirements
   in showing that there were insurmountable obstacles.


9. The final ground was in relation to the  right  to  a  private  life.  At
   paragraph 83 of the First-tier Tribunal decision she  found  he  did  not
   meet the requirements.  At  no  point  was  there  any  consideration  of
   obstacles to return to South Africa where there  was  a  high  degree  of
   xenophobia.


10. Ms Isherwood  submitted  that  there  were  material  facts  which  were
   important to consider. Firstly, regarding Somalia, at paragraph 13 of the
   decision the Judge noted that the Appellant was a member  of  a  majority
   clan originating from Mogadishu and he had family in Somalia and  he  was
   supporting  them.  Regarding  circumventing  rules,  it  was  clear  from
   paragraph 28 that the Judge heard oral evidence that they found out about
   the income requirement.  The Presenting Officer made  a  submission  that
   they were ready to  abuse  the  system  to  get  into  the  country.  The
   challenge of  circumventing  the  Rules  did  stand  up  because  of  the
   evidence. The Appellant was supporting his family and he managed to start
   his own business in South Africa.  Ground  1  concerned  the  Appellant's
   South African status. In the refusal letter it was accepted that  he  had
   status in South  Africa.  The  Judge  found  at  paragraph  45  that  the
   Appellant had done nothing concerning clarifying his status.  The  burden
   of proof was on him. The Judge was entitled to find that nothing had been
   done. She was entitled to find that he was not a refugee but may have had
   some legal leave. Then for completeness she looked at the applicable law.




11. With regard to paragraph EX.1 (a) (ii), she concluded that it would  not
   be unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK. From paragraph 60
   the Appellant was not found a credible witness  and  the  Judge  did  not
   accept the claim of the historical fear in Mogadishu. The Judge  referred
   to one paragraph concerning violence in MOJ. The Appellant  had  lots  of
   family in Somalia. There was no basis for the appeal to be  allowed.  She
   looked at the historical claim, said it no longer  existed  and  did  not
   accept it anyway. The Judge gave a number of reasons  for  not  accepting
   this account.  At paragraph 62 she noted the  improved  situation  there.
   The Judge considered MOJ and chose not to depart from  it.  She  did  not
   accept that the family would not be able to offer him  accommodation  and
   acknowledged the situation in the  UK.  She  disregarded  the  submission
   regarding IDP camps.  At  paragraph  65  she  noted  that  there  was  no
   documentation showing he had ever been recognised as a refugee. The Judge
   was giving reasons at that point. The Appellant's evidence had  not  been
   accepted. He could have obtained evidence of refugee status. At paragraph
   66 she accepted he had lawful residence and looked both at  South  Africa
   and Somalia. At 67 she took account of the random  attacks.  The  attacks
   were not widespread and there was reasoning. It was not the case that she
   did not consider the evidence. In addition submissions were made that the
   Appellant was attacked but at paragraph 68 he reported  one  attack.  She
   found there was sufficient protection and the appropriate tests were  not
   reached. At paragraph 69 internal relocation was considered.  There  were
   no incidents of violence occurring. At paragraph 70 she did  accept  that
   the Appellant met suitability and that eligibility criteria.  At  74  she
   noted that his wife was from Somalia. It was not  enough  that  the  wife
   thought it was dangerous. At 75 her circumstances were considered.  There
   was no evidence from the step-daughter's father. The burden of proof  was
   on the Appellant and nothing was provided. It had  not  been  established
   that she had ongoing contact with  her  father.  The  Judge  acknowledged
   there was extended family here. The wife did not mention personal fear in
   course of her evidence. The fear was based on reduced circumstances.  The
   Judge understood the concerns but found it amounted to a  preference.  At
   paragraph 78 she considered the children and within the first line placed
   weight on  their  British  Citizenship.  She  treated  it  as  a  primary
   consideration and there was nothing wrong with her  approach.  She  could
   give it what weight was proper. It was not unreasonable for  them  to  go
   with their  parents.  The  Judge  acknowledged  that  children  may  find
   themselves in  reduced  circumstances  and  the  Judge  acknowledged  the
   benefits. There was  extended  parental  family.  All  alternatives  were
   considered. There were no welfare reports. No  additional  findings  were
   required and everything had been considered.


12. Mr Ti said that the Respondent may  have  misunderstood  the  arguments.
   The plans which were made by the Appellant and his wife were in 2013 when
   she returned from South Africa. Riots happened in  2015  and  there  were
   legitimate reasons for the change of approach. It was a proper route  for
   them to rely on paragraph EX.1. There was no unethical behaviour and  the
   conclusion was unreasonable. He  was  not  challenging  the  decision  on
   asylum grounds but that was a basis for the proportionality decision. The
   finding was baseless and not supported. The problem  was  with  the  fact
   that she considered the positive factors were outweighed. She  failed  to
   recognise that gains were balanced out by  the  losses.  The  gains  were
   neutralised.


   Discussion and Findings


13. The first ground asserts that the First-tier Tribunal either  failed  to
   give adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant had legal  residence
   in South Africa in the light of her finding that he did not have  refugee
   status or, in the  alternative,  that  the  finding  that  he  had  legal
   residence was perverse and not supported by the evidence.


14. The Appellant's claimed country  of  nationality  was  Somalia  and  the
   Respondent accepted that this was so. The First-tier Tribunal  considered
   firstly, whether the Appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution  on
   return to Somalia and concluded that  he  had  not.  There  has  been  no
   challenge by the Appellant to that finding. It was the Appellant's  claim
   to have been granted refugee status in South Africa  and  to  have  lived
   there since 2008. The Respondent at the hearing did not accept  that  the
   Appellant had refugee status in South  Africa.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
   found, at paragraph 65 of the decision, that  he  did  not  have  refugee
   status in South Africa but accepted, at paragraph 66, that  he  had  some
   form of legal residency there and that he had permission to reside there.
   She accepted that it was his country of  habitual  residence  and  stated
   that since she had found that he had no well-founded fear  of  return  to
   Somalia, the matter of whether he or  not  he  was  entitled  to  refugee
   status from South Africa was academic.


15. Having found that the Appellant did not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
   persecution in Somalia, his country of nationality,  the  Judge  was  not
   required to consider whether he had a well-founded fear of persecution in
   South Africa because he was neither stateless nor had  dual  nationality.
   Even if her findings in relation to the  legality  of  his  residence  in
   South  Africa  were  perverse  or  inadequately  reasoned  it  would  not
   therefore be material. However, I find that the findings were  both  open
   to her on the evidence and sufficiently reasoned. It is  clear  from  the
   reasoning  in  paragraph  67  of  the  decision  that  she  accepted  the
   Appellant's evidence that he was able to live and start his own  business
   in South Africa, albeit not as a refugee, and it followed rationally from
   these findings that he had some form of  legal  residence.  She  was  not
   required to give reasons for these reasons.


16. The second ground relates to the reasonableness of the Appellant's  wife
   leaving the United Kingdom. The Appellant had argued that paragraph  EX.1
   (b) applied and  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
   continuing with his wife outside the UK.  The  grounds  assert  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal erred in stating that the Appellant's  wife  did  not
   mention any personal fear of returning to Somalia in the  course  of  her
   evidence because she had stated in her witness statements  of  7  October
   2015 and 8 March 2016 that it would be too  dangerous  for  her  and  her
   children to live in Somalia. It is further said that there  was  evidence
   of high levels of gender based violence and had the Judge taken this into
   account she may have reached a different conclusion on whether there were
   insurmountable obstacles.


17. The First-tier Tribunal considered  whether  there  were  insurmountable
   obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  with  his  wife  in  Somalia  at
   paragraphs 74 to 76 of the decision. At paragraph 76 she stated that  the
   Appellant's wife "did not mention  any  personal  fear  of  returning  to
   Somalia". The Appellant's wife's oral evidence is recorded at  paragraphs
   33 to 35 of the decision. At paragraph 35 of the decision she is recorded
   as saying that she could not consider going to South Africa or Somalia as
   it was not safe and in terms of the education of her children it was  not
   the place to go. In her witness statement dated 8 March 2015  she  stated
   that she thought it was too dangerous to go to live in Somalia.


18. I do not consider that the First-tier Tribunal  either  failed  to  take
   into account material evidence or reached a perverse finding in  relation
   to whether there were insurmountable obstacles.  The  Appellant's  wife's
   evidence was that she considered the country situation was too  dangerous
   not that she had a fear of return for reasons that related to her person.
   The Judge's finding was in accordance with  the  evidence.  Further,  her
   assessment of whether there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  has  to  be
   considered in the context of her findings as a whole.  At  paragraph  63,
   following the case of MOJ, she noted the improved situation in Mogadishu.
   She also noted that there were random attacks of violence. She  found  at
   paragraph 76 that  the  Appellant,  a  majority  clan  member,  would  be
   returning to his family in  Somalia  who  were  close  friends  with  the
   Appellant's wife's family. She found that she was a fluent Somali speaker
   and had given up her external private life to raise children  and  whilst
   there would be doubtless a period of readjustment and  initial  financial
   hardship that the obstacles were not insurmountable.  Her  findings  were
   sufficiently reasoned and took into account relevant  evidence.  She  was
   not required to refer to every piece of the Appellant's  wife's  evidence
   and in the context of the circumstances of her return  with  her  husband
   was entitled to come to the conclusion that she did.


19. The third ground challenges the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  that  it
   was reasonable for the Appellant's children to leave the UK. It is argued
   that the Judge failed to take into account that there would be a risk  of
   serious harm to the children due to the level of violence  in  Mogadishu.
   It is also argued that there was significant violence against  foreigners
   in South Africa and that the children would be exposed to that risk.


20. I do not consider that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  either  erred  in
   her approach to the assessment of reasonableness, made findings that were
   not open to her on the facts or failed  to  take  into  account  material
   considerations. The parties' submissions are  recorded  in  full  and  at
   paragraph 51 she notes  that  the  Appellant  submitted  that  in  either
   Somalia or South Africa the children would face physical insecurity and a
   lack of education or health care. She did not specifically  refer  within
   the assessment of reasonableness to the level of violence  in  Mogadishu.
   However, she rejected the submission that there  would  be  risk  to  the
   Appellant at paragraph 63 of the decision  taking  full  account  of  the
   reports before her which she noted were dated February 2016,  found  that
   he had family and was a member  of  a  majority  clan.  She  rejected  as
   fanciful the submission that he would end up in an  IDP  camp  and  found
   that his family in Mogadishu would make room for him.   Her  findings  in
   relation to reasonableness have to be seen in this context. She noted  at
   paragraph 81 that there were no welfare reports before  her  and  nothing
   from an independent social worker, educationalist or  suitably  qualified
   person which indicated that there would be any negative impact  upon  the
   welfare of the children in removing  them.  Whilst  she  had  before  her
   background reports in relation to sexual violence there was  no  evidence
   before her that the children would be at risk of such violence.  She  had
   specifically found that the Appellant would not be a displaced person and
   there was no evidence before her to suggest that  the  children  were  at
   risk.  Similarly whilst there were  background  reports  in  relation  to
   xenophobic violence in South Africa, she found at paragraph 67  that  any
   attack on the Appellant was random and that he was able to move elsewhere
   in South Africa. There was no error in her conclusion that there  was  no
   evidence before her to indicate that the children would suffer  adversely
   if raised by their parents in South Africa.


21. It is argued at Ground 4 that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that
   there were many long term gains to the children living outside the United
   Kingdom to balance the loss of the material  welfare  of  living  in  the
   United Kingdom was irrational and not based on any apparent reasoning. It
   is contended that there were no gains to  balance  the  loss  of  British
   education, healthcare and public benefits.


22. There can  be  no  question,  in  my  estimation,  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal  was  fully  aware  of  the  weight  to  be  given  to   British
   Citizenship.  She  expressly  stated  at  paragraph  78  that  she   gave
   considerable weight to that citizenship with  its  attendant  rights  and
   privileges. She accepted that their best interests were to remain in  the
   United Kingdom.  However,  she  found  that  those  best  interests  were
   outweighed and give a number of reasons for so finding, all of which were
   open to her on the evidence. She was entitled  to  take  account  of  the
   extended paternal family in Somalia, the young age of the  children,  the
   caring environment provided by their parents, the fact that their  mother
   was from Somalia and their father lived there until 2008 and the  absence
   of evidence that removing the children from the UK would have a  negative
   impact. She was also entitled to take the conduct  of  the  parents  into
   account (MA (Pakistan) and Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705). Her finding  that
   there would be gains for the children in  living  either  in  Somalia  or
   South Africa was neither  perverse  or  inadequately  reasoned,  although
   consideration of the reasonableness of return to  South  Africa  was  not
   required strictly required in the light of her findings.


23.  Ground  5  challenges  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that   the
   Appellant had made a baseless asylum claim in  order  to  circumvent  the
   Immigration Rules. The Appellant contends that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   made an irrational or inadequately  reasoned  finding.  Secondly,  it  is
   argued that the Appellant was not trying to  circumvent  the  Immigration
   Rules as he relied upon paragraph EX.1.  It is further asserted that  the
   description of the asylum claim  as  baseless  is  unreasonable  and  the
   allegation that it is fabricated is unsubstantiated  and  unfair.  It  is
   argued that the Appellant claimed asylum because of what happened to  him
   in South Africa and that the First-tier Tribunal noted  that  there  were
   attacks on foreign nationals. Further, in  the  light  of  the  level  of
   violence in Mogadishu it was unreasonable to  find  that  the  claim  was
   baseless.


24. At paragraph 80 of the  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
   there was a strong  indication  on  the  evidence  before  her  that  the
   Appellant had decided to make a baseless asylum claim to  circumvent  the
   Immigration Rules when the couple became aware that they could  not  live
   together in the United  Kingdom  unless  they  could  afford  to  support
   themselves. She found there was considerable merit  in  the  Respondent's
   submissions that the family intended to live together in the  UK  knowing
   full well that they could not meet the maintenance  requirements  of  the
   Rules.


25. I find that this conclusion was entirely open to her  on  the  evidence.
   The Appellant married his wife by proxy in  2013  when  she  was  in  the
   United Kingdom and he was in South Africa. She then went to South  Africa
   and spent five months  there  during  which  she  conceived  their  child
   (paragraph 6 of the decision). According to his wife's evidence  recorded
   at paragraph 34 of the decision they had decided that she would go to see
   him and that she would then  sponsor  him  to  join  her  in  the  United
   Kingdom. However, they realised subsequently that  they  had  to  have  a
   certain level of income and there was a language test  and  these  became
   stumbling blocks. Also they felt that South Africa was not a safe  place.
   The Appellant then entered the United Kingdom clandestinely in  May  2015
   with the assistance of an agent. The First-tier Tribunal  heard  evidence
   from the Appellant and his wife and assessed their credibility. She found
   his claims to be in need of international protection to be without merit.
   In the circumstances it was open to her to find that he came  to  the  UK
   clandestinely in order to avoid the  entry  clearance  requirements  with
   regard to maintenance. The finding was neither perverse nor  inadequately
   reasoned.


26.  The  final  ground  asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave   no
   consideration in the decision to whether  there  were  obstacles  to  the
   Appellant's re-integration into South Africa  or  Somalia  and  that  she
   failed to explain how  she  arrived  at  this  assessment.   Further,  in
   relation to South Africa, she failed to explain how xenophobia was not an
   obstacle to integration.


27. The First-tier Tribunal specifically considered  paragraph  276  ADE  of
   the Immigration Rules at paragraph 83 of the decision. She did not accept
   that  there  were  any  obstacles,  significant  or  otherwise   to   his
   reintegration into Somalia or South Africa. She had  already  found  that
   the Appellant did not have a well-founded fear of persecution  in  either
   country, that he could move to avoid incidents  of  xenophobia  in  South
   Africa in order to be safe and that he had already rented a room for  his
   wife in the past in a good area in order for her to  reside  safely.  The
   Judge had also found that  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
   family life continuing in either country and that  they  would  have  the
   support of family in Somalia. She had also found that it  was  reasonable
   for the children to live there. In the circumstances she was not required
   to make further findings of fact to justify  her  conclusion  that  there
   were no very significant obstacles to his integration.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray             13 September 2016

