
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02646/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 January 2019                  |On 30 January 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 OLUTOLA [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith (counsel) instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Parker promulgated on 17 September 2018, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born 28 March  1982.  She  has  two
children who are dependent on her claim. The appellant arrived in the UK  on
24 September 2011 in possession of a visit visa  and  claimed  asylum  on  2
October 2015. The appellant claims that she fears her parents, who want  her
to adhere to her abusive husband in Nigeria. The respondent  considered  the
appellant's claim to be a claim to have a well-founded fear  of  persecution
as a member of a particular social  group  as  a  woman  in  Nigeria.  On  7
February 2018 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge AJ Parker ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  10  October  2018  Tribunal
Judge Povey gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "3.   All  grounds  appear  arguable.  In  assessing  the  appellant's
      credibility,  the  Judge  recited  and  appeared  to  rely  upon   the
      respondent's decision letter. If the Judge considered the  appellant's
      response in her witness statement of the letter, he failed to  provide
      adequate reasons for how he assessed her evidence.  If  he  failed  to
      have regard to her statement, he  ignored  a  relevant  factor.  Those
      findings undermine the Judge's finding  that  the  appellant  was  not
      credible.

      4.    The same errors appear to undermine the  Judge's  assessment  of
      the appellant's partner's return (or otherwise) to Nigeria. There  was
      no explanation of how, if at all, the Judge had assessed the partner's
      evidence (of why he could not return to  Nigeria).  Those  errors  are
      material to the Judge's findings on  internal  relocation  (which  was
      premised on the appellant returning to Nigeria with her  partner)  and
      his assessment of proportionality under article 8.

      5.    As such, the application for permission has  disclosed  arguable
      errors of law and permission to appeal is granted. All grounds may  be
      argued.

The Hearing

5. (a) Ms Smith, for the appellant, moved the grounds of  appeal.  She  told
me that the Judge failed to have regard to  the  appellant's  evidence.  She
took me to [28] of the decision and told me that, there,  the  Judge  simply
repeats the points raised by the  respondent  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
letter. She told me that the appellant  adopted  the  terms  of  a  detailed
witness statement responding to the points taken by the  respondent  in  the
reasons for refusal letter, and that the Judge has failed  to  consider  the
various strands of the appellant's evidence. She told me  that  the  Judge's
assessment of credibility is inadequate.

(b) Ms Smith moved the second ground of appeal and told me  that  the  Judge
failed to give proper consideration to the expert report relied  on  by  the
appellant. She told me that the Judge simply rejects the  expert  report  at
[46] because he finds that the appellant is not  a  credible  witness.  Miss
Smith referred me to Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

(c) Ms Smith told me that the Judge found that the appellant's  partner  can
return to Nigeria with her, yet the appellant's partner  has  limited  leave
to remain in the UK because he has contact to his children from  a  previous
relationship. Ms Smith told me that the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to
both the protection and article 8 claims rely entirely on his  finding  that
the appellant's partner will return to Nigeria with  her.  She  took  me  to
various parts of the decision and told me that that finding is  unsafe,  and
is inconsistent with the finding at [47] that there  is  no  requirement  on
the appellant's partner to leave the UK.

(d) Ms Smith told me that the Judge's article 8  assessment  is  inadequate.
She argued that the Judge failed to take proper account of  the  appellant's
partner's circumstances (as a man granted limited leave  to  remain  in  the
UK) and that in any event the Judge failed to  properly  consider  both  the
rights of  the  appellant's  partner's  British  citizen  children  from  an
earlier relationship, and the  rights  of  the  two  children  born  to  the
appellant and her partner. She told me that  the  decision  is  weakened  by
mistakes in fact which demonstrate that the  Judge  did  not  apply  anxious
scrutiny to the evidence.

(e) Ms Smith urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

6.(a) For the respondent  Mr  Bates  conceded  that  the  decision  contains
material errors of law.  He  told  me  that  the  protection  claim  is  not
adequately dealt  with  and  that  the  Judge  fails  to  give  reasons  for
rejecting the appellant's evidence. He told me that the Judge fails to  give
reasons for preferring the  respondent's  position.  He  told  me  that  the
decision in relation to the protection claim does not  contain  an  analysis
of the appellant's statement and  does  not  explain  why  the  respondent's
position is adopted at [28] of the decision.

(b) Mr Bates agreed that the Judge's  treatment  of  the  expert  report  is
flawed, and that the Judge's findings in  relation  to  internal  relocation
are undermined by his failure to properly assess the appellant's  protection
claim and reach a conclusion. He agreed that  as  the  Judge  made  no  real
findings about the influence and reach of potential agents  of  persecution,
so that the findings on internal relocation are incomplete.

(c) Mr Bates did not accept all of  Ms  Smith's  arguments  in  relation  to
article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal, but accepted that the Judge has not  given
adequate consideration to the grant of limited leave to  remain  enjoyed  by
the  appellant's  partner.  He  accepted  that  there   is   a   less   than
straightforward family dynamic which needed  to  be  considered  in  greater
detail. He accepted that the decision does not properly deal with  the  best
interests of both the two children born to the  appellant  and  her  partner
and the interests of the  appellant's  partner's  British  citizen  children
from an earlier relationship.

(d) Both Mr Bates and Ms Smith joined in  asking  me  to  set  the  decision
aside and to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  of
new.

Analysis

7. Between [16] and [47] the Judge starts consideration of  the  appellant's
protection claim. At [20] he appears to make  findings  of  fact,  but  then
departs from fact-finding to quote from the appellant's  skeleton  argument.
Then (after confusing the numbering of  the  paragraphs)  at  [28]  declares
that  the  appellant's  evidence  is  riddled  with  inconsistencies  before
adopting the terms of the reasons for refusal letter. The Judge moves on  to
consider section 8 of the Asylum & Immigration (Treatment of Claimants  etc)
Act 2004, before again quoting at length from the skeleton argument for  the
appellant.

8. Between  [43]  and  [47]  the  Judge  returns  to  consideration  of  the
protection claim. He then appears to confuse the protection claim  with  the
article 8 claim, before reaching a conclusion that the appellant can  return
to Nigeria because her partner will return  with  her  &  protect  her.  The
Judge does not reach a conclusion in relation to the  protection  claim.  He
does not make any meaningful findings  about  risk  on  return  nor  on  the
existence (or otherwise) of  an  agent  of  persecution.  Instead  he  leaps
straight to consideration of internal relocation.

9. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

10. The decision does not contain an analysis  of  the  appellants  evidence
nor does the Judge say why he  prefers  the  respondent's  position  to  the
appellant's position. No meaningful decision is reached  on  the  protection
claim. That is a material error of law.

11. In Ex  parte  Virjon  B  [2002]  EWHC  1469,  Forbes  J  found  that  an
Adjudicator had been wrong to use adverse credibility findings  as  a  basis
for  rejecting  medical  evidence  without  first  considering  the  medical
evidence itself. That too was the view of the Court of Appeal  in  the  case
of Mibanga 2005 EWCA Civ 367.

12. The appellant relies on an expert report. At [43] the Judge rejects  the
expert report in  two  sentences.  The  Judge  rejects  the  experts  report
because the Judge does not find the appellant to be a credible  witness  and
because the Judge says that the expert report does not consider whether  the
appellant's partner will return to Nigeria with the appellant.

13. There is no meaningful analysis of the expert report. The  Judge  relies
almost exclusively on his finding that  the  appellant  is  not  a  credible
witness and does  not  consider  the  expert  report  further.  The  Judge's
superficial consideration of the expert report amounts to  another  material
error of law.

14. The Judge goes on to consider article  8.  At  [63]  he  says  that  his
starting point is that it is in the children's  interest  remain  with  both
parents. He fails to adequately consider the  position  of  the  appellant's
partner, who has limited leave to remain in the  UK,  and  his  relationship
with his two British citizen children from an earlier relationship.

15. The Judge's findings depend entirely on the appellant's partner  leaving
the UK with the appellant. His finding that the appellant  and  her  partner
are  inseparable  and  that  the  appellant's  partner  will  accompany  the
appellant to Nigeria is inadequately  reasoned.  At  [61]  the  Judge  makes
findings in relation to the two children  born  to  the  appellant  and  her
partner. He makes no findings in relation to  the  appellant's  partner  has
two British citizen children. Between [70] and [73]  the  Judge  appears  to
consider  the  test  of  reasonableness  which  applies  to  either  British
citizens or qualifying children.  Those  considerations  are  irrelevant  in
relation to the children of the appellant and her  partner.  The  Judge  has
not applied  those  considerations  to  the  appellant's  partner's  British
citizen children from an earlier relationship.

16. The decision in relation to each aspect of  the  appellant's  appeal  is
undermined by material errors of law. I set the decision aside.

17. I have already found material errors of law in the fact-finding  process
carried out by the First-tier in the decision promulgated  on  17  September
2018. I therefore find that I cannot substitute my own decision  because  of
the extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach  a  just  decision
in this appeal.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a)      the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal of a fair  hearing  or  other  opportunity  for  that
   party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b)      the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
   necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is  such
   that, having regard  to  the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
   appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

20. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Manchester  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Parker.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

22. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 17 September  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed      Date 15 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

