
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02784/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2019                            |On 19 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                              S H (Afghanistan)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Edward Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Ata & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.    I  continue  that  order
pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008:
unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall identify  the  original
appellant, whether directly or indirectly.  This order applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties.

Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Judge in Birmingham dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
    refusal of international protection and or leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Judge  Neville  on  the
    basis that the First-tier Judge decided the  appeal  on  the  basis  of
    internal relocation to Kabul alone, but failed to make a finding as  to
    whether there was a real risk in  the  home  area,  without  which  the
    question of internal relocation does not arise, and that  his  findings
    of fact and credibility, in particular his treatment of expert evidence
    before him, were arguably erroneous.

 3. In  granting  permission,  Judge  Neville  noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in relying on the Upper Tribunal decision  in  AS
    (Safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT  18  (IAC)  which  was
    overturned by the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Office Department [2019] EWCA Civ 873  and  remitted
    for reconsideration.  The  Court  of  Appeal's  reasons  for  remitting
    focused on the actual percentage number of casualties.

 4. At [80]-[82], Lord Justice Underhill defined the  task  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal on remittal in AS:

         "80. In those circumstances it seems to me that the remittal to the
         Upper Tribunal can  and  should  be  on  the  basis  that  it  need
         reconsider its conclusions only on the question of  the  extent  of
         the risk to returned asylum-seekers from security incidents of  the
         kind considered at paras. 190-9 of its Reasons. Although of  course
         the relevance of that risk is to the overall issue of whether it is
         reasonable for asylum-seekers to be expected to relocate to  Kabul,
         it is in practice a self-contained element within that  assessment,
         and since I would hold that there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
         Tribunal's approach to the other elements I see no reason why those
         elements require to be reconsidered.

         81.  The fact that the remitted issue is self-contained means  that
         there would be no difficulty in it being heard  by  a  differently-
         constituted Tribunal; and I think that in the circumstances of  the
         present case, given the nature of the error on ground 1, that would
         be the correct course. A fresh Tribunal  would  of  course  not  be
         privy to the evidence called  on  the  previous  occasion,  or  the
         submissions made; and that would  mean  that  the  evidence  as  to
         security risk adduced at the previous  hearing  would  have  to  be
         adduced again (unless agreed), together with any updating  evidence
         that might now be available, and further submissions made. But  the
         scope of the remitted hearing would still be far more limited  than
         first time round.

         82.  Those limits on the scope of the remittal are subject  to  one
         important qualification. We were told that  last  year,  after  the
         decision of the Upper Tribunal, UNHCR produced  further  Guidelines
         on  returns  to  Afghanistan,  which,  unlike  the  2016   version,
         unequivocally recommend that "given  the  current  security,  human
         rights and humanitarian situation in Kabul, an IFA/IRA is generally
         not available in the city". It will be for the Tribunal,  no  doubt
         after hearing submissions,  to  consider  whether  that  assessment
         requires a reconsideration  of  its  country  guidance  on  a  more
         extensive basis than is required by the remittal of this appeal. If
         it decides that it does, it is likely to make sense either for  the
         scope of hearing to be increased or (which may be procedurally more
         correct) for the remittal in this  case  to  be  heard  along  with
         whatever appeal is the vehicle for that wider consideration."
                                                            [Emphasis added]

 5. Permission to appeal was also granted in this appeal in relation to the
    Judge's reliance on EU (Afghanistan) & Others:  the First-tier  Judge's
    decision at [22]-[27] contains  a  speculative  disagreement  with  the
    appellant's evidence about his ongoing contact with  his  mother  after
    2017, which appears to have been made to the  ordinary  civil  standard
    (the Judge finds the evidence not 'likely') and/or by reference to what
    the judge repeatedly refers to as his own "common  sense"  rather  than
    basing his conclusions on the evidence  before  him  and  applying  the
    lower standard of  proof  used  for  the  assessment  of  international
    protection claims.

 6. Since I have found that the First-tier Tribunal's findings of fact  and
    credibility  were  made  to  the  higher   standard   of   balance   of
    probabilities rather than the international protection standard of real
    risk or reasonable degree of likelihood, only positive findings  as  to
    fact or credibility can survive.  There are no such  findings  in  this
    decision.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal decision is unsound and cannot stand.  There is
    no alternative but to set aside this decision and remit it to the First-
    tier Tribunal for remaking, with no findings  of  fact  or  credibility
    preserved.

DECISION

 8. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal will be
    remade afresh in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:      14 November
2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
