
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02095/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th September 2019               |On 9th October 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                   'K D H'
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed by Wick & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the remaking of the decision in the appellant's appeal  against
    the respondent's refusal of her protection and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Albania,  claimed  asylum  at  a  screening
    interview on 14 December 2015. She also sought leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom (the 'UK') on the basis of her human rights and  claimed
    to have been the victim of  trafficking.  The  respondent  refused  her
    asylum and human rights claims in a decision dated 29 January 2018 (the
    'Refusal Letter').

 3. Prior to this, the appellant  entered  the  UK  on  clandestinely.  She
    claims to have done so on 11 November 2015.  She then gave birth  to  a
    daughter in the UK on 23 May 2016. She claimed that her  pregnancy  was
    the result of her enforced prostitution and rape, which had taken place
    both in Italy and Albania in the period from 16 August 2015,  when  she
    was forced into an arranged  marriage  in  Albania,  fled  her  abusive
    husband and father, only to be trafficked into prostitution, which  she
    then escaped by entering the UK.  The appellant  was  referred  for  an
    assessment of her claim to have  been  trafficked  under  the  National
    Referral Mechanism ('NRM') on 14 December 2015. The  appellant's  claim
    to be trafficked  was  rejected  in  a  negative  'conclusive  grounds'
    decision on 5 December 2017, on the basis of  inconsistencies  and  the
    implausibility of the appellant's account, including the fact that  she
    was accompanied by someone using her husband's passport when  she  left
    Albania on 19 October 2015.

 4. On 26 March 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge  S  J  Clarke  (the  'FtT')
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of the appellant's
    protection claim, but allowed her claim under article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR'),  noting  her  PTSD  and  the  best
    interests of her daughter.  The FtT was  critical  of  the  appellant's
    credibility, but accepted the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  and  the  need  for
    ongoing counselling, so that the appellant's rights would  be  breached
    if she were removed from the UK.

 5.  The  appellant  appealed  and  the  respondent   cross-appealed;   the
    appellant, on the basis of a challenge to the  FtT's  analysis  of  her
    credibility; the respondent on the basis that if her account of adverse
    treatment was not accepted, it was unclear  why  she  would  face  very
    significant obstacles to  her  return  to  her  family,  including  her
    husband, in Albania.

 6. This Tribunal set aside the FtT's decision, allowing  both  the  appeal
    and cross-appeal, without any preserved findings of fact. This Tribunal
    regarded  it  as  appropriate  to  remake  the  decision,  noting   the
    availability of medical evidence to assist in a remaking decision.

The issues in this appeal

 7. The issues in remaking  the  FtT's  decision,  are:   (1)  whether  the
    appellant has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on  the  basis  of
    membership of a particular social group, specifically as the victim  of
    trafficking; and for the non-convention reason that  she  would  be  at
    risk of an 'honour' killing by  members  of  her  family;  (2)  whether
    sufficiency of protection would be available to the  appellant,  noting
    relevant Country Guidance cases of TD  and  AD  (Trafficked  women)  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC); DM (Sufficiency of Protection - PSG - Women  -
    Domestic Violence) Albania CG [2004]  UKIAT  00059  and  other  country
    evidence; (3)  whether  the  appellant  could  internally  relocate  in
    Tirana;  (4) whether by reference to her  PTSD,  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration in Albania, for  the  purposes
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration  Rules,  or  outside  the
    Immigration Rules by reference to article 8.   In  considering  all  of
    these issues I would need to consider the appellant's  daughter's  best
    interests, for the purposes of section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.

 8. Mr Burrett confirmed that the appellant did not seek to rely on article
    3 of the ECHR in respect of her mental health issues.

The gist of the respondent's refusal

 9. The core points taken against the appellant were as follows:

      a. The appellant claimed that her father was controlling and  punished
         her but had never been violent, which was not consistent  with  her
         claim that he had locked her up for 2 days at a  time  and  starved
         her;

      b. while her accounts  of  subsequent  ill-treatment  by  her  father,
         uncles and  husband  were  internally  consistent,  they  were  not
         consistent with her having left Albania accompanied by a  man  with
         her husband's passport on 19 October 2015, when she claimed to have
         last seen him on 18 August 2015;

      c. the appellant's  account  that  she  would  willingly  travel  with
         strangers, having been beaten and raped the  previous  day  by  her
         husband, was not plausible.

      d. whilst the appellant's description of the brothel in which she  was
         imprisoned in Italy was reasonably detailed, the respondent did not
         regard it as plausible that the appellant would then be taken  back
         to Albania and trafficked on a  second  occasion  from  Albania  to
         Italy;

      e. the respondent did not regard as plausible that the appellant would
         trust a 'client' of the brothel in which she  was  imprisoned  with
         her escape, having only just met him on 23 October  2015;  or  that
         those imprisoning the appellant would allow the  her  to  be  taken
         from the brothel by someone who was not her trafficker;

      f. the respondent did not regard as  plausible  that  the  appellant's
         rescuer would not simply contact the Italian authorities and  would
         instead procure the appellant's  travel  out  of  Italy,  at  great
         expense;

      g. the respondent drew adverse inferences from the appellant's failure
         to disclose that she left Albania with her husband, by reference to
         section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants)
         Act 2004;

      h. the respondent concluded that the  appellant  had  not  sought  the
         protection of the Albanian authorities. By reference to the country
         guidance,  there  was  an  integration  programme  for  victims  of
         trafficking as well as shelters.  Noting the  appellant's  personal
         circumstances, she came from an  economically  comfortable  family,
         having been educated to degree level. At the time  of  the  Refusal
         Letter she had not submitted evidence of  mental  health  or  other
         health problems. She was 24 years old and from  Shkoder  and  could
         relocate to Tirana. She claimed not to have a support  network  but
         she had contacted her sister after she escaped the traffickers. The
         appellant could obtain  anti-depressants  such  as  Sertraline  and
         access counselling in Albania. She could obtain  access  to  social
         housing and employment.

The hearing before me

10. The appellant did not give evidence in this Tribunal.   I  agreed  with
    the representatives that I would not draw any  inferences  accordingly,
    given the sensitive subject matter of the claim and the fact that there
    might be a risk of retraumatisation if the allegations  were  truthful.
    Whilst I had previously recorded in the error of law decision  that  it
    was not in dispute  that  the  appellant  suffered  from  PTSD,  having
    further canvassed issues  at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing  and  in
    fairness to Mr Melvin, the Refusal Letter did not in  fact  comment  on
    the question of PTSD; the alleged diagnosis of the condition post-dated
    the Refusal Letter; there had been no preservation of a finding of fact
    in relation to PTSD; and there had been no formal concession  that  the
    appellant's condition amounted to PTSD.  Whilst Mr Melvin accepted that
    the appellant suffered  a  lower  level  of  mental  issues,  the  full
    diagnosis of PTSD was not accepted by the respondent.  When I canvassed
    with Mr Burrett how we should then proceed, he indicated  that  he  was
    content that we proceed with the case today based on the expert medical
    report as it stood, albeit the medical expert  would  not  have  had  a
    chance to respond to any challenges to the diagnosis of PTSD.

Documents

11. The respondent provided a bundle including the appellant's  immigration
    history; the screening and  substantive  asylum  interview  notes;  the
    Refusal Letter and the  appellant's  appeal.   The  appellant  provided
    three paginated and indexed bundles (marked 'A' to 'C') which  included
    her witness statements, as well as the expert  reports  of  Dr  Rozamin
    Halari, a consultant clinical psychologist; and a Dr  James  Korovilas,
    an academic expert on human trafficking in the Balkans region, as  well
    as correspondence from counsellors, supportive of the appellant.

12. The hearing proceeded with submissions by both  representatives,  based
    on skeleton arguments, the summaries of which I set out below; and also
    with reference to  the  expert  reports  and  the  appellant's  witness
    statements.

13. I have considered all of the evidence provided to me, whether  I  refer
    to it specifically or not. The fact that I do  not  refer  to  specific
    reports, or correspondence, does not mean that I  have  not  considered
    them, particularly given the large number of documents,  running  to  4
    bundles.

Dr Halari's reports

14. Dr Halari prepared an initial report on 14 August 2018, a copy of which
    began at [6] of the appellant's bundle, marked 'B.'

15. Of significant concern, on the first page  of  the  report,  Dr  Halari
    referred to the name of somebody else, suggesting that in fact elements
    of the report had  been  copied  from  a  report  relating  to  someone
    entirely different. The issue was highlighted when the  question  arose
    of whether the appellant had previously applied  for  judicial  review.
    Dr Halari included at Appendix 2, a list of  documents  which  she  had
    considered in compiling the report, at [42], which suggested  that  the
    appellant had applied for judicial review.  Mr Burrett  confirmed  that
    the entirety of Appendix 2 was incorrect and therefore not only was the
    name of the  person  about  whom  Dr  Halari  was  writing  the  report
    incorrect, (not merely a typographical error, but a  largely  different
    name), but the list  of  documents  which  Dr  Halari  considered  when
    writing her report was also entirely incorrect, although she also based
    her report on an interview with  the  appellant.   Mr  Burrett  had  no
    explanation for this.  Whilst I do  not  discount  the  report  in  its
    entirety, it gave significant cause for concern as  to  the  extent  to
    which appropriate care had been given in producing the report  and  the
    extent to which elements of it had been copied from a  report  relating
    to an entirely different person.

16. In the remainder of the report, Dr Halari summarised the  gist  of  the
    appellant's account of meeting her husband, her  ill-treatment  by  him
    and her  subsequent  escape  and  trafficking.   She  referred  to  the
    appellant having receiving counselling since  April  2016  and  her  GP
    identifying a need for anti-depressants, although when I canvassed with
    Mr Burrett whether there were any GP records beyond correspondence from
    counselling teams. There were no comprehensive GP records.   Dr  Halari
    referred to the appellant claiming to be currently  taking  Sertraline,
    which was said to be a  relatively  modest  anti-depressant  drug.  She
    described an account  given  by  the  appellant  of  a  poor  appetite,
    recurrent dreams and flashbacks, a  sense  of  shame  and  thoughts  of
    suicide.  Dr Halari described poor eye contact  and  the  appellant  as
    being anxious; and when describing past  events,  she  became  tearful,
    quiet and anxious, and then less responsive,  tearful,  dulled,  almost
    drug-looking and unable to follow further questions.  This was relevant
    as it was said by Mr Burrett to explain possible omissions in  evidence
    that the appellant provided in her later accounts.  At  paragraph  [78]
    of her report, Dr Halari referred to the appellant  as  scoring  on  an
    assessment scale, '24'  'suggesting  moderate  levels  of  depression'.
    However, in contrast, later in the report, Dr Halari described at [108]
    'significant' symptoms of anxiety and depression and later,  at  [130],
    'severe  depression'.   There  was  no  explanation  for  the  apparent
    assessments  of  increasing  severity  of  depression  as  the   report
    continued to a conclusion.  Once  again  this  further  undermined  the
    weight I attached to the report.

17. At paragraph [86] Dr Halari referred to the appellant stating that  she
    had married her husband in 2015 and that traffickers had issued  her  a
    passport in 2014 in her married name.  The appellant described that all
    the things that had happened to her were very confusing, difficult  and
    traumatic for her to recall.  At paragraph [90] there was  a  reference
    to depressive disorder on a 'moderate  to  severe  range'.   Dr  Halari
    considered whether the appellant could be feigning  her  condition  and
    found no discrepancy between the  complained  condition  and  objective
    findings on psychological examination.  Dr  Halari  then  concluded  at
    [104] that the appellant's account was credible. Dr Halari referred (at
    [106]) contributing factors affecting the appellant's mental health  as
    including a fear of return to Albania and ongoing uncertainty regarding
    her and her daughter's future and safety.  She recommended,  at  [108],
    that  the  appellant  required  specialist  psychological  therapy  and
    benefit from seeing a  consultant  psychiatrist.   Dr  Halari  did  not
    believe that the appellant would be able to access support  in  Albania
    ([117]), because she had a young daughter and  because  of  a  lack  of
    support and a lack of mental health services in  Albania,  although  Dr
    Halari's conclusion about the availability of mental health services in
    Albania is not explained any further. Dr Halari also does  not  explain
    her expertise or experience in relation to mental health  provision  in
    Albania.

18. In a brief addendum report of 9 September 2019,  Dr  Halari  reiterated
    that her assessment was based not only on the appellant's account,  but
    on Dr Halari's clinical knowledge, training and  standardised  clinical
    assessments.   Dr  Halari  accepted  the  appellant's   experience   of
    trafficking  and  abuse  were  traumatic,  as  were  her   early   life
    experiences, including the impact of unspecified religious and cultural
    factors.  Dr Halari again expressed a view on the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account.

Dr Korovilas's reports

19. Dr Korovilas provided an  expert  report  dated  28  August  2018  (the
    appellant's bundle 'C') on the pattern of trafficking  in  relation  to
    the appellant's particular circumstances in Albania.   He  referred  at
    page [5] of his  report  to  objective  country  reports  that  he  had
    considered in compiling the report, the most recent of which was  a  US
    State Department Report dated March 2017; as  well  as  a  Home  Office
    Country Information and Guidance  Report  of  June  2014  and  a  later
    Operational Guidance Note of October 2014.

20. However, of note, Dr Korovilas did not refer to having  considered  the
    report of a Home Office fact-finding mission  in  Albania  of  February
    2018, despite its publication pre-dating his report by some six months,
    which provides much of  the  basis  of  the  respondent's  more  recent
    Country Policy and Information Notes (or 'CPIN's) on domestic abuse and
    violence against women (December 2018) and  people  trafficking  (March
    2019).  I asked for Mr Burrett's comments in relation to that  omission
    and whether Dr Korovilas might have potentially failed to  engage  with
    evidence on more recent improvements in  the  situation  for  potential
    victims of trafficking in Albania.  Mr Burrett did not have anything to
    add other  than  that  the  appellant  stood  by  the  contents  of  Dr
    Korovilas's report.

21. His report summarised a gist of the appellant's account; and  confirmed
    as consistent with background country evidence that the  applicant  may
    have accepted the offer of employment from strangers, when fleeing  her
    abusive husband.  While he referred to the US State  Department  Report
    as corroborating the general prevalence of trafficking in  Albania  and
    suggested that offers of employment and similarly sophisticated methods
    of trafficking took place, he did not refer to any source evidence when
    commenting  on  the  sophisticated  techniques  of   trafficking.    Dr
    Korovilas gave a view on whether the appellant's arranged marriage  was
    part of a trafficking process.  He opined that the possibility  of  the
    appellant's father having been involved was unlikely (page  [10]).   He
    stated that it was a 'much greater' possibility  that  the  appellant's
    husband had been involved in the process and went on to say that it was
    'highly plausible,' if the husband believed  he  would  be  paid  as  a
    result.  His analysis of the far great plausibility  of  the  husband's
    complicity, as opposed to the father's complicity,  was  similarly  not
    referenced to any source evidence.

22. Dr Korovilas also gave a view on the ease with which Albanian passports
    could be obtained without the appellant being present, via a  power  of
    attorney because of the corruption  of  state  authorities.  While  the
    Albanian electronic border monitoring system known as' TIMS' was itself
    reliable, people would often cross borders without  being  checked,  so
    that the TIMS system could  not  be  taken  as  a  reliable  record  of
    movements of Albanian citizens (14]).  He then listed the  shortcomings
    in the Albanian Police Force as identified in the US  State  Department
    Report of 2017; the prevalence of domestic  violence  in  Albania;  and
    considered the  possibility  that  the  strangers  whom  the  appellant
    alleged had trafficked her had pre-planned the entire abduction,  which
    he regarded as an 'entirely reasonable' assumption ([19]).

23. Dr Korovilas also concluded that it would be hard for the appellant, in
    the absence of family support, to secure employment or obtain access to
    accommodation without reference from where  she  and  her  family  were
    from; and if she registered, which she would need to for  the  purposes
    of work and accommodation,  she  could  be  re-trafficked.   Whilst  Dr
    Korovilas considered, at [26] and [27], the Country Guidance case of TD
    and AD; as well unspecified evidence on the national referral mechanism
    ('NRM') in Albania from a colleague at  the  Faculty  of  Economics  of
    Tirana University in February 2017, his comments were very  brief;  did
    not refer  to  the  Home  Office  Fact-Finding  Mission  report,  which
    included detailed material on the NRM, at [2.8], from multiple sources,
    all of which were available prior to his report, but  which  post-dated
    his single-source of evidence. His only brief comment of substance  was
    to criticise the number of places in  shelters  and  the  duration  for
    which people might stay in them, although he  does  not  say  what  the
    number of places is said to be; or the duration of permitted stay.   Dr
    Korvilas's analysis on the point is so limited, and  without  reference
    to more recent, but available material, to be of  very  limited  weight
    when assessing the appellant's ability to relocate, with the assistance
    of the NRM.

The appellant's submissions

24. In terms of the two written skeleton arguments produced by Mr  Burrett,
    these included the submissions that whilst the Albanian Government  was
    trying to address domestic violence, their attempts were  insufficient.
    There was a risk of honour  killing.   The  provision  of  shelter  for
    victims of domestic violence, as indicated by  a  US  State  Department
    Report on March 2017, indicated only  a  single  shelter  (although  Dr
    Korovilas referred  to  4).   Whilst  one  of  his  skeleton  arguments
    referred to article 3 of the ECHR, Mr Burrett confirmed that  this  was
    not in fact relied on.  There was both medical and country evidence  to
    support the appellant's account  and  the  impact  on  the  appellant's
    mental health, if she were returned  to  Albania.   Specialist  medical
    support would not be  accessible  in  Albania  and  I  also  needed  to
    consider Section 55 of the 2009 Act.

25. In oral  submissions,  Mr  Burrett  said  that  even  if  there  was  a
    discrepancy around a passport which the appellant  could  not  explain,
    she could not be expected to do so as she was not in control of events,
    as the victim of trafficking, but in any event, this did not  undermine
    the entirety of her case.  She could still have been  trafficked,  even
    if her husband had not been complicit or she had been  the  subject  of
    domestic violence; and still be at risk of re-trafficking, even if  the
    original traffickers were not aware that she had returned  to  Albania.
    Considering the risk factors on her return, she would be returning with
    a young child as a lone woman with mental health issues.

26. On the passport issue, it was now her contention that there  must  have
    been two false passports: one false passport for  herself  and  another
    for the person who used her husband's passport.  At page  [F1]  of  the
    respondent's bundle was the report produced to the respondent from  the
    TIMS system, indicating the appellant's movements with her husband.  It
    was not reliable as it suggested  that  she  had  previously  travelled
    outside Albania prior to 2014 but  did  not  have  a  passport  on  her
    earlier occasion.  This inconsistency undermined a central plank of the
    respondent's case, as the record  was  not  reliable.   Dr  Halari  had
    referred to the appellant  having  dissociations  which  would  explain
    about her difficulties in explaining what  had  happened,  but  in  any
    event the issue around passports was not one that she could know about.
    The remainder of her account was broadly consistent and had been so for
    a number of years.  Even if Dr Korovilas had not referred to  the  most
    recent Fact-finding Mission to Albania in his report, he  had  referred
    to the relevant case law and the risk factors.

The respondent's submissions

27. The expert reports were challenged as to their accuracy and the  extent
    to which they assisted the appellant's case.  It was not plausible that
    within the context of what  the  appellant  had  described  as  a  very
    restrictive family, the appellant's father would go to the  trouble  of
    paying for her to be educated in university, only to arrange a marriage
    with  someone  who  then  immediately  procured  her  trafficking.   In
    addition, there was a question of  how  the  appellant's  passport  was
    issued in her married name in 2014, when she claimed only to  have  met
    and married him in 2015.

28. If the appellant had believed the TIMS record to be inaccurate,  as  it
    did not record the two passports in  her  name,  it  was  open  to  the
    appellant, with legal representation, to have  contacted  the  Albanian
    passport authorities herself.  She had not done so,  despite  going  to
    the trouble of asking Dr Korovilas to produce a report which speculated
    on the ability to obtain false passports, in order to  challenge  this.
    There was  no  a  marriage  certificate  and  the  FtT  had  previously
    identified concerns about this.   The passport issue went to  the  core
    of the respondent's credibility concerns.  If the  appellant's  husband
    was not using his own passport, it implied it was stolen, in which case
    he would have reported it.

29. It was implausible  that  the  husband  would  make  a  profit  out  of
    trafficking his own wife, for the reasons  already  outlined.   It  was
    also implausible that she would seek to  escape  her  husband  only  to
    accept a job from two unnamed people who befriended her in a  caf�  but
    she had no idea of the place of  work,  salary  or  accommodation  that
    would be offered.  It was further implausible  that  a  client  of  the
    brothel in which she was imprisoned would then go  to  the  trouble  of
    procuring, at significant expense,  her  transport  across  to  the  UK
    rather than simply referring matters to the police.

30. There was further a lack of evidence  from  the  current  situation  in
    Albania regarding the appellant's family, two sisters and a brother and
    how they  could  assist  her  in  relocating  in  Albania.  The  recent
    evidence, and in particular the CPINs of December 2018 and March  2019,
    provided objective, detailed evidence as to the  extent  to  which  the
    Albanian Government was seeking to prevent  trafficking;  and  provided
    details of the NRM and the  protection  procedures  now  developed  for
    victims of trafficking and domestic violence, and the ability of single
    women to internally relocate.  Much of the material had been drawn from
    the 2017 Fact-finding Mission, which had not been referred to at all by
    Dr Korovilas, let alone discussed or engaged with.

31. In respect of Dr Halari's  evidence,  as  indicated  there  were  clear
    internal inconsistencies about the level of depression.  It  was  clear
    that Dr Halari had  crossed  the  line  in  terms  of  opining  on  the
    credibility of the appellant's account and had become too close to  the
    appellant in terms of giving  independent  expert  evidence.   She  had
    provided no basis for her assertion about the  lack  of  mental  health
    treatment in Albania.

The Law

Asylum protection

32. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that the  appellant  will
    be granted asylum if the provisions of that paragraph apply. The burden
    of proof rests on the appellant to satisfy me that she falls within the
    definition  of  a  refugee  in  Regulation  2  of   the   Qualification
    Regulations, as read with Article 1(A) of the  Refugee  Convention.  In
    essence, the appellant has to show  that  that  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that she is outside her country of nationality by
    reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for a  Refugee  Convention
    reason and is unable or unwilling, owing to such fear, to avail herself
    of the protection of that country.

Humanitarian protection

33. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules states that an  appellant,  who
    does not qualify as a refugee, will be granted humanitarian protection,
    if the provisions of that paragraph apply. The burden of proof rests on
    the appellant to satisfy  me  that  she  is  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.  In  essence,
    she will have to show that there are substantial grounds for  believing
    that, if returned, she would face a real risk of suffering serious harm
    and that she is unable or, owing  to  such  risk,  unwilling  to  avail
    herself of the protection of the country of  return.  Serious  harm  in
    this context is defined as the death  penalty  or  execution,  unlawful
    killing, torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment  or  a
    serious and individual threat to a person's life.

34.  In  assessing  the  evidence  for  the  purposes  of  any  claim   for
    asylum/humanitarian protection, I have considered carefully  Paragraphs
    339L to 339N of the Immigration Rules.  I am conscious that the absence
    of  documentation  would  not,  of  itself,  affect   the   appellant's
    credibility and that even if I conclude that the  appellant's  evidence
    is not credible, this would not necessarily mean that  her  asylum  and
    other claims should not succeed.

35. In assessing the appellant's accounts, I have also expressly considered
    the Country Guidance to which I have been referred, but do  not  recite
    that guidance again, for the purposes of brevity.

ECHR

36. In respect of the appellant's family and  private  life,  I  needed  to
    consider whether the facts warranted  consideration  under  article  8,
    outside the Immigration Rules.   If  I  did  conclude  that  the  facts
    warranted consideration outside the  Immigration  Rules,  I  needed  to
    consider section  117A  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.  Section  117A
    requires me to consider, in cases where I must  determine  whether  the
    respondent's decision breaches the appellant's right to a  private  and
    family life under article 8, the considerations listed in section  117B
    of that Act.  I may consider the facts up to the date of this hearing.

37.  In  addition,  in  considering  the  appellant's  case   outside   the
    Immigration Rules, I must consider the well-known test under  Razgar  v
    SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, in paragraphs [17] to [20].

Findings of fact

38. I am very conscious that there is not a requirement  of  corroboration,
    when assessing an account in a protection claim,  which  the  appellant
    needs only prove to the lower evidential standard.   Similarly,  simply
    because the appellant's credibility in one respect  is  not  sustained,
    does not mean that the entire of the account is necessarily untruthful.
     Nevertheless, where part of an allegation goes  to  the  core  of  the
    appellant's account, that is likely to present significant difficulties
    for the appellant in discharging  the  burden  of  proof.   I  am  also
    conscious of not falling into  the  error  of  considering  the  expert
    evidence in  isolation,  particularly  by  discounting  it  because  of
    credibility concerns with the appellant. Their  evidence  needs  to  be
    considered in the round.

39. When assessing the  appellant's  account,  I  also  took  into  account
    paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules, and the extent  to  which  the
    appellant should be given the statutory 'benefit of the doubt,' for the
    purposes of paragraph 339L.  I concluded that she should  not,  as  she
    has not established her overall credibility, for the reasons I set  out
    below.

40. On the one hand, I accept that there are large parts of the appellant's
    account that are internally consistent, in particular  the  claim  that
    she had had an arranged marriage; was ill-treated  by  her  husband  on
    their wedding night; fled him in August 2015; was trafficked in and out
    of Italy, last leaving Albania on 19 October 2015;  and  then  a  short
    period afterwards on 23 October 2015, fled her place of imprisonment in
    Italy assisted by a client of the brothel. I do  not  accept  that  the
    plausibility of her account is undermined  because  her  education,  to
    university level, is supportive of an ability to contrive  an  account.
    She has maintained her account over a number of years.  Some criticisms
    which the respondent took of the appellant's account are ones  that  in
    my view are not sustained and where the assessment of plausibility  has
    drifted into speculation.  In particular, an assertion that it  is  not
    plausible that she would not  seek  the  assistance  of  strangers,  on
    fleeing a violent husband, is not sustainable.  It is plausible that if
    desperate enough, somebody may seek help from strangers.

41. Similarly, I did not accept the criticism that  it  was  not  plausible
    that the person said to have helped the appellant  travel  from  Italy,
    would not simply have contacted the Italian police.  In that regard, an
    assessment of plausibility is not an exercise  in  comparisons  of  the
    likelihood of alternative scenarios. I accept that the  respondent  was
    entitled to have concerns about the plausibility of  the  same  rescuer
    doing so, when the appellant had been imprisoned in a brothel  and  her
    rescuer was known to her captors, but equally, a victim of  trafficking
    would not, in these circumstances, be able explain the motives  of  her
    rescuer or the full circumstances of his relationship with her captors.
     I accept as just about plausible, to the  lower  evidential  standard,
    that an individual client would have been willing  to  risk  themselves
    for a trafficked person in certain circumstances.

42. I do not, however, accept the appellant's general credibility,  because
    of the internal inconsistency in the appellant's account, which goes to
    the core of her case, namely the issue of her passport, in her  married
    name, not only prior to the date of her claimed  marriage,  but  before
    she even claimed to have met him; and her accompaniment by  someone  in
    the name of her husband in October 2015.   The issue  of  her  passport
    was raised an early stage of proceedings, on 5 December  2017,  in  the
    National Referral Mechanism 'conclusive grounds' decision.  The  letter
    states:

         "You claim that after being taken back to Albania on 31 August 2015
         you were handed over  to  another  group  of  men  who  abused  and
         exploited you until one of them took you by ferry to Italy from the
         port of Durres on 19 October 2015.  Information from  the  Albanian
         Ministry of Interior shows that you used your Albanian passport  to
         leave Albania via the Durres border crossing point and  checked  in
         at 20.37 hours on 19 October 2015.  However, it also shows that you
         travelled with your spouse, [name omitted  in  this  Decision]  who
         checked in at the same time".

43. The appellant's first written witness statement dated 13 July 2016 made
    no reference to the passport issue.  Mr Burrett says  that  is  because
    the appellant had no reason to know of the concern around the passport.
     In her witness statement, which was  not  paragraph-numbered,  but  at
    page [24] of the appellant's bundle 'A', she states  that  she  was  so
    petrified on fleeing her husband that when he left the house,  she  ran
    away from the matrimonial home and took her passport with her.

44. She gave no further details about the passport  that  she  had  already
    obtained at  the  time.   However,  in  paragraph  [9]  of  her  second
    statement dated 7 August 2018,  which  post-dated  the  NRM  conclusive
    grounds decision, she stated that she had travelled with a stranger and
    when she arrived at exit control on 19 October 2015, to leave  Albania,
    they  were  never  checked  on  departure  and  she  did  not  see  her
    traffickers show any passports to anyone in an official capacity.   She
    did not know how her husband's passport had been obtained, or  how  her
    husband's passport  details  had  been  obtained  to  arrange  a  false
    passport.

45. However, the appellant's case moves from a concern about her  husband's
    passport being false, to the suggestion by Dr Korovilas in  his  report
    about whether a copy of appellant's passport had been obtained falsely,
    using a power of attorney, at 24 hours' notice (pages [12] and [13]  of
    bundle 'C').

46. I considered the correspondence between the British Embassy  in  Tirana
    and the respondent, in the respondent's bundle at page [F1], where  the
    British Embassy attested to the veracity of enclosed results 'conducted
    by named individuals from the Albanian Border and Migration  Department
    and the British Embassy in Tirana,'. The  attached  evidence  from  the
    'TIMS' database referred  to  a  passport  issued  in  the  appellant's
    marital name. The date of issue was not stated but it was  valid  until
    20 November 2024. The record also stated,  "Previous  passport:  none",
    but added that the applicant had re-entered Albania, without  a  record
    of having left, on 19 March 2013 from Greece, which corresponds with Dr
    Korovilas's  suggestion  that  people  could  leave   Albania   without
    necessarily having passports checked, but not  because  of  any  fraud,
    merely because  of  busy  border  crossings.   The  appellant  is  then
    recorded as having travelled on 20 October 2013 from Milan to  Albania;
    and on 1 February 2014 from Kosovo to Albania, on each occasion without
    prior records of having left Albania. The  first  TIMS  record  of  the
    appellant leaving Albania is on 19 August  2015,  at  the  border  with
    Montenegro, with her returning to Albania  on  2  September  2015.   Mr
    Melvin asked me to consider that this was consistent with  a  honeymoon
    which the appellant may have taken with her husband.  The final  record
    is of the appellant leaving accompanied by someone using a passport  in
    her husband's  name  on  19  October  2015,  with  his  date  of  birth
    identified.

47. Mr Burrett submits that because the TIMS record shows travel  prior  to
    2014, before the date when appellant was said to have been issued  with
    a passport, this fundamentally undermines the entirety of  the  record,
    which is likely to have been compromised by corrupt officials, with two
    false passports, both for the appellant and  her  husband.   I  do  not
    accept that submission.  First, and as I asked Mr  Burrett  to  comment
    on, the suggestion of 'previous passport:  none"  may  simply  indicate
    that there are no records held, prior to the issue if the passport said
    to be false. He accepted this was a possibility.  I was also  conscious
    that the 'veracity' of the TIMS record was specifically attested to  by
    a joint team of the British Embassy in Tirana, who would obviously have
    no motive in producing false documentation; and their  counterparts  in
    the Albanian authorities.  Even if the level of corruption  extends  to
    obtaining false, duplicate passports, it  does  not  explain  how  that
    could not result in two passport records being on  the  TIMS  database;
    one for the allegedly false  duplicate  identified  at  [F1];  and  the
    appellant's 'true' passport that she took with her when  she  fled  her
    husband.  The only explanation would be a deception  by  modifying  the
    TIMS database itself. While the appellant's legal representatives  have
    taken the trouble to instruct Dr  Korovilas,  who  has  opined  on  the
    possibility of obtaining false passports in general, he does not  opine
    on a manipulation of the TIMS database, for which there is no  evidence
    whatsoever, and indeed he comments on the internal reliability  of  the
    TIMS database, as opposed to the extent to which it may not capture all
    movements of peoples; or prevent duplicate passports  being  issued  by
    proxy.  As Mr Melvin rightly submitted, there  is  no  explanation  for
    why, if this critical contention is pursued, the appellant's solicitors
    did not seek further evidence  from  the  Albanian  authorities,  which
    might show the issue of duplicate passports, if the document at [F1] is
    said to be a corrupted record. The respondent raised  the  issue  about
    the passport in 2017.  I did draw adverse inferences from  the  failure
    to do so, where the appellant has legal representation and has gone  to
    the trouble of instructing Dr Korovilas.

48. The lack of evidence, which could have been obtained,  to  support  the
    existence of a duplicate passport in the applicant's name  is  core  to
    the appellant's account. Without it, the respondent, and this Tribunal,
    is left with a TIMS record which  fundamentally  undermines  the  first
    part of the appellant's account, not only of fleeing her husband in the
    company of strangers, but in fact when she met  and  married  him,  the
    clear implication being that she had married  him  in  2014,  the  year
    before she admits to doing so.

49. Dr Korovilas's report is further weakened by that fact that  he  opines
    on the scenario of  the  appellant's  husband  being  involved  in  the
    trafficking  of  the  appellant,  which  he  regards  as  a  reasonable
    assumption. He does not then go on to analyse why, if the husband  were
    involved, the traffickers would go to the trouble of obtaining a  false
    or duplicate passport in the husband's name,  when  the  husband  could
    have simply used his own.

50. Mr Burrett seeks to resolve the clear contradiction  between  the  TIMS
    records and the appellant's account by suggesting that  first,  matters
    are confusing. I do not accept that submission;  rather  they  directly
    contradict a core part of the appellant's account.

51. His second submission is that even if the evidence contradicts part  of
    her account,  the  remainder  of  the  account  of  domestic  violence,
    trafficking and exploitation may nevertheless be true.  I do not accept
    that submission.  The TIMS record supports the fact, in the absence  of
    a marriage certificate, that the appellant married her husband no later
    than 20 November 2014, (10 years  prior  to  the  expiry  date  of  her
    passport), a full 10 months prior  to  apparently  leaving  Albania  in
    August 2015.   While the duration of a marriage for that period of time
    is not inconsistent with  the  possibility  of  domestic  violence,  it
    contradicts to the appellant's  account  of  meeting  her  husband  and
    almost immediately fleeing from him a matter of days  afterwards.   The
    contradiction exposed by the TIMS records is not explained by a lack of
    memory recall because of the appellant's mental health, which Dr Halari
    suggested, in more general terms, might explain a confusion over  dates
    and events. There is a stark  difference  between  fleeing  a  husband,
    after first meeting him, after a day or two, and being married  to  him
    for at least 10 months before doing so.

52. The TIMS records go not  only  to  the  appellant's  account  prior  to
    leaving Albania, but that she left Albania with her husband.  This then
    leads on to the second part of the account in which she described being
    trafficked by strangers and a matter of only a short  time  later,  her
    rescuer procuring her escape from a brothel in Italy.  If  however,  as
    records indicate, she in fact left Albania accompanied by her  husband,
    that puts an entirely different  complexion  on  the  circumstances  by
    which she will have been able to travel across Europe and also goes  to
    the issue of the continuing relationship between the appellant and  her
    husband.

53. In summary, evidence of the  fact  that  the  appellant  departed  from
    Albania with her husband goes to  the  core  credibility  not  only  of
    fleeing his violence, but also the risk of her  being  trafficked  when
    she was accompanied by her husband.  She has not alleged that  she  was
    directly accompanied by  him  as  a  trafficker  (merely  Dr  Korovilas
    suggesting that he may have been  indirectly  implicated).  Instead,  I
    find that the evidence supports that she was  in  fact  accompanied  by
    him.

54. In relation to Dr Halari's report, I have already identified two  areas
    of concern about the care with which the primary report  was  prepared,
    with the errors suggesting that the elements of  the  report  had  been
    copied  from  other,  unconnected  cases.    Second,   there   is   the
    inconsistent description of the severity of the appellant's  depression
    and also an accompanying absence of detailed GP records.  Whilst  I  do
    not suggest that the appellant has not sought counselling,  and  indeed
    correspondence from various counselling  organisations  attest  to  her
    continuing participation in counselling, it is regrettably  clear  that
    Dr Halari has over-emphasised the severity of her depression, literally
    as  the  report  developed,  from  a  'mild'  depression  to   'severe'
    depression.  In relation to causation of  that  depression,  Dr  Halari
    accepts  that  the  fact  of  travel  across  Europe  and,  putting  it
    neutrally, having to do so in clandestine terms,  will  naturally  have
    caused depression, as will uncertainty over her continuing  immigration
    status.  Put it another way, whilst the appellant may suffer a form  of
    depression and anxiety around having had to travel through  Europe  and
    also her current uncertainty over her  immigration  status,  that  adds
    limited weight, but not no weight, to the account of  trafficking,  and
    rape and domestic violence.  Having identified the flaws in the medical
    report, whilst I do not discount the report entirely, what they  do  is
    to support an assessment of  somebody  who  has  moderate  anxiety  and
    depression, as well as somebody who has  also  repeatedly  asserted  an
    account which is consistent, save in relation to the core issue  around
    her passport.

55. In relation to Dr  Korovilas's  report,  I  accept  that  the  risk  of
    trafficking is one that, given the appellant's age, is consistent  with
    background evidence.  What Dr Korovilas does  not  do  is  explain  the
    different situation between the risk that the appellant's  husband  was
    somehow involved as opposed to the  lower  risk  that  the  appellant's
    father was involved.  Dr Korovilas also does not  also  in  his  report
    attempt to engage with the fact that the British Embassy in Tirana  has
    attested to the accuracy of the TIMS record; or  how  the  TIMS  record
    could be manipulated.

56. In summary, whilst Dr Korovilas's report is consistent with a  risk  in
    certain circumstances of trafficking in the context of Albania, it does
    not engage with the central weakness around  the  manipulation  of  the
    TIMS record and the risk to her on return if the appellant left Albania
    accompanied by her husband.

57. Based on the evidence as discussed, I find that the appellant  has  not
    established that she married her husband as  claimed  in  August  2015;
    almost immediately fled him; was encountered by  strangers,  trafficked
    and then re-trafficked, on the last occasion leaving  in  October  2015
    and then the subject of rape, imprisonment in a brothel and  trafficked
    across Europe.  I was conscious of the lower evidential burden of proof
    on the appellant.  However, the core of  her  account  is  inconsistent
    with evidence verified by the British Embassy in  Tirana.   Instead,  I
    find that the appellant was not the subject of domestic violence, as  a
    result of which she fled Albania; and instead  I  find  that  she  left
    Albania on 19 October 2015 with her husband,  and  was  not  trafficked
    across Europe; and that the couple are not estranged, as claimed.

58. Whilst I find that the appellant suffers from moderate  depression,  it
    is  explained  by  the  traumatic  experience   of   having   travelled
    clandestinely  across  Europe.   In  terms  of   findings   about   the
    appellant's family and private life in the United Kingdom, I accept  Mr
    Melvin's submission that there is virtually  no  evidence,  beyond  the
    appellant's  engagement  with  the  counselling  and  local   authority
    services in supporting the appellant's establishment of a private  life
    in the UK, and that whilst the appellant's daughter will shortly be, if
    not  already  at,  the  age  of  attending  nursery,  her  daughter  is
    relatively young, (aged 3) and whose central focus is on the appellant.
    There is nothing contrary to the best interests of that young child  to
    return with her mother to Albania.  I make this finding specifically in
    the circumstances that where there has been no estrangement between the
    appellant  and  her  husband,  that  he  would  provide  a   supportive
    environment for the appellant to return to Albania.  I  find  that  her
    daughter was  not  conceived  as  a  result  of  any  alleged  rape  by
    traffickers or their clients and that instead, the appellant's  husband
    is the father of her daughter.

59. If, as alleged, the appellant has previously  suffered  a  restrictive,
    overbearing father, there is nothing that would prevent  the  appellant
    from having the protection of her husband and immediate  family;  there
    is no suggestion that the appellant's father and the husband  have  any
    particular antipathy to the extent that the couple themselves would  be
    at risk on reunification in Albania.

60. Bearing in mind the relevant Country Guidance,  in  the  circumstances,
    the appellant would not return to Albania as a lone woman, but  instead
    would be as part of a family unit with her husband and their very young
    daughter.  I considered the extent to which the appellant would not  be
    able to access appropriate  medical  services  for  her  treatment  for
    moderate depression.  Whilst Dr Halari suggested that medical  services
    in  Albania  are  inadequate  to  treat  depression,  she  provides  no
    explanation for that assertion by reference to any objective  evidence,
    or the basis  of  her  knowledge  of  Albanian  medical  services.  The
    December 2018 CPIN describes, at  paragraph  [7.3],  the  provision  of
    mental health services in Tirana and elsewhere,  including  in  womens'
    shelters, with a range of support being offered. There is no  objective
    evidence  that  counselling  services  for  moderate   depression,   or
    Sertraline, obtained via a local doctor or GP, would not  be  available
    in Albania. In the circumstances, I find that there would not  be  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration, as a family unit,
    with her husband and daughter in Albania.

Conclusions

Asylum

61. Based on my findings set out above, I have concluded that the appellant
    does not have a genuine, let alone a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    based on being  a  victim  of  trafficking  (issue  (1)  identified  in
    paragraph 7 of this Decision).

Conclusions on humanitarian protection

62. On the same facts established in this  appeal,  I  concluded  that  the
    appellant has not discharged the  burden  of  showing  that  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that, if returned, she would  face  a
    real risk of suffering serious harm, because  of  the  risk  of  honour
    killing,  (issue  (2),  as  previously  identified).  This   allegation
    depended on the claim of estrangement between  the  appellant  and  her
    husband, which I do not accept was proven.

63. It follows that the question of internal relocation  (issue  (3))  does
    not need to be answered.

Conclusions on ECHR

64. By reference to issue (4), on the facts  established  in  this  appeal,
    there are no grounds for believing that the  appellant's  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would result in a breach of the  appellant's  rights
    under article 8 of the ECHR.  In reaching this conclusion, I considered
    the appellant's circumstances outside the  Immigration  Rules  for  the
    purposes of article 8, but taking the Immigration Rules as my  starting
    point.  By reference to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, based on the facts found, there would not  be  very  significant
    obstacles to her integration in Albania.  She would be returning to her
    husband and would reintegrate as part of a family  unit  with  him  and
    their daughter; and it is in that child's best interests that she  does
    so.  She would be able to continue to access counselling and any  other
    mental health services she needs.

65. I also specifically considered sections 117A and B of the 2002 Act.  In
    the context of the appellant's protection claim having failed, she  has
    only a limited family and private life in the UK, all of which she  has
    established without settled leave to remain, so that limited weight can
    be attached to  it.   There  is  no  evidence  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant's daughter to leave the UK with  her
    mother.  To the extent that refusal of leave to remain engages  article
    8, it is in accordance with the Immigration Rules and for a lawful end,
    namely immigration control.  On the final 'Razgar' question, I conclude
    that any interference in the appellant's  family  or  private  life  is
    wholly proportionate, weighing up on the one hand, the weight  attached
    to the appellant's  family  and  private  life  in  the  UK,  which  is
    necessarily limited; and against that, the lack  of  obstacles  to  her
    return to Albania, of which she and  her  daughter  are  citizens;  the
    powerful interest in immigration control; and the reunification of  the
    appellant with her husband, as part of a family unit, which must be  in
    their daughter's best interests.

Decision

66. I remake the FtT's decision.  In doing so, I  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds; humanitarian protection  grounds;  and  human
    rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of  her  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 3 October 2019

J Keith
Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and so there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 3 October 2019

J Keith
Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02095/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2019                      |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                  MS k d h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel instructed by Wick & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
    were given ex tempore at the end of the hearing on 22 July 2019.



Introduction

 1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  appellant,  and  a  cross-appeal  by  the
    respondent against the decision (the 'Decision) of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S J Clarke (the 'FtT') promulgated on 26 March 2019, by which she
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal against the respondent's  refusal  on
    29 January 2018 of her protection claim, but allowed  her  claim  under
    article 8 of the ECHR, noting her PTSD and the best  interests  of  her
    young child, born in the United Kingdom ('UK').

 2. In essence, the appellant claimed to have fled an  abusive  husband  in
    Albania, her country of origin, whom she was forced to marry, only then
    to be the target of sex-traffickers, who trafficked  and  re-trafficked
    her to Italy.  She claimed to have been able to escape as  one  of  her
    'clients' (I use this phrase without any disrespect to  the  appellant)
    sought the agreement of those imprisoning her that she  be  allowed  to
    stay with him, but he then arranged her travel to the UK  clandestinely
    in lorries.  The  core  points  taken  against  the  appellant  by  the
    respondent related to the appellant travelling backwards  and  forwards
    from Albania accompanied by a person using her husband's passport, whom
    she claimed to have fled, as well as the implausibility of the  account
    of a client negotiating her temporary release  from  those  imprisoning
    her, only then to procure her escape.  The respondent had assessed  her
    under the National Referral Mechanism or 'NRM' but reached  a  negative
    conclusive grounds decision.

The FtT's decision

 3. The FtT made an analysis of the evidence, running from  [11]  to  [30].
    The FtT was not impressed by various aspects of the  evidence,  finding
    there to be inconsistencies in the appellant's accompaniment by someone
    using her husband's passport; the lack of analysis of this in an expert
    report; and the lack of plausibility in the account of the client being
    able to procure her release. The FtT accepted the diagnosis of PTSD and
    the need for ongoing counselling, so that there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's return in light of her mental  health,  so
    that her article 8 rights would be breached if she  were  removed  from
    the UK.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The appellant asserts  that  the  FtT  erred  in  finding  her  account
    rehearsed, because she was an educated woman;  had  failed  to  analyse
    adequately the psychologist's report as corroborating  the  appellant's
    account; and failed to assess the core account in light of the  country
    expert report.  The respondent, in the cross-appeal, asserts  that  the
    where the FtT had regarded the entirety of the account  as  fabricated,
    she failed to  assess  adequately  the  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration, e.g. her return to her husband.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes granted permission on  11  April  2019
    for the respondent's application  while  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chamberlain granted  the  appellant's  application  on  20  June  2019.
    Neither grant was limited in its scope.

The hearing before me

The appellant's submissions

 6. The  FtT's  criticism  of  the  appellant's  credibility  was  brief  -
    inadequately so.  At paragraph [24] of the Decision it  was  said  that
    the appellant had the ability to rehearse facts.  The Decision  states,
    "I find she has displayed an ability to learn facts to a high degree of
    education and this  is  an  explanation  for  her  ability  to  give  a
    consistent version of events both internally and  with  the  background
    evidence."  In essence, if the appellant were to be criticised for this
    it follows that a large number of those seeking protection claims would
    also fail.  Crucially, the FtT had reached this decision whilst at  the
    same time accepting that the accuracy of the  assessment  at  paragraph
    [16] of PTSD, which the FtT had accepted she was not feigning.  As well
    as this there had been supporting letters from the Rape  Crisis  Centre
    and also the Salvation Army.  It was said that on the  one  hand  being
    able to give a credible account was something she  was  criticised  for
    whilst on the other hand, there  was  a  reliable  assessment  of  PTSD
    together  with  supporting  documentation.  The  latter  could  not  be
    reconciled  with  the  adverse  credibility  finding,  without  further
    reasoning.  There was no engagement with the appellant's  core  account
    and in particular that she had suffered from PTSD.

The respondent's submissions

 7. In response, while Mr Tarlow made no  formal  concession,  he  accepted
    candidly that there were,  what  he  described,  as  'lacunae'  in  the
    reasoning and that therefore the case needed to be considered again.

Discussion and conclusions

 8. The FtT erred in law in its reasoning in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    credibility, particularly on the one hand, accepting the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD, which centred on the appellant's credibility, whilst on the other
    hand, discounting the consistency of her account as rehearsed.  It  was
    incumbent on the FtT to explain its reasoning  more  fully,  where  the
    PTSD diagnosis  was  seen  as  credible.   The  appellant's  appeal  is
    therefore allowed.

 9. The FtT also failed to adequately analysis and explain whether,  if  he
    disbelieved her account,  she  would  return  to  Albania  with  family
    support (specifically her husband) and the extent to which such support
    would assist in overcoming obstacles to her integration.  The  Decision
    did not contain any analysis of this and that is an error of law.   The
    respondent's cross-appeal is therefore allowed.

Notice of Decision and disposal

 6. The Decision contained errors of law and it is appropriate that  I  set
    it aside, which I do so.   The appellant's appeal and the  respondent's
    cross-appeal both succeed.

 7. The remaking of the decision  can  be  properly  remade  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, in light  of  the  availability  of  the  expert  documentary
    evidence.  While the parties have liberty to apply to serve  additional
    evidence, the existing documents appear to  be  comprehensive,  without
    the need for the appellant to give  additional  evidence,  particularly
    given her vulnerability.  A hearing will be listed in order  to  remake
    the Decision accordingly.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 8. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 3 October 2019

J Keith
Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

