
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02541/2019




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th December 2019                        |On 4th February 2020          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between


                                     DDK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Ms L Bashow, instructed by Parker Rhodes
    Hickmotts Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS



      1. No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").
          However, as this a protection claim,  it  is  appropriate  that  a
         direction is made. Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  Court  directs
         otherwise, DDK is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This direction applies  amongst  others  to  all  parties.
         Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
         court proceedings.


      2. The appellant is a national of Iraq.   He  arrived  in  the  United
         Kingdom 15th December  2016  and  claimed  asylum.  His  claim  was
         refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a  decision  dated
         5th March 2019. The appellant's appeal against  that  decision  was
         dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  ("the  judge")  for
         reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 29th May 2019.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford


      3.  The  judge  summarises  the  appellant's  immigration  history  at
         paragraphs [1] of her decision.  The background to  the  claim  for
         asylum is set out at paragraphs [3] to [9] of  the  decision.   The
         judge records at paragraph [10]:


             "The Secretary of  State  accepts  that  the  appellant  is  a
             national of Iraq from Kirkuk.  It is accepted that  he  is  an
             ethnic Kurd."

      4. At paragraph [23], the judge referred to two  documents  that  were
         relied upon by the appellant at the  hearing  of  the  appeal.  The
         judge admitted the documents because  they  were  relevant  to  the
         matters in issue.   The  first  document  was  a  letter  from  the
         appellant's GP which confirmed, on examination, that the  appellant
         has scarring and muscle wasting at the  back  of  the  right  thigh
         close to the knee and the front of the left thigh. The judge noted,
         at [24], that the GP offers no opinion as to causation  or  whether
         the scarring observed was consistent with  the  appellant's  claim.
         The second document relied upon by the appellant was an email  from
         the appellant's representative to the  respondent  commenting  upon
         the interview record dated 1st February 2019.  In that  email,  the
         appellant claimed that he was not sure if he can obtain his ID card
         from Iraq, but he has asked his mother and is awaiting a response.


      5. At paragraph [26], the judge records the evidence of the  appellant
         at the hearing of the appeal that his mother has  moved  to  a  new
         house from one part of Kirkuk to another. His evidence was that his
         mother had been unable to find his CSID since the move.


      6. The judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [30]
         to [50] of her decision. The judge refers to  the  evidence  before
         her regarding the appellant's CSID at paragraphs [31]  to  [34]  of
         the decision.  At paragraphs [34] and [35], the judge concluded  as
         follows:


              "34.     He had not rung his solicitors to tell  them  of  the
             change in his mother's situation or the loss of the  CSID  and
             said that it was only on the day of the hearing that  he  told
             his representative for the first time  of  his  mother  having
             lost his CSID.  I did  not  find  this  to  be  credible.  The
             appellant knew from the date of the refusal  letter  that  the
             respondent was relying on his statement that his CSID  was  in
             Iraq with his mother and I  am  satisfied  that  he  knew  the
             importance of this issue. He had asked his mother for the CSID
             and as at early February he was waiting for her to respond  to
             his request.

              35. I do not find it credible that he would leave it until two
             weeks before the hearing to get  a  clear  response  from  his
             mother about his CSID and I  do  not  find  it  credible  that
             having only just signed his witness statement six days  before
             the latest phone call with  his  mother,  that  he  would  not
             realise that it was important to tell his solicitor about  the
             lost CSID.  Nor do I accept that his mother would have been so
             careless as to lose the CSID  given  the  importance  of  this
             document to the appellant's functioning in Iraq and especially
             given that he was returned to Iraq when he previously left and
             claimed in Sweden. He resumed his former employment as a lorry
             driver when he returned from Sweden and the only time he  said
             he was in hiding was in  2016  when  he  was  discharged  from
             hospital and hiding from Ibrahim and the IS group to which  he
             belonged. I do not accept even to the lowest standard of proof
             that the appellant has told the truth about  his  CSID  and  I
             find that he can secure it on request from Iraq where he  left
             it in the care of his mother."




      7. The judge considered the appellant's account  of  events  following
         his return to Iraq  from  Sweden  in  2013.  The  judge  noted  the
         appellant had previously claimed asylum in Sweden on the basis that
         his life was at risk from IS because of what had  happened  to  his
         father and to his brother. At paragraph [38], the judge stated:


              "His older brother apparently knows the details of the killing
             of his father and of his brother and he lives in Sweden. I had
             no evidence from the appellants brother either concerning  his
             own situation in Sweden and the account he gave of his  family
             history to the  Swedish  authorities  or  of  the  appellant's
             history. While there is no requirement  for  corroboration  in
             asylum claims, if evidence is relevant and available  then  it
             should be produced. The appellant has not produced  any  death
             certificates for  his  father  or  his  brother.  He  has  not
             produced any evidence of his father's claimed employment as  a
             driver with the police. At the hearing he was asked which part
             of government his father had worked for and he said there were
             2, PUK and KDP and he thought his father was working  for  the
             PUK. In re-examination he was asked if he was  sure  that  his
             father was working for the PUK and he said  that  he  was  not
             sure, that his father was working for the government,  but  he
             did not know which government. This evidence suggests strongly
             that  his  father  was  working  in  the  IKR  and  that   the
             appellant's home area is in the IKR and not Kirkuk."

      8. The judge refers, at [39], to the vagueness and lack of  detail  in
         the appellant's evidence  about  his  father's  and  his  brother's
         death.  That vagueness  and  lack  of  detail   led  the  Judge  to
         conclude, at [39], that even to the lower  standard  the  appellant
         has not discharged the burden of proof the rests with him  and  the
         judge did not accept that the appellant's father and/or his brother
         were killed by ISIS.  At paragraph [40], the judge  refers  to  the
         matters  relied upon by the appellant:


              "The appellant's current claim rests  on  events  since  early
             2016. Three years on from those events the appellant  has  not
             produced any medical records from Iraq. He was made  aware  at
             his screening interview  that  any  relevant  medical  records
             should be secured and submitted as quickly as possible. He has
             stated that he was treated  in  hospital  in  Kirkuk  for  4-6
             months for severe injuries  in  2016  caused  by  beating  and
             electric shock and had to have extensive skin grafts.  He  has
             been able (sic) in contact with his mother and has conceded at
             interview that he could contact her if he needed to do so.  He
             could have requested that his mother  help  him  in  accessing
             those  records  but  gave  no  account  of   doing   so.   His
             representatives could have contacted the hospital  direct  and
             sought the records, but I had no account of any efforts  being
             made in this regard."

      9. The judge noted at paragraph [41], that the letter relied  upon  by
         the appellant from his GP is far from satisfactory. She  noted  the
         letter says nothing about causation and whilst the  Judge  accepted
         that the appellant has  some serious  scarring  to  his  legs,  she
         concluded the scarring observed by the GP during the examination in
         February 2019 could have been caused  in  a  number  of  ways.   At
         paragraphs [43] to [45], the judge concluded:


              "43.     I am not satisfied even  to  the  lower  standard  of
             proof that this appellant was ever tortured in 2016 by  IS  or
             Daesh or any militia group interested in forcing him to become
             a suicide bomber. His account of being left for dead but  then
             recovering and of Ibrahim somehow finding out what  his  phone
             number  was  and  repeatedly  threatening  to  kill   him   is
             completely lacking in credibility for the reasons given in the
             refusal letter.

              44.  The  appellant  could  have  produced  his  CSID  or  his
             brother's details from Sweden as evidence of his home area  in
             Iraq. The respondent has never conceded that the appellant  is
             from Kirkuk, just that he is an Iraqi Kurd. I am not satisfied
             that he is from Kirkuk.

              45. But even if he is from Kirkuk (and I do not  believe  that
             he is) then he can still  be  returned  safely  to  Iraq.  His
             mother has his CSID and can get it to him. He can travel  from
             Baghdad to the IKR or alternatively fly direct to Erbil as  he
             did before and if he does not wish to return to Kirkuk he  can
             stay in the IKR. He has a viable relocation alternative."

     10.  At paragraph [47], the judge found the appellant will be  able  to
         secure entry to the IKR as an ethnic Kurd with a  CSID.  The  judge
         did not accept that the situation on the ground in the IKR is  such
         that the appellant will, merely by his presence as a civilian, face
         a real risk of serious harm. The judge noted there was no  evidence
         to suggest the appellant will not be able to work or to secure  the
         necessities of life as he did before he left Iraq.


The appeal before me


     11. The appellant advances two grounds  of  appeal.  First,  the  judge
         found the appellant is not from Kirkuk, whereas the respondent  had
         accepted the appellant is an  Iraqi  Kurd  from  Kirkuk,  following
         extensive questioning of the appellant by the respondent during his
         interview.  The appellant claims it was irrational for the judge to
         require documentary evidence to corroborate the  appellant's  claim
         that he is from Kirkuk, and it  was  procedurally  unfair  for  the
         judge to find in her determination that the appellant is  not  from
         Kirkuk, when he was not challenged about that during his  evidence,
         or given an opportunity to  address any  concerns.   The  appellant
         claims that the issue as to whether the appellant is from Kirkuk or
         the IKR is relevant to the question of  internal  relocation.   The
         appellant claims the judge does not adequately address the issue of
         internal relocation, and the judge fails to adequately address  the
         question as to whether the appellant can internally relocate.


     12.  Second,  the  judge  erred  requiring  the  appellant  to  provide
         corroborating documentary evidence to support his claim  generally,
         contrary to the general principle that documentary corroboration is
         not required if  the  person  can  substantiate  their  claim  with
         coherent evidence, and  if  the  evidence  is  not  available.  The
         appellant claims that his account  of  events  is  consistent  with
         evidence referred to in the country guidance decisions that torture
         by ISIS  is  systemic  in  contested  areas  such  as  Kirkuk.  The
         appellant gave detailed information during his interview as to  the
         events that had occurred when he returned to Iraq from  Sweden  and
         he explained how he had  been  beaten  and  tortured  when  he  was
         detained.   The  appellant  had  provided  a  letter  from  his  GP
         confirming the extensive scarring on his leg, and the judge  failed
         to evaluate the appellant's claim but rejected it as untrue, simply
         because of a lack of very specific background  material  supporting
         the claim.


     13. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria
         on 18th June 2019. The matter comes before me to determine  whether
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  infected  by  a
         material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


     14. At the outset of the hearing before me Mr Mills conceded the  judge
         went  behind  the  concession  made  by  the  respondent  that  the
         appellant is  from  Kirkuk.   However,  he  submits,  that  is  not
         material because the judge immediately, at  [45],  deals  with  the
         position as it would be, even if the appellant is from Kirkuk.


     15. Ms Bashow submits  that  although  at  paragraph  [45],  the  judge
         appears to  consider the matter on the alternative basis  that  the
         appellant is from Kirkuk, that  consideration  is  tainted  by  the
         Judge's view, expressed again at paragraph [45], that she  did  not
         believe the appellant is from Kirkuk.  Ms Bashow submits it  is  an
         issue of fairness and the appellant  can  have  no  confidence  the
         judge properly considered the claim with anxious scrutiny when  the
         Judge starts off on the premise that  the  appellant  is  not  from
         Kirkuk.   The  appellant's  home  area  is   fundamental   to   the
         consideration of the claim because it impacts upon the decision  as
         to whether  the  appellant  can  internally  relocate.   The  judge
         concludes the appellant has a  viable  relocation  alternative  but
         fails to address whether it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         appellant to relocate given his own background and the support that
         would be available to him.


     16. Ms Bashow  submits  that  in  addressing  the  credibility  of  the
         appellant,  the  judge  imposed  a  higher  burden  by  imposing  a
         requirement for evidence to corroborate his account of events.  She
         submits that corroboration is  not  necessary  and  refers  to  the
         decision of the Court of Appeal in TK  (Burundi)  -v-  SSHD  [2009]
         EWCA Civ 40.  She submits  the  question  is  whether  evidence  to
         support the account given by the appellant is or should readily  be
         available.  Here, the appellant had been treated in a  hospital  in
         Iraq and it is far from clear that any  medical  records  would  be
         available.  She submits that throughout her  consideration  of  the
         credibility of the claim made by the appellant, the judge  required
         evidence to corroborate the appellant's account,  and  in  reaching
         her findings regarding the  appellant's  account  of  events  since
         2016, at paragraphs [40] to [42], the judge  relies  entirely  upon
         the lack of evidence to support the claim.  Ms Bashow  submits  the
         judge is not entitled to  say  that  there  may  hypothetically  be
         evidence, that could support the  account.   She  submits  that  at
         paragraph [42], the judge simply states that there was no  evidence
         that ISIS would use torture to force  the  appellant  to  agree  to
         becoming a suicide bomber.  The  background  material  acknowledges
         that ISIS do use torture. Ms Bashow submits  that  in  AA  (Article
         15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544  (IAC),  the  Upper  Tribunal,  at
         [31], acknowledged the evidence from Amnesty International that  in
         areas held or contested by ISIL there remained substantial  dangers
         of killing and other human rights  abuse  of  the  utmost  gravity,
         including torture and sexual violence.


     17. In reply, Mr Mills  submits,  that  although  the  judge  erred  in
         finding the appellant  is  not  from  Kirkuk,  that  is  immaterial
         because the judge addressed the  question  of  internal  relocation
         from Kirkuk to the  IKR.   He  accepts  the  consideration  is  not
         particularly thorough, but, he submits, there  is  nothing  on  the
         facts found, that could  possibly  demonstrate  that  it  would  be
         unduly harsh for the appellant  to  internally  relocate.   As  the
         judge recognised, the availability of the CSID is key.   The  judge
         found the appellant has a CSID and has  access  to  it.   Mr  Mills
         submits the appellant is a young single male of working  age,  with
         some health issues, that would not prevent  him  working.   He  has
         access to a CSID and in the circumstances it was open to the  judge
         to find that he has a viable relocation alternative for  the  brief
         reasons set out  in  the  decision.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
         conclude that the appellant can secure entry  to  the  IKR  with  a
         CSID.


     18. Mr Mills submits it was open to the judge to note  the  absence  of
         evidence to corroborate the appellant's account. When the  decision
         is read as a whole it is plain that the judge  gives  a  number  of
         reasons for rejecting the core of the appellants claim.  The  judge
         noted, at [38], that there is no requirement for  corroboration  in
         asylum claims, but if evidence is relevant and available, it should
         be produced.  That is undoubtably true.  In TK (Burundi), the Court
         of Appeal noted there is a lower standard in asylum claims, but  if
         there is no good reason why the evidence that should  be  available
         is not produced, the judge is entitled to take that into account in
         the assessment of the credibility of the account.  Here, the  judge
         was concerned that the appellant had not provided information  from
         his brother that would be readily available regarding the basis  of
         his claim for refugee status in Sweden and his knowledge of  events
         that had occurred in Iraq.   Documents  from  Iraq  might  be  less
         readily available, but here the judge found that the appellant  has
         continued contact with his mother and there had been no attempt  to
         obtain any evidence to  support  the  claims  being  made,  and  no
         explanation for the absence of such evidence.  The judge noted  the
         appellant had been admitted to hospital for  a  period  of  between
         four to six months. In assessing the claim,  it  was  open  to  the
         judge to refer to the lack of any medical records from the hospital
         at which the appellant had been extensively treated.


     19. Mr Mills submits at paragraph [42] of her decision, the  judge  was
         addressing the particular claim made by the appellant that  he  was
         beaten and tortured by Daesh who wanted him  to  become  a  suicide
         bomber. When the decision is carefully read it is clear  the  judge
         does not go as far as to say that ISIS  do  not  use  torture.   Mr
         Mills submits the judge was specifically addressing  the  claim  by
         the appellant that was at the core of his account.  The  judge  was
         entitled to find that the  account  is  not  credible  and  is  not
         supported by background material.


Discussion


     20. I have carefully read the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Ford and the evidence that was before the Tribunal.  The account of
         events relied upon by the appellant following his  return  to  Iraq
         from Sweden is carefully set out by the judge at paragraphs [6]  to
         [9] of the decision.


     21. At paragraph [38] of her decision the Judge refers to the  evidence
         given by the appellant at the hearing regarding his  father's  work
         as a driver with the police. The appellant referred to the PUK  and
         KDP, and initially had said that he thought his father was  working
         for the PUK.  In re-examination the appellant then said he was  not
         sure that his father was working for the PUK, but  his  father  was
         working for the government.  It was this evidence  that  the  judge
         said "... strongly suggests that his father was working in the  IKR
         and that the appellant's home area is the  IKR  and  not  Kirkuk.".
         However, the judge had noted at paragraph [10], that the respondent
         had accepted the appellant is a national of Iraq from Kirkuk and Mr
         Mills is right to acknowledge the judge went behind the  concession
         that been made by the respondent.


     22. That error is not in my judgement material to the  outcome  of  the
         appeal. I accept, as Mr Mills submits, the judge addressed the risk
         upon return in the alternative,  even  if  the  appellant  is  from
         Kirkuk.  It is now well established that although there is a  legal
         duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on the  central
         issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons need  not  be
         extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard  to
         the material accepted by the judge. It was in my judgement open  to
         the Judge to conclude that even if the appellant is from Kirkuk, he
         has a viable relocation alternative available  to  him.  The  judge
         found the appellant has access to a CSID,  and  the  appellant  can
         safely be returned to Baghdad as he has access to his CSID and  can
         fly from there to  the  IKR.  The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
         appellant will be able to secure entry to the IKR as an ethnic Kurd
         with a CSID.  The judge noted there is no evidence to suggest  that
         the appellant will not be able to work or to secure the necessities
         of life as he did before he left Iraq.  At  paragraph  [9]  of  the
         decision the Judge  noted  the  appellant's  account  that  he  had
         previously left Kirkuk, to live in Sulaymaniyah for his own safety,
         where he managed to work in order to pay in part at least, for  his
         hotel room.


     23. I accept corroborative evidence is not  necessary  for  a  positive
         credibility finding.  However, the fact that corroboration  is  not
         required is not to say that a judge is not entitled  to  take  into
         account the absence of documentary evidence, which could reasonably
         be expected.  The judge was entitled to comment upon the absence of
         relevant documents.   In particular, the judge was entitled to note
         the absence of death certificates for the  appellant's  father  and
         brother, and the absence of any  evidence  regarding  his  father's
         claimed employment as a driver with the  police.  Furthermore,  the
         judge was entitled to note the absence of any medical records  from
         Iraq in circumstances where the  appellant  claimed  to  have  been
         treated in hospital for 4-6 months and was still  in  contact  with
         his mother. These were issues of fact that related to the  core  of
         the appellant's account that the judge was  required  to  consider.
         Ms Bashow relies upon the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  TK
         (Burundi).  The Court of Appeal confirmed that where an immigration
         judge in assessing the credibility of an asylum  seeker  relied  on
         the fact that there was no independent  supporting  evidence  where
         there should be supporting evidence, and, no credible  account  for
         its absence, the judge committed no error of law when he relied  on
         those facts in rejecting the asylum seeker's  account.   Thomas  LJ
         stated, at [16]:


             "16.  Where evidence to support an account given by a party is
             or should readily be  available,  a  Judge  is,  in  my  view,
             plainly entitled to take into account the failure  to  provide
             that evidence and any explanations for that failure. This  may
             be a factor of considerable weight in relation to  credibility
             where there are doubts about the credibility of  a  party  for
             other reasons...."

     24. The assessment of credibility and the risk upon return is always  a
         highly fact sensitive task.  The judge was required to consider the
         evidence as a whole. In assessing the credibility of the  appellant
         and the claim advanced by him, the judge was required to consider a
         number of factors.  They include, whether the account given by  the
         appellant  was  of  sufficient  detail,  whether  the  account   is
         internally consistent and consistent with any relevant specific and
         general country information, and whether the account is  plausible.
         In my judgement, the judge carefully considered  the  core  of  the
         claim advanced by the appellant, noting the inconsistencies in  his
         account, and the lack of detail in material respects.


     25. On the evidence before the Tribunal and the findings  made  by  the
         Judge, it was in my judgement open to the  Judge  to  conclude  the
         appellant will not be at risk upon return for the reasons given and
         to dismiss the appeal.


     26. It follows that in my judgement there is no material error  of  law
         in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford and I dismiss the
         appeal.


    NOTICE OF DECISION


     27. The appeal is dismissed.


     28. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford promulgated on  29th
         May 2019 stands

    Signed                                  Date 27th January 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


