
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02556/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2018                         |On 15th March 2018            |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               MR Vahid Parviz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born  on  6th  February  1983.   The
    Appellant left Iran on 1st October 2016, entering the UK on  29th  June
    2016 and claimed asylum on 10th October 2016, when he was  served  with
    notice as an overstayer.  The Appellant's claim for asylum was based on
    having a well-founded fear of  persecution  due  to  his  religion  and
    ethnicity, namely that he was a born a Shia Muslim and had converted to
    Christianity.  The Appellant's appeal was refused by Notice of  Refusal
    dated 25th February 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Lever sitting at Manchester on 11th  April  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 3rd May 2017 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 3rd May 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 30th August 2017 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Dineen  refused
    permission to appeal.  The renewed Grounds of  Appeal  were  lodged  on
    17th September 2017.

 4. On 16th October 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted permission to
    appeal, concluding that it was arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had failed to take into account relevant evidence provided by  Reverend
    Bradford as set out in Ground 1 and unfairly  drew  adverse  inferences
    regarding other matters as set out in Ground 2,  as  amplified  in  the
    renewal grounds.  On 7th November 2017 the Secretary of State responded
    to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.  It is on that basis  that  the
    appeal comes before me to determine whether or not there is a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   There
    is no attendance by the Appellant or any  legal  representatives.   The
    appeal was due to take place at 10 o'clock.  At 11.15 there had been no
    attendance by the Appellant.  He had been tannoyed.  I  note  from  the
    file that notice of hearing was sent to him at his last  known  address
    and  that  notice  indicates  that  he  has  no   representative.    An
    interpreter who had attended was released.  I was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had been properly notified of the hearing and record that the
    notice of hearing  had  not  been  returned  to  the  court.   In  such
    circumstances I  proceeded  in  the  absence  of  the  Appellant.   The
    Secretary of State  was  represented  by  his  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer Mr Diwnycz.

 5. The Appellant's grounds contend  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred  in  law  by  departing  from  the  authority  of  Ali   Dorodian
    01/TH/01537 by giving insufficient weight to the Appellant's reasonably
    comprehensive knowledge of the scripture, his regular church attendance
    and the fact that a minister of religion attended the Tribunal to vouch
    for him and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  arguably  deprived
    the Appellant of a fair hearing by not  to  putting  to  the  Appellant
    matters of credibility which he later held against  him  in  dismissing
    the appeal.  Further it was contended that the Appellant  averred  that
    Judge Lever had arguably misunderstood the church's policy  in  respect
    of baptism, a matter that was not a subject of contention  between  the
    parties and failed to  properly  take  into  account  the  evidence  in
    respect of the church's approach to baptism.  Further it was  contended
    that  a  fair  reading  of  the  Record  of  Proceedings  made  by  the
    Appellant's advocate revealed  that  the  matter  of  credibility  held
    against the Appellant by Judge  Lever  was  not  canvassed  during  the
    hearing and accordingly  the  judge  may  arguably  have  deprived  the
    Appellant of a fair opportunity  to  provide  an  explanation  for  the
    matter said to be implausible.  I note those contentions.  There is  on
    file a  witness  statement  from  the  advocate  who  attended  on  the
    Appellant's behalf before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Greer.  I give it
    read  through  consideration.   However,  Mr  Greer   nor   any   legal
    representative, is of course present before me.

 6. Mr Diwnycz in his submissions relies in his entirety  on  the  Rule  24
    response.  He submits that the Reverend Bradford's evidence is recorded
    between paragraphs 11  and  13  of  the  determination  and  the  judge
    considers his evidence between paragraphs 35 and 38.  He further refers
    me to the authority of the Secretary of State for the Home Department v
    Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 and reminds me that fairness  does  not
    require that every point be put by a judge.  He further  contends  that
    the credibility findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  were
    reasonably open to him.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 9. It is appropriate, when an Appellant is not in attendance, for a  judge
    to give a full and fair reading to the papers that are before him and I
    confirm that I have done this and that I have read and considered Judge
    Lever's decision and the Grounds of  Appeal.   The  Grounds  of  Appeal
    effectively however do not stand up to  anxious  scrutiny.   The  judge
    considered the evidence and made findings of  credibility  which  I  am
    satisfied were open to him.  He was entitled to look at this matter  in
    the round.

10. Further, as is set out in the  Rule  24  response,  there  has  been  a
    considerable analysis carried out by the judge of the evidence  of  the
    Reverend Bradford.  His evidence is recorded in three paragraphs of the
    determination and is considered in the conclusions found at  paragraphs
    35 to 38.  At paragraph 38 Judge Lever  draws  conclusions  as  to  the
    Reverend Bradford's testimony.  He does not doubt his truthfulness.  He
    then goes on at paragraphs 39 and 40 to express reasons for the judge's
    concern  with  the  Reverend  Bradford's  evidence  and  those  of  the
    Appellant.  It is clear therefore that this is a judge who has  carried
    out a detailed analysis of the evidence that was before him  and  drawn
    conclusions to which he was entitled.  Further, whilst I note that  the
    reference in Mr Greer's statement at paragraph 4 as  to  evidence  that
    was not  canvassed  in  cross-examination,  the  judge  had  heard  the
    evidence and has made findings which  he  was  entitled  to.   In  such
    circumstances I am satisfied that the written Grounds of Appeal  amount
    to little more than disagreement with the findings of the judge.

11. Overall this is a well-reasoned decision by an  experienced  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and the decision discloses no material  errors  of  law.
    In such circumstances the  Appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
