
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02865/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th December 2017                         |On 23rd January 2018          |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     NF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sanders of Counsel instructed by Bankfield
Heath Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Moxon made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 20th April 2017.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born  on  21st  January  1971.   She
    claimed asylum in the UK on 5th September 2016 on the  basis  that  she
    fears  mistreatment  in  Iran  on  account   of   her   conversion   to
    Christianity.

 3. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was a genuine convert.
     The judge agreed with the respondent and dismissed the appeal.

 4. In reaching his conclusions the judge stated that it  was  damaging  to
    her credibility during her asylum interview that she did not know  when
    Easter would be that year despite her interview being less  than  three
    months before Easter.  He also  highlighted  an  inconsistency  in  her
    evidence about whether she was on foot or in a  vehicle  when  she  saw
    members of the house church being arrested.

 5. In the grounds of challenge the appellant argued that it  was  entirely
    unfair to hold it against her that the appellant did not know the  date
    of Easter which is calculated by a lunar calendar, and which  ought  to
    have been set in the context of her accurate answers at interview about
    what happened at Easter and at Pentecost.

 6. The appellant also argues that the judge made a significant mistake  of
    fact in highlighting a  discrepancy  in  the  asylum  interview  as  to
    whether the appellant  was  walking  or  driving.   The  appellant  now
    produces fresh evidence from a professional interpreter who listened to
    the audio recording of the substantive asylum interview  and  who  says
    that there was no mention of the word walking.  The appellant  in  fact
    said "carried on going" or "continued on my way".

 7. I accept that this evidence meets the Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489
    test.

 8. Whilst the judge also gave other reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeal,
    namely that he did not find it credible that the appellant did not know
    of the dangers faced by Christian converts in Iran, and criticised  the
    appellant's daughter's corroborative evidence that she  did  not  speak
    Arabic, I am persuaded that the errors highlighted above  infected  the
    judge's findings as a whole.  This is  an  appellant  who  displayed  a
    considerable detailed knowledge of Christianity and who  was  supported
    by a Darodian witness.  As the judge who granted permission  to  appeal
    stated, many Christians would be unable to state the date of Easter.

 9. The errors are therefore material since it is quite possible that,  had
    they not been made, the appeal might have been allowed.

10. The judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.  It will  be  re-
    made by a judge other than Judge Moxon at a fresh hearing in Bradford.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 22 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

