
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02875/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th January 2017                 |On 1st February 2017                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               Mr MOHAMMED [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born on 23rd February 1989.  The
    Appellant claims to have left Ethiopia on 17th May 2015  and  travelled
    via Sudan and France before entering the UK illegally on 3rd  September
    2015 where he claimed asylum.  The  Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  is
    based on a fear that if returned to Ethiopia he would face mistreatment
    due to his  support  of  the  organisation  known  as  Ginbot  7.   The
    Appellant's application for asylum was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State by Notice of Refusal dated 8th March 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Hussain sitting at Birmingham on 29th September 2016.  In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 12th October 2016 the Appellant's
    appeal was refused on asylum and human rights grounds and the Appellant
    was found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 3. On 15th October  2016  the  Appellant's  legal  representatives  lodged
    Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contend:-

       . The judge failed to apply the correct standard of proof.

       . The judge, when considering the Appellant's sur  place  activities,
         failed to apply country guidance.

       . That the judge erred in his  consideration  of  Article  8  of  the
         ECHR/paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

       . That the judge failed to  assess  the  persecutory  risk  that  the
         Appellant faced on return to Ethiopia as a failed asylum seeker.

       . That the judge made unreasonable findings by finding at paragraph 7
         of the determination that it was reasonable to expect the Appellant
         to have produced some memorabilia regarding his father's  political
         involvement in Ethiopia and that paragraph  8  of  the  Appellant's
         account was not credible on the basis that he had not provided such
         supporting evidence regarding his father's activities.

       . That the judge had given inadequate reasons at paragraphs 10 to  13
         of his decision for not accepting the Appellant's account  of  what
         happened to him in Ethiopia.

 4. On 14th November 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio granted permission
    to appeal.  In granting permission Judge Adio concentrated  on  two  of
    the Grounds of Appeal, firstly that the judge used the higher  standard
    of proof in his deliberation in considering the Appellant's credibility
    at paragraph 12 of the decision, and secondly that the  judge  did  not
    engage with the background evidence when dealing  with  the  sur  place
    activities.

 5. On 30th November 2016 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  Therein it submits that the use of  the  term
    "improbable" did not indicate the fact that the Appellant  was  subject
    to a higher standard of proof in the making of this determination.  The
    Rule 24 response goes on to contend that in relation to the Appellant's
    grounds commenting on sur place activities, it is  submitted  that  the
    judge had adequately reasoned his findings at paragraph 18 where it had
    been found that the evidence of any  sur  place  activities  would  not
    place the Appellant at risk.

 6. It is on this basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    solicitor Mr Howard.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office
    Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Howard takes me to the Grounds  of  Appeal.   His  main  thrust,  he
    emphasises, is on a contention that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the
    correct standard of  proof,  failed  to  apply  country  guidance  when
    considering the Appellant's sur place activities, and made unreasonable
    findings in his conclusions.  His starting point is paragraph 12 of the
    decision.  It is relevant  to  record  the  sentence  that  causes  the
    Appellant's legal representatives the greatest concern:-

         "It is improbable that a person having escaped from police  custody
         would go to as public a place as a university  if  he  had  escaped
         from the police especially if, as he says, he had been recognised".



    The underlining of the word improbable is my own.  It  is  however  the
    use of that  word  that  Mr  Howard  hangs  his  hat  upon.   By  using
    improbable he contends that the  wrong  standard  of  proof,  i.e.  the
    balance of probabilities, has inadvertently been applied by the  judge.



 8. Mr Howard then addresses the sur place activities which are referred to
    at paragraphs 17 and 18 of the judge's  decision.   He  notes  that  at
    paragraph 18 the judge appears to accept that the  Appellant  has  been
    involved in sur place activities  in  that  he  has  been  photographed
    taking part in demonstrations and  that  the  Appellant  has  published
    photographs of  his  involvement  at  the  demonstrations  on  his  own
    Facebook account.  Having made such an acceptance he  states  that  the
    judge then fails to go on to consider the Appellant's risk on return as
    a  consequence  of  such  involvement.   He  refers  to  the  objective
    evidence, in particular the Operational Guidance Note  on  Ethiopia  at
    paragraph 3.16.21:-

         "Conclusions: individuals perceived to be active or influential  in
         opposition to the Ethiopian state are  at  risk  of  ill-treatment,
         including persecution by the Ethiopian authorities"

    and he also relies on the US Department  of  State  Country  Report  on
    Human Rights Practices Ethiopia 2015 where it was found:-

         "In addition to its domestic activities, the government used FinSpy
         to monitor the online activities of Ethiopians living abroad".

 9. Mr Howard then turns to what he contends are unreasonable findings made
    by the judge and asks me to consider paragraphs 7 and 8 of the  judge's
    decision.  He notes at paragraph 7 the judge contends it was reasonable
    to expect the Appellant to have produced some memorabilia regarding his
    father's political involvement in Ethiopia.  He contends that that  was
    an  unreasonable  finding  and  that  the  judge  did  not   give   any
    consideration to the risk or danger that it would place the Appellant's
    family in Ethiopia if evidence of an anti-Ethiopian authority  activity
    was sent through the post, bearing in  mind  that  there  is  objective
    evidence that points to state monitoring.  Further he contends that  it
    is unreasonable for the judge to have  found  at  paragraph  8  of  his
    decision that the Appellant's account was not  credible  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant did not provide such supporting  evidence  regarding
    his father's activities.  Mr Howard asks me to find there are  material
    errors of law, to set aside the decision and to remit the  matter  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

10. In response Mr McVeety, whilst acknowledging that the use of  the  word
    improbable is unfortunate, points out that the judge has, at  paragraph
    5, set out the fact that the lower standard of proof applies and relies
    on the point made in the Rule 24 that the use of  the  term  improbable
    does not indicate the fact that the Appellant was subject to  a  higher
    standard of proof in the making of this determination.

11. So far as the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities  are  concerned,  Mr
    McVeety points out that the judge at  paragraphs  17  and  18  was  not
    satisfied that the activities undertaken by  the  Appellant  created  a
    risk of persecution for  him  on  return,  despite  the  fact  that  he
    accepted what the Appellant had been  doing.   Further  he  points  out
    there is no objective evidence that has been produced to show that  the
    Appellant's activities were monitored.

12. Turning to  the  issue  of  the  corroborative  evidence  mentioned  at
    paragraphs 7 and 8 of the decision and the failure to  produce  it,  he
    points out that the Appellant has confirmed that he has been  in  touch
    with his mother and that it is reasonable  in  such  circumstances  for
    corroborative evidence to have been  provided.   He  submits  that  the
    judge has just about done enough, bearing in mind the reasons given why
    the judge queries the corroborative evidence.  Overall he  asks  me  to
    find no material errors of law and to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. It is clear that the judge has set out at paragraph 5 what I anticipate
    is a standard paragraph used setting out the lower standard  of  proof.
    This of course is not in itself sufficient to show  that  a  judge  has
    applied that standard of proof.  The judge goes on to consider in  some
    detail the Appellant's version of events.  It  is  however  unfortunate
    that he uses the word improbable.  I understand  from  the  submissions
    made that use of the word "unlikely"  would  create  exactly  the  same
    difficulty.  I can well imagine  that  the  judge  when  dictating  his
    decision and making use of the word improbable probably did not in  any
    shape or form believe that in doing so he was potentially applying  the
    wrong burden of proof but when looked at objectively the statement does
    imply a balance of probabilities test merely by use of the word  rather
    than a lower burden of proof.  As the use of the word goes to  findings
    of credibility, there is an  error  of  law.   The  question  therefore
    remains is it material particularly bearing in mind the other  findings
    made by the judge?  I am satisfied that in this case the findings  have
    to be looked at in the round and therefore such a finding  could  taint
    the judge's credibility assessment and, as such, there  is  a  material
    error of law.

16. I am also persuaded that bearing in mind the findings  that  the  judge
    accepts the Appellant has been involved in sur place activities, it  is
    necessary for him as  a  matter  of  law  to  go  on  to  consider  the
    persecutory  risk  that  the  Appellant  would  face  on  return  as  a
    consequence of such involvement and to consider the objective evidence.
     Such objective evidence has not been considered.  That in itself again
    constitutes an error of law which in this instant case  I  find  to  be
    material.

17. Finally I give due consideration to the position regarding the analysis
    of the corroborative evidence.  The judge has quite properly started by
    reciting the authority or TK (Burundi) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  40.   To  a  certain  extent   the
    submissions made by Mr Howard in this aspect amount to little more than
    disagreement in that the judge  made  his  analysis  having  given  due
    consideration to the guidance given in TK (Burundi).  However, in  view
    of the other findings and the fact that this matter has to be re-heard,
    I agree with the submissions made that it  is  appropriate  that  these
    particular  findings  are  not  preserved  and  that   the   issue   is
    reconsidered in the light of all the evidence bearing in mind the judge
    has failed to consider the risk/danger that the Appellant's  family  in
    Ethiopia may be placed in sending such evidence through the  post  when
    the evidence points to there being state  monitoring  within  Ethiopia.
    To such an extent there is a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and is set aside.  Directions are given below  for  the  re-hearing  of
    this matter.

Directions

(1)  On the finding that there is a material error of law  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

(2)  The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  such
    centre  as  the  administration  considers  appropriate  on  the  first
    available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.

(3)  None of the findings of fact are to stand.

(4)  That the re-hearing is to be before any Immigration  Judge  other  than
    Immigration Judge Hussain.

(5)  That there be leave to either party to file/serve an up-to-date  bundle
    of subjective and/or objective evidence upon which they seek to rely at
    least seven days prior to any restored hearing.

(6)  That an Amharic interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

