
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)         Appeal Number: PA/02246/2018 (V)
                                                           PA/02247/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 10 September 2021             |On the 04 October 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                 MB and MMB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Bond, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1.  The  appellants,  who  are  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  appeal  with
         permission against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Alis) who dismissed their protection and human rights appeals in  a
         decision promulgated on the 16 February 2021.


      2. The First-tier Tribunal made a direction  regarding  anonymity  and
         neither party sought for it be set aside.  I therefore confirm that
         order at the conclusion  of  the  decision  and  do  so  as  it  is
         presently in the interests of justice  that the appellants are  not
         publicly recognised  as  those  seeking  international  protection:
         paragraph 13 of the  Upper  Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber
         Guidance  2013: Anonymity Orders.

      3. The hearing took place on 10 September  2021,  by  means  of  teams
         which has been consented to and not objected to by the  parties.  A
         face-to-face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable,
         and both parties agreed that all issues could be  determined  in  a
         remote hearing.  The advocates attended remotely via video  as  did
         both appellants so that they could listen and observe the  hearing.
         There were no issues regarding sound,  and  no  technical  problems
         were encountered during  the  hearing,  and  I  am  satisfied  both
         advocates were able to make their respective cases  by  the  chosen
         means. Missing documentation was identified at the  outset  of  the
         hearing which was subsequently provided so that  the  tribunal  and
         the  advocates  were  able  to   have   sight   of   all   relevant
         documentation.

Background:


      4. The history of the appeals is set out in the decision of the  FtTJ,
         the decision letters and the evidence contained in the bundles.

      5. The appellants are brothers and are citizens of Bangladesh. The 1st
         appellant (referred to as "MB") arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in
         2009 with leave to remain as a student until 2011.  His  leave  was
         extended until May 2012 and whilst he sought  to  extend  his  stay
         further both as a student and on family and  private  life  grounds
         the applications were refused. MB lodged a protection claim  on  29
         September 2016.

      6. The 2nd appellant (referred to as "MMB"), also entered  the  United
         Kingdom  in  2009  as  a  student  and  although  his   leave   was
         subsequently extended it was curtailed in March 2015 because he was
         in breach of the work restrictions placed on his Visa. Applications
         to extend his stay were subsequently refused in 2015 and  2016.  He
         also lodged a protection claim on 29 September 2016.

      7. The Secretary  of  State  refused  their  protection  claims  in  a
         decision letter dated 1 December 2018.

      8. Both appellants appealed those decisions on 14 February 2018  under
         section 82 (1) of the NIAA 2002 on the basis that their  return  to
         Bangladesh would lead to a real risk of persecution and would  also
         breach their rights under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

      9. Their appeals were subsequently listed together before FtTJ  Pickup
         (as  he  then  was)  who  dismissed  both  appeals  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 20 March 2018.

     10. On 18 September 2018 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harris found there
         had been an error in law because a fax  transmission  sent  to  the
         tribunal prior to  the  date  of  promulgation  of  Judge  Pickup's
         decision had not been placed  before  the  judge.  The  appeal  was
         remitted back to Judge Pickup for him to  consider  the  additional
         evidence. However in the light of  his  appointment  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal it was directed at the  appeal  be  heard  de  novo  by  a
         different judge.

     11. As a result of the Covid-19 pandemic the  hearing  date  which  was
         previously listed on the 20 March 2020 was adjourned.  The  appeals
         came before the FtTJ on 4 January and 3 February 2021.

     12. In a  decision  promulgated  on  the  16  February  2021  the  FtTJ
         dismissed both appeals. At paragraphs [7]-[112] the  FtTJ  set  out
         his analysis of the evidence and his findings of fact. In  summary,
         whilst the judge found that it was reasonably likely that they  may
         have been involved in student politics and that one or both of them
         may have been arrested following what appears to have been a  brawl
         between 2 opposing groups, any detention between 2003  -  2006  was
         not a cause of them having to seek asylum in  September  2016.  The
         judge was  also  not  satisfied  that  either  appellant  held  the
         positions they claimed as the evidence was inconsistent and that he
         found that both appellants chose to come to United Kingdom to study
         rather than through fear of persecution.

     13. As to the documents that the appellants had provided in support  of
         their appeals, the judge found that he was not satisfied  that  any
         weight could be placed on the FIR's contained  in  the  bundle  and
         found that there was no obligation on the respondent to verify  the
         documents.

     14. In respect of Mr M, the judge was not satisfied that the appellants
         were close relatives of this man and whilst he had a  high  profile
         in Bangladesh politics, the appellants problems or those that  they
         claimed to have could not be compared to  his.  The  judge  finally
         found that he was not satisfied that the family  were  under  house
         arrest or experiencing problems of the authorities and further  was
         not satisfied that either appellant had any  political  profile  in
         Bangladesh or in the United Kingdom. Consequently  he  reached  the
         conclusion that neither appellant  had  discharged  the  burden  of
         proof to show that on their return they would face persecution or a
         real risk of suffering  "serious  harm"  and  thus  dismissed  both
         appeals.

     15. Permission to appeal was sought and permission was refused  by  the
         FTT but granted by  Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor   on  6  May
         2021.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     16. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 6 May 2021 inter alia,  indicating  that  it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face-to-face hearing and directions were given
         for a remote hearing.

     17. Both parties have indicated that they were content for the  hearing
         to proceed by this  method.  Therefore,  the  Tribunal  listed  the
         hearing to enable oral submissions to  be  given  by  each  of  the
         parties. I am grateful for their assistance and  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

     18. Ms Bond appeared on behalf of the appellants and  relied  upon  the
         written grounds of appeal  and  her  previous  written  submissions
         which were provided to the First-tier Tribunal and provided a  copy
         to the Tribunal and to Mr Bates.

     19. There was no rule 24 response on behalf of the respondent.  However
         after Mr Bates had the opportunity to consider the material and  in
         the context of the grounds he accepted that the  grounds  2  and  3
         were made out and that for the reasons set out in  th  grounds  the
         FtTJ's decision involved the making of an error on a point  of  law
         and that the errors were material to the outcome as they materially
         affected the credibility issues and the fact finding process. As  a
         result he invited the Tribunal to set aside  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ and to remit thee appeal to the FtT for a rehearing.

     20. The respondent concedes that the grounds of challenge are made  out
         (grounds 2 and 3) and as such the decision should be set aside.  In
         the light of that concession and for the reasons  set  out  in  the
         grounds which the respondent accepts is made out,  I  am  satisfied
         that as this was a protection claim and  thus  the  requirement  of
         anxious scrutiny applied, the  findings  of  fact  are  unsafe  and
         therefore cannot stand.

     21. In the light of that concession made on behalf of the respondent  I
         shall set out a  brief  summary  as  to  why  that  concession  was
         properly made.

     22. The basis of the appellants' claim is that they are  members  of  a
         politically active family in Bangladesh and were student  activists
         on behalf of the BNP. One of the family relatives is a former MP of
         the BNP. They claimed that following the 2008 elections  they  were
         targeted by members and activists of the opposition party which  is
         now in power. The appellant therefore  feared  the  authorities  in
         Bangladesh. In the alternative it was argued that they would be  at
         risk in Bangladesh due to imputed political opinion based on  their
         political support for the BNP (see ground 1).

     23. As part  of  their  claim  the  appellants  provided  a  number  of
         documents they claimed had emanated from Bangladesh including FIR's
         and newspaper reports. In his decision the  FtTJ  referred  to  the
         FIR's at paragraphs [87] and [92].

     24. In the written submissions provided for the FtTJ both  parties  are
         set  out  their  respective  arguments  concerning  the  issue   of
         prevalence of forged documentation in  Bangladesh.  The  respondent
         had provided a  short  summary  relying  on  the  CPIN  Bangladesh;
         documentation dated March 2020  and  expressly  stated,  "indicates
         systemic corruption in Bangladesh, in particular to fake or altered
         documentation,  5.2.1  prevalence  and  procurement  of  fraudulent
         documents. Corruption widespread in the  courts  and  police.  5.36
         call to police documents can easily be obtained and 5.2.4  easy  to
         obtain genuine documents containing false information."

     25. By way of response Ms Bond provided written submissions  in  detail
         setting out that there was a conflict in the background evidence as
         to the ease with which forged documentation can  be  obtained  from
         Bangladesh.

     26. Both parties before the FtTJ accepted  that  this  was  a  "central
         issue" to both  appeals.  In  particular  the  appellant  had  also
         obtained a  report  from  an  advocate  of  the  Supreme  Court  of
         Bangladesh and pages of Bangladesh Supreme  Court  procedure  rules
         (known as the Bangladesh Gazette).

     27. It is therefore plain that a  central  issue  before  the  tribunal
         related to the documents and the reliability of those documents set
         out in the context of the  background  country  materials  and  the
         report commissioned on behalf of the appellant.

     28. The  FtTJ  considered  the  documents  and  found  that  fraudulent
         political letters and documents are "freely  available"  (at  [91])
         and at [93] referred to the CPIN  March  2020  stating  the  report
         "details problems with documents originating from Bangladesh".  His
         assessment was set out at paragraphs  [107  -  111].  At  paragraph
         [107] the judge stated "the background evidence  makes  clear  that
         forged documents are significantly prevalent and easily  obtainable
         in Bangladesh.  Some  of  the  documents  from  different  official
         sources  have  the  same  type  of  heading  which  undermines  the
         reliability.  There  is  a  well-developed  market  for   obtaining
         fabricated documents including  fabricated  documents  of  official
         documents. The FIR's are on the same heading as the  court  records
         of hearing, summons and warrants."  At  [108]  in  respect  of  the
         newspaper reports relied upon, the judge stated, "they have  to  be
         considered in the round against the background that fabrication  of
         news report  is  prevalent  in  Bangladesh."  At  [109]  the  judge
         referred to the inconsistencies in the documents of the BNP  is  to
         their level of involvement and then  concluded  at  [110]  that  no
         reliance could be placed in any of the  documents  as  confirmation
         support for their claims.

     29. Grounds 2 and 3 taken together seek to challenge  that  assessment.
         In essence it is argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  resolve  the
         conflict in the evidence  relating  to  the  prevalence  of  forged
         documentation in Bangladesh. Ms Bond on  behalf  of  the  appellant
         relied upon paragraph 7  -  19  of  the  grounds  which  were  also
         summarised in the "core grounds" at paragraphs 6 and 7.

     30. In the FtTJ's assessment of the issue it is accepted on  behalf  of
         the respondent that the FtTJ did not engage  with  the  submissions
         advanced on behalf of the appellant as to the  conflicting  country
         evidence and did not undertake any  analysis  of  that  conflicting
         evidence. The FtTJ had only considered  one  view  that  there  was
         evidence of corruption. However the FFM report May  2017  conducted
         with the assistance of the BHC had different evidence. The BHC  and
         DFAT held the view that corruption was a widespread problem due  to
         various issues  whereas  the  Transparency  International  and  the
         lawyers and other sources consulted by the FFM said that it was not
         a general problem, and it was not  the  case  with  every  type  of
         document. It also highlighted the point made at 5.2.3  that  forged
         or fraudulent police and court documents are not easily obtainable.

     31. In this context Ms Bond sought to rely upon an unreported  decision
         of Laws LJ in ex parte Demisa.  Ms Bond was  unable  to  provide  a
         copy of any transcript and one does not exist, so far as I can tell
         on any online legal forum. In  my  view  it  is  not  necessary  to
         consider any argument based on this authority as it is agreed by Mr
         Bates in behalf of the respondent that the FtTJ  erred  in  law  in
         failing to resolve the conflict  in  the  evidence  concerning  the
         prevalence of false documentation in Bangladesh. Both  parties  are
         in  agreement  that  the  assessment  that   was   undertaken   and
         highlighted at paragraphs [107]-[111] did not resolve that conflict
         and one which the parties had agreed was a "central issue".

     32. This leads to ground 3 which again  refers  to  the  assessment  at
         paragraphs [107]-[108]. At [107]  the  FtTJ  again  refers  to  the
         prevalence of false documentation and that the documents  that  the
         appellants had relied upon were said to be from  different  sources
         had the same type of heading which undermined their reliability. It
         is submitted on behalf of the  appellants  that  this  finding  was
         undermined by the issues as set out above in the context of  ground
         2 (the failure to resolve the conflict of the country  material  in
         this issue) but also that the issue of the format of  documentation
         was set out in the appellant's evidence in  the  bundles  including
         the relevant pages of the Bangladesh  Gazette  (Bangladesh  Supreme
         Court procedure rules; pages 327 - 345) and that the Supreme  Court
         advocate and also provided evidence in support of  the  appellant's
         claim and in respect of the  certified  copy  documents  and  their
         provision by the court (see page 318 dated 21/3/18).

     33. As the ground submit and  Mr  Bates  accepts,  there  has  been  no
         engagement with that evidence in reaching  any  assessment  on  the
         documents provided in support of their claims.  The  assessment  at
         paragraph [107] failed to take this evidence into account.  Whether
         the evidence from  the  advocate  could  be  properly  regarded  as
         "expert evidence" has not been one either considered by  the  judge
         or by the advocates. Nonetheless there was  material  of  relevance
         which had not been engaged with and  thus  undermined  the  factual
         conclusions reached.

     34. I would accept that the FtTJ did make a number of factual  findings
         by reference to inconsistent evidence given by both appellants  and
         therefore the judge  would  have  been  entitled  to  consider  the
         documents  and  their   reliability   in   the   light   of   those
         inconsistencies. However, that still required an assessment of  the
         other supporting evidence before reaching a conclusion  as  to  the
         documents and their reliability and thus the overall factual claims
         advanced.

     35. In the light of the errors set out in grounds 2  and  3  which  are
         made out and which Mr  Bates  accepts  goes  to  the  core  of  the
         credibility assessment of their accounts, it is  not  necessary  to
         consider the remaining grounds of 1 and 4.

     36. I should also deal with the point raised referred to in the grounds
         as "IK Turkey". I have not considered this ground as it was not  an
         argument that was pursued before the FtT. As I  understand  it,  Ms
         Bond seeks to rely upon it as a  result  of  the  factual  findings
         reached by the judge. However as she properly accepted, this ground
         of challenge was not an argument that was put before the judge  and
         therefore in my view it cannot impugn his  decision.  However  that
         view does not affect the ability to advance such an argument before
         the FtT on remittal.

     37. Consequently, I am satisfied that as this was  a  protection  claim
         brought by the appellants  and  thus  the  requirement  of  anxious
         scrutiny applied, the findings of fact  are  unsafe  and  therefore
         cannot stand. As accepted by both advocates, the errors of  law  go
         to the core of the credibility assessment made  and  therefore  the
         decision should be set aside with no factual findings preserved.

     38. For those reasons, and in light of the respondent's concession  the
         decision of the FtTJ  involved the making of an error on a point of
         law,  the decision should be set aside.

     39. I have therefore considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

          "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied
         that:-
         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or
         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

     40. Both advocates agree that the venue for hearing the appeal should
         be the FtT. I have carefully considered the submissions of the
         advocates and have done so in the light of the practice statement
         recited. It  will be necessary for the appellants  to give evidence
         and  to deal with the evidential issues, and therefore further fact-
         finding will be necessary alongside the analysis of risk on return
         in the light of the relevant country evidence, and the
         documentation  and in my judgement the best course and consistent
         with the overriding objective is for it to be remitted to the FTT
         for a hearing. It is not necessary for me to set out any further
         directions, but it is agreed between the parties that a Case
         Management Review Hearing should take place before the First-tier
         Tribunal. I also record that it is not necessary to provide copies
         of the earlier 2 bundles which remain on the file. Any updating
         evidence can be placed in a supplementary bundle.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision is set aside  and  remitted  to
the FtT for a hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others  both
to the Appellants and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated    13 September 2021

