
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02993/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd August 2017                            |On 7th August 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     ME
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C MacKenzie of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Mitchell promulgated on 10 May 2017, in which his  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse his protection and human rights claim dated 9  March
    2017 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Turkey, born on 10 September  1997,  who
    claimed asylum on the same day that  he  was  encountered  at  Heathrow
    airport on  11  September  2016.   He  underwent  an  asylum  screening
    interview on 12 September  2017  and  a  substantive  interview  on  16
    February 2017.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 9 March  2017  on  the  basis
    that she did not accept that he was Kurdish as claimed; nor that he was
    politically active as part of the HDP or the PKK in Turkey; nor that he
    had ever come to the adverse attention of the authorities; nor that  he
    would be at risk on return as a draft evader.  As such,  the  Appellant
    was  not  at  risk  on  return  to  Turkey,  nor  was  he  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection and his removal would not breach Articles 2  or
    3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The application was also
    refused on private and family life grounds under  and  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. Judge Mitchell dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 10 May
    2017 on all grounds.  Although  he  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
    Kurdish, adverse credibility findings were made against  the  Appellant
    whose claim was found to be fundamentally undermined by the significant
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's  account.   At  the  outset  of  the
    hearing, the Appellant's Counsel had accepted that  the  Appellant  had
    not been called for military service and would not therefore be at risk
    as a draft evader and there were no submissions in relation to  private
    and family life on behalf of the Appellant.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on  three  grounds.   First,  that  the  decision
    contains two factual errors: incorrectly recording that  the  Appellant
    did not claim initially that he had been detained four times in  Turkey
    (when this was submitted to the Respondent as  a  correction  from  the
    screening interview) and that there was evidence of adverse interest in
    his family who had links to the PKK.   Secondly,  that  Judge  Mitchell
    failed to consider relevant evidence or make findings on  the  evidence
    from the HDP about the Appellant's involvement with  them  and  on  his
    family profile with the PKK.  Thirdly, that Judge  Mitchell  failed  to
    give reasons as to why the information requested from the Appellant  on
    the PKK was not credible, nor why he was not even considered  to  be  a
    low level supporter.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Cruthers on 7  July  2017  on
    all grounds, the strongest of which was the first ground of challenge.

Findings and reasons

 7. At the outset of the hearing, Mr  Jarvis  conceded  that  there  was  a
    material error of law specifically as to the factual errors  identified
    in the first ground of challenge but likely on the remaining grounds as
    well.  It was accepted that there was a tension in paragraph 18 of  the
    decision as to the number of times the Appellant said he  was  detained
    in Turkey and the Judge failed to engage at all with  the  position  of
    the Appellant's family members nor consider expressly the  findings  in
    IK (returnees - records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004]  UKIAT  00312,  despite
    recording that it was still extant.

 8. The concession  was  appropriately  made  by  the  Respondent  for  the
    following two primary reasons.  First, in paragraph 18 of the decision,
    Judge Mitchell  refers  to  the  Appellant's  screening  interview  and
    response that  he  had  been  detained  in  Turkey  once,  followed  by
    reference to the letter of clarification on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
    that followed.  It was stated in terms that 'the  clarification  letter
    does not mention any other  detentions  either',  which  is  a  factual
    error.  The letter of 9 September 2017 states that  the  Appellant  was
    detained  in  Turkey  on  four  occasions  because  of  his   political
    affiliations  and  further  stated  that  he  was   fingerprinted   and
    photographed by the Turkish authorities on each occasion  that  he  was
    detained (confirming there was more than one).  This factual error is a
    material error of law as it was relied upon as an inconsistency in  the
    Appellant's claim which undermined his credibility.

 9. Secondly, in paragraph 30 of the decision,  it  is  recorded  that  the
    Appellant's family and his father have been able to  remain  in  Turkey
    with  no  problems,  prosecutions,  detentions  or  arrests.   This  is
    contrary  to  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   both
    documentary and as part of the witness evidence,  that  family  members
    had been charged and imprisoned in Turkey and that the family had  been
    visited by the authorities searching for the Appellant.   This  factual
    error is also a material error of law as it is relied upon  as  one  of
    the reasons for dismissing the appeal.

10. It is sufficient to allow the appeal for  these  reasons  alone,  which
    have been expressly conceded by  the  Respondent,  and  find  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  a  material
    error of law by relying on factual errors  forming  key  parts  of  the
    reasoning for the appeal  being  dismissed.   It  is  not  possible  to
    conclude that if these factual errors were not  made  that  the  appeal
    would still have inevitably been dismissed.

11. I also allow the appeal on the second ground of challenge.  There is  a
    material error of law in the Judge's failure to refer to  or  make  any
    findings about the evidence from the HDP and,  linked  to  the  factual
    error above, a failure to engage at all with the  Appellant's  family's
    links to the PKK and the evidence of the adverse  attention  they  have
    received from the Turkish  authorities  for  this  reason.   The  third
    ground of challenge as to the failure to give reasons  adds  little  of
    substance to the appeal which has been allowed for the reasons  already
    given.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Directions to the parties

 1. This appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing of the appeal.


 2. Any further evidence relied upon shall be  filed  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and served upon the other party no later than 14 days prior to
    the hearing of the remitted appeals.


 3. The Appellant is to file with the First-tier Tribunal  and  serve  upon
    the Respondent no later than 14  days  prior  to  the  hearing  of  the
    remitted appeal a skeleton argument setting out relevant  issues,  with
    reference to evidence and case-law.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal may issue further directions as required.

Directions to administration

 1. The appeal is remitted and shall be heard at the Taylor  House  hearing
    centre on a date to be fixed by that centre.


 2. The remitted appeal is to be  listed  before  any  Judge  except  Judge
    Mitchell.


 3. There is a time estimate of 2 hours for the hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed[pic]                Date:        4th August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


