



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02446/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 30 June 2017                        |On : 6 July 2017                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             Frank Rukemanganizi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of  24
January 2017 to refuse his protection and human rights claim.

The appellant is a national of Uganda born on 1 September  1973.  He  claims
to have entered the United  Kingdom  in  April/May  2006.  He  came  to  the
attention of the authorities when he was stopped in a  motor  vehicle  on  1
June 2014 and was served with illegal entry papers. He claimed at that  time
to have entered the UK in 2012 with his own genuine  passport  containing  a
false indefinite leave to remain stamp. On 16 June 2014 he was convicted  of
two counts  of  possess/control  identity  documents  with  intent  and  was
sentenced to one year imprisonment. On 16 July 2014 he was notified  of  his
liability to automatic deportation. On 18 August 2014 he indicated  that  he
wanted to leave the UK and he  signed  a  disclaimer  and  applied  for  his
return under the Facilitated Returns Scheme (FRS), which was approved. On  6
October 2014 a decision to make a deportation order under section  32(5)  of
the UK Borders Act 2007 was made, together with a signed deportation  order.
On 29 November 2014 the appellant was removed from the UK under the FRS.


On 21 January 2016  the  appellant  re-entered  the  UK  in  breach  of  the
deportation order and made an asylum claim. His  claim  was  refused  on  24
January 2017.


The appellant claimed asylum on the basis that he was at risk on  return  to
Uganda as he was gay. He claimed to have first realised his  sexuality  when
he was at school or college and had had several male relationships.  He  met
his first partner  Alan  at  high  school  in  1996  and  that  relationship
continued until Alan moved to Kenya in 2000. In 2000  he  met  Michael  with
whom he was in a relationship until 2015. He also had a  son  with  a  woman
named Sarah. On 15 June 2015 he was  detained  by  the  Ugandan  authorities
when seen kissing Michael on the street. He was beaten  by  the  police  and
burned on the abdomen with a heated knife. He was released  on  a  bond  the
following day. He left Uganda five to six months later.


The respondent noted various inconsistencies in the appellant's  claim.  His
claimed  relationship  with   Michael   was   not   accepted   and   various
inconsistencies were noted between the  account  given  by  Michael  in  his
letter of support and the account given by  the  appellant.  The  respondent
did not accept the appellant's claim to have been arrested and  detained  in
Uganda in June 2015. The respondent referred to a medical  report  submitted
from Dr Naomi Hartree but did not consider that it adequately supported  his
claim to be gay. The respondent considered the appellant's  account  of  his
relationship with Sarah, and his claim in regard to his  two  children  with
Sarah, to be inconsistent. The respondent noted that the appellant had  used
different identities in the UK  and  considered  that  that  undermined  his
credibility. The respondent did not accept  the  explanation  given  by  the
appellant for failing to claim asylum on the basis of  his  sexuality  prior
to his deportation from the UK. The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
appellant was gay and did not accept that he would be at risk on  return  to
Uganda. The respondent noted the appellant's claim to be HIV+  and  to  have
had tuberculosis but concluded that he would be able to access treatment  in
Uganda. The respondent considered that the  appellant's  removal  would  not
breach his human rights under Article 3 or 8 of the ECHR.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard on 30 March 2017. Judge Howard  refused  an
adjournment request that was made in order for  Dr  Hartree  to  attend  and
give evidence. He heard from the appellant. The judge did  not  accept  that
the appellant was gay and found that he would be at no  risk  on  return  to
Uganda. He accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


The appellant then sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
three grounds: firstly, that the judge's refusal to adjourn the  hearing  to
enable Dr Hartree to defend her report was unfair; secondly, that the  judge
erred in his approach to Dr Hartree's  report  and  that  his  approach  was
contrary to the guidance in Mibanga  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367; and thirdly, that the judge made  irrational
findings of fact.


Permission was granted on 11  May  2017,  with  specific  reference  to  the
ground referring to the judge's refusal to adjourn the proceedings.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The matter came before me on 30 June 2017. I  heard  submissions  from  both
parties.


Ms Fisher relied and expanded upon  the  three  grounds  of  challenge.  She
relied on the case of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  in
submitting that the judge's refusal  to  grant  an  adjournment  led  to  an
unfair hearing. The medical report from Dr Hartree had been  prepared  prior
to the appellant's asylum interview and the purpose of the  adjournment  was
to enable her to comment on the interview.  Ms  Fisher  submitted  that  the
judge's approach to the medical evidence was flawed because he rejected  the
medical  evidence  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's  account  was  not
credible, an approach criticised in Mibanga. She submitted further that  the
judge's findings were brief and inadequately reasoned.

Mr Tufan responded to the grounds, submitting that the logic in Mibanga  did
not apply in this case and that  Mibanga  was  confined  to  the  particular
circumstances in  that  case  where  the  medical  evidence  had  had  clear
corroborative weight. He relied upon  the  case  of  HH  (medical  evidence;
effect of Mibanga) Ethiopia  [2005]  UKAIT  00164.  He  submitted  that  the
judge's reasoning was adequate and that there was no material error  of  law
in the decision.


Ms Fisher responded and reiterated the points previously made.


Consideration and findings.

The first ground of challenge is that the judge's  refusal  to  adjourn  the
proceedings was unfair. The relevant approach to such  a  challenge  is  set
out in Nwaigwe, where the head-note states as follows:


    "If a Tribunal refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    considerations;  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to   intrude;
    denying the party concerned  a  fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most cases  the
    question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his
    right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on
    fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that  the  question  for
    the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT  acted  reasonably.   Rather,
    the test to be applied is that of fairness:  was there any  deprivation
    of the affected party's right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

 Whilst Judge Howard did not specifically refer to the question  of  whether
the refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing,  it
is clear from his reasons for refusing the adjournment request that  he  did
not consider that the appellant would be so  deprived.  The  judge  properly
found that no purpose  would  be  served  by  calling  the  doctor  to  give
evidence since her clinical findings were not challenged or questioned.  The
assessment of  the  appellant's  credibility  arising  from  those  clinical
findings was, as the judge properly found,  a  matter  for  him  alone.  The
grounds for an adjournment as set out in the appellant's  skeleton  argument
at [14] to [22] also referred to a need for the  expert  to  supplement  her
report after having had sight of the appellant's interview record.  However,
although an adjournment request made prior to the  appeal  hearing  on  that
same basis had been refused, by the time of the hearing Dr Hartree  had  had
an opportunity to prepare and produce a supplementary report  responding  to
the respondent's criticism of her earlier report. Clearly she had  seen  and
considered the refusal letter by that time and the fact  that  she  had  not
had sight of the interview records, which plainly would  have  preceded  the
refusal decision, could only have been due to  the  appellant's  solicitor's
oversight. Given that there had been time for her  to  obtain  and  consider
the refusal letter, it follows that there must have been ample time for  the
interview records to be supplied  to  her  for  her  consideration.  In  any
event, for the same reasons as given by Judge Howard, I fail to  see  how  a
consideration by the expert of the appellant's interview records could  have
had any effect on her clinical findings.  Accordingly,  given  that  by  the
time of the hearing the expert had had time to consider and respond  to  the
refusal decision and that a detailed supplementary report had been  produced
to the Tribunal, there was no  justification  for,  and  no  purpose  to  be
served by an adjournment and the appellant had clearly not been deprived  of
a fair hearing. I therefore find no merit in the first ground of challenge.

Neither do I find any merit in the second ground. I do not  agree  that  the
judge's  approach  to  the  medical  evidence  suffered  from  the   defects
identified in Mibanga.  The  Upper  Tribunal,  in  HH,  made  the  following
observation in regard to Mibanga:


      "The Tribunal considers that there is a danger of Mibanga being
      misunderstood. The judgments in that case are not intended to place
      judicial fact-finders in a form of forensic straightjacket. In
      particular, the Court of Appeal is not to be regarded as laying down
      any rule of law as to the order in which judicial fact-finders are to
      approach the evidential materials before them. To take Wilson J's
      "cake" analogy, all its ingredients cannot be thrown together into the
      bowl simultaneously. One has to start somewhere. There was nothing
      illogical about the process by which the Immigration Judge in the
      present case chose to approach his analytical task."


It seems to me that the grounds of challenge in this case  pursue  the  same
flawed approach as criticised in HH. The fact that the  judge  addressed  Dr
Hartree's report  at  the  end  of  his  findings  does  not,  in  my  view,
demonstrate that he considered  the  medical  evidence  in  isolation  after
having already determined the credibility of the appellant's  claim.  Indeed
it is relevant to note that the judge referred to the report  prior  to  his
credibility findings, at [28]. There is nothing in the judge's  findings  to
suggest that he failed to consider all the evidence, including  the  medical
evidence, in the round. Having accepted Dr  Hartree's  conclusion  that  the
appellant's scars were consistent with the account he had  given  for  their
cause, he properly identified at [35] that the expert could  go  no  further
than that and that she was not in a position to confirm that the  scars  had
been caused in the actual circumstances claimed by the appellant.  That  was
a matter for the judge on a consideration of all the evidence. In  light  of
the various other significant concerns that he had about  the  evidence,  it
was entirely open to the judge to reject  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
injuries had been caused in  the  circumstances  stated  and  to  place  the
limited weight that he did on the medical reports. I find no merit  in  this
ground of challenge.

Finally  the  grounds  assert  that  the  judge's  findings  of  fact   were
irrational and were inadequately reasoned. It is the case that  I  indicated
to the parties prior  to  hearing  submissions  that  I  found  the  judge's
findings to be somewhat brief. However, having heard submissions and  having
carefully considered the judge's  findings,  I  consider  that  his  adverse
conclusions  are  adequately  reasoned.  The  respondent,  in  refusing  the
appellant's claim, identified numerous inconsistencies and discrepancies  in
the evidence at pages 5 to 7 and 10 to 12 of the decision letter. The  judge
did not specifically refer to these but would plainly have had them in  mind
when assessing credibility. In addition there are the  reasons  specifically
provided by the judge for rejecting the appellant's claim,  at  set  out  at
[30] to [34].


In regard to those  reasons,  the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  draw
adverse conclusions from the fact that the appellant had made no mention  of
being gay prior to his return to  the  UK  in  breach  of  his  deportation,
despite claiming that his move to the UK in 2006  was  partly  motivated  by
fear  of  the  repressive   attitude   of   the   Ugandan   authorities   to
homosexuality. In particular he referred to the fact that the appellant,  at
his pre-deportation interview with the immigration  authorities,  identified
his reason for coming to  the  UK  as  business  and  mentioned  having  two
children  in  Uganda.  The  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  reject  the
appellant's claim to have told a lawyer that he was gay in the  days  before
his deportation and to consider that two days  was  an  adequate  period  of
time in which a lawyer could have sought to challenge his removal and  lodge
an asylum claim. No evidence has been produced by the appellant  to  confirm
his account. The judge was also perfectly entitled to make the  observations
that he did at [34] in  regard  to  the  appellant  being  released  without
charge the day after he and his partner were  detained,  despite  them  both
making confessions  about  their  sexuality,  and  I  find  nothing  in  his
observation which is undermined by the background  information  referred  to
in the appellant's grounds. For all of those reasons, and  for  the  reasons
given at [34] in regard to the lack  of  police  interest  in  Michael,  the
judge was fully entitled to conclude that the appellant's account was not  a
credible one  and  to  reject  his  claim  to  be  gay.  There  was  nothing
irrational in his findings and his conclusions  were  more  than  adequately
reasoned. Again, the challenge in the grounds has no merit.

For all of these reasons I do not consider there to be any errors of law  in
Judge Howard's decision which would require it to be set  aside.  The  judge
was entitled to proceed to hear  the  appeal  as  he  did  on  the  evidence
available to him. His approach to the medical  evidence  was  a  proper  and
lawful one and the conclusions he reached were adequately reasoned and  were
fully and properly open to him on the evidence  before  him.  I  uphold  his
decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  on  a  point  of  law
requiring it to be set aside. I do not set aside the decision. The  decision
to dismiss the appellant's appeal therefore stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity. I see no need  for
    anonymity in this case and I therefore discharge the order pursuant  to
    rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.









Signed   [pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 5 July
2017
