
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02887/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1st June 2017                          |On 14th July 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  [  ]  2001  and
    therefore still a minor.  He first entered the  UK  illegally  on  30th
    April 2015 and applied for asylum on the same  day.   That  application
    was refused for the reasons given in the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    dated 22nd October 2015.  The Appellant appealed  and  his  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Row (the  Judge)  sitting  at
    Birmingham on 19th July 2016.  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the
    reasons given in his Decision dated  23rd  July  2016.   The  Appellant
    sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 23rd  February  2017  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge decided to dismiss the appeal because he found  his  evidence
    to be lacking in credibility and he did  not  believe  his  account  of
    events in Afghanistan.  Indeed, the Judge found that the Appellant  was
    an economic migrant.  The Judge also found that the Appellant  was  not
    an orphan without relatives in Afghanistan.

 4. At the outset of the hearing before me, Mrs Aboni confirmed that it was
    now accepted that the Appellant was born on 25th April 2001  and  as  a
    consequence he had been granted discretionary  leave  to  remain  until
    25th October 2018.

 5. At that hearing, Ms Wilkins argued that the Judge had erred in  law  as
    to his finding as to credibility.  It  was  now  established  that  the
    Appellant had told the truth about his age.  The Judge's finding as  to
    the contrary had infected his overall finding as to the credibility  of
    the Appellant.  Further, the Judge made mistakes as to fact.  There was
    no discrepancy in the Appellant's evidence concerning the rape  of  his
    mother, which went to the  core  of  the  Appellant's  claim,  and  the
    Appellant had claimed from the outset that pupils from his  school  had
    been abducted.  The Appellant had given explanations for the criticisms
    of his evidence made by the Judge which the Judge had ignored.  It  was
    only speculation by the Judge that the Appellant  had  embellished  his
    account.  Finally, the Judge had erred in not treating the evidence  of
    Mr Foxley as that of an expert.

 6. In response Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24  response  and  submitted
    that there had  been  no  such  errors.   The  grounds  of  application
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with the decision of the Judge.
     The Judge had come to a conclusion about the  Appellant's  credibility
    which had been open to him on the evidence and which he had  adequately
    reasoned.  It was now accepted that the Appellant was a minor, but  the
    Judge had not erred in law in finding to the contrary.  He had  made  a
    finding as to the Appellant's age open to him  and  for  which  he  had
    given adequate reasons.  This was not a material error of  law  because
    it was apparent from what the Judge wrote at paragraphs 12  and  46  of
    the Decision that he had treated the Appellant as being very young  and
    a vulnerable witness.  The Judge had given many other reasons  for  his
    adverse finding as to credibility.  It may have been an error  for  the
    Judge not to treat Mr Foxley as an expert witness, but again  this  was
    not a material error because Mr Foxley's  report  was  based  upon  the
    premise that the Appellant had no family  in  Afghanistan  whereas  the
    Judge had found to the contrary.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  I agree with the submission of Mrs  Aboni  that  the
    Judge made an adverse credibility finding  as  regards  the  Appellant,
    which was open to him upon the evidence and which he  fully  explained.
    As Mrs Aboni said, the Judge treated the Appellant as being very  young
    and a vulnerable witness and therefore any error made by the  Judge  in
    respect of the Appellant's age was immaterial.  Likewise, any error  in
    the status of Mr Foxley is immaterial  as  the  expert  report  relates
    mainly to the Appellant's status in Afghanistan and it was found by the
    Judge that the  Appellant  was  not  an  orphan  without  relatives  in
    Afghanistan.

 8. I further agree with the submission of Mrs Aboni that the Judge came to
    a conclusion open to him as regards the credibility of the  Appellant's
    account of events in Afghanistan and which  he  fully  explained.   The
    Judge dealt with the issue  of  credibility  at  paragraphs  24  to  38
    inclusive of the Decision.  Therein the Judge identified  a  number  of
    discrepancies in  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  explained  how  that
    evidence had changed  over  the  course  of  events.   The  Judge  also
    explained why he found relevant parts of the Appellant's evidence to be
    implausible, and referred to the absence of documentary evidence.   The
    Judge took into account and accepted the evidence of Dr Kumar as to the
    Appellant's mental health, and also  took  into  account  the  relevant
    objective information.  The Judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant's journey to  the  UK  indicated  that  he  was  an  economic
    migrant.

 9. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the same reasons as those given by the First-tier Tribunal and which  relate
mainly to the Appellant's age.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12th July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
