
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02546/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 January 2017                            |On 24 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    H T G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant, who claims to be a citizen of Eritrea, was  born  on  28
    October 1990.  She entered the United  Kingdom  on  29  July  2015  and
    claimed asylum.  The appellant claimed that she  had  left  Eritrea  in
    January 2008 and had then lived in Sudan  until  February  2013  before
    leaving Sudan to travel  to  France.   She  remained  there  until  she
    entered the UK in July 2015.  The basis of the  appellant's  claim  was
    that she was an Eritrean national of Tigrinya ethnicity.   She  claimed
    that she was a Pentecostal Christian and that she had been arrested and
    detained in 2007 because of her  religion  and  would  be  at  risk  on
    return.

 3. On 28 October 2015, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and  under  the  ECHR.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant was a national  of
    Eritrea of Tigrinya ethnicity.  Further, the Secretary of State did not
    accept that the appellant was a Pentecostal Christian.   In  fact,  the
    Secretary of State did not accept any part of the appellant's claim.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. In a decision sent  on  31  May  2016,  Judge  O'Rourke  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.  First, he did not accept that the appellant was an
    Eritrean national.  Secondly, in any event, he found the appellant  not
    to be credible and did not accept that she was a Pentecostal  Christian
    who would be at risk in Eritrea.  The judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and also under Art 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on a  number  of  grounds:
    challenging the judge's adverse finding in respect of  the  appellant's
    nationality and her religion,  his  failure  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant was at risk as a failed  asylum  seeker  and  in  failing  to
    consider Art 8, in particular para 276ADE of the Rules.

 7. On 5 July 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M  J  Gillespie)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.

 8. On 19 July 2016, the Secretary  of  State  filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

 9. Mr Sharif, who represented the appellant adopted the  five  grounds  of
    appeal which he expanded upon in his oral submissions.

10. Grounds 1 and 3 challenge the judge's reasoning  in  para  26  for  not
    accepting the appellant is an Eritrean national.  In para 26, the judge
    said this:

         "26.     Nationality.  I do not accept that  the  Appellant  is  of
             Eritrean nationality.  The reasons for that  decision  are  as
             follows:

             i.   Her lack of knowledge  as  to  conscription  in  Eritrea.
                  This is despite the fact that it applies to  all  men  and
                  women from age 18 and is one  of  the  major  factors  for
                  migration of young people from that Country and  she,  she
                  states, lived there until she was 17.  It is inconceivable
                  that she will not have been aware of it.  She did, I find,
                  mention a fear of conscription to the Immigration  Officer
                  on initial arrival in UK, but that seems, in the light  of
                  her subsequent ignorance of the subject, to  be  almost  a
                  'throw-away' remark, perhaps based loosely on  what  other
                  migrants may have told her.  In questioning at  interview,
                  she clearly knew nothing of the subject.

             ii.  She did have a passing knowledge of some of the geography
                  of Eritrea, but  much  of  what  she  said  could  not  be
                  verified and those items she was aware of  and  that  were
                  verifiable could have been sourced from the  Internet,  or
                  conversations with persons from those locations.

             iii.      Her  lack  of  knowledge,  despite  claiming  to  be
                  Tigrinyan, of that ethnic group's customs and  traditions,
                  or their language.  She didn't, as stated, 'associate with
                  those people'.  I didn't find her explanation  as  to  why
                  she and her aunt and uncle spoke Amharic  convincing.   If
                  Tigrinya was their native language, they would surely have
                  spoken that in the house and perhaps learnt Amharic  also,
                  for use in the community.

             iv.  The conflicts in her evidence as to, firstly, whether she
                  had ever been arrested  (not  admitted  in  the  screening
                  interview) and secondly, as to  the  dates  when  she  was
                  arrested and how  long  detained.   I  accept  that  these
                  events were some time ago, but in view of their nature and
                  being the cause of her leaving Eritrea, were not likely to
                  be forgotten, or mistaken."

11. First, Mr Sharif submitted that in para 26(i)  the  judge  had  made  a
    contradictory  and  unreasonable  finding,  first  in   rejecting   the
    appellant's evidence  that  she  was  unaware  of  compulsory  military
    prescription in Eritrea and then accepting that  she  had  referred  to
    that when initially confronted by an Immigration Officer.

12. I do not accept this submission.  It was the appellant's case that  she
    was unaware of conscription in Eritrea and she denied that she had made
    the remark to the Immigration Officer which the judge quoted at para 20
    of his determination that she "claimed that this country had  a  better
    freedom and she does not want to become  a  soldier".   In  her  asylum
    interview the  appellant  quite  clearly  denied  that  she  knew  that
    military service was  compulsory  (see,  for  example  the  answers  at
    questions 98 and 101).

13. It was, in my judgment, properly open to the judge to find that it  was
    not believable that she would be unaware of  conscription  if  she  had
    lived in Eritrea when she claimed.  Mr Sharif placed  reliance  on  the
    fact that the appellant's evidence was that she had moved from  Eritrea
    to Ethiopia in 1993 when she was 2 or 3 years  old.   However,  it  was
    also her evidence that she had been deported back to  Eritrea  in  2000
    along with her family.  She was then  10  years  old  and  remained  in
    Eritrea, on her account, until 2008 when she was 17 years old and  left
    to live in Sudan.  She was fast approaching  the  age  of  conscription
    when she left.     In the light of the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    lived in Eritrea from the  age  of  10  until  17,  there  was  nothing
    perverse or irrational in the judge not  accepting  that,  if  she  had
    indeed lived there, she would be wholly unaware of compulsory  military
    conscription.

14. Further, there is nothing inconsistent in the judge's reasoning in para
    26(i).  Always bearing in mind that the appellant denied that  she  had
    ever said to the Immigration Officer that she did not want to become  a
    soldier, the judge was entitled to treat that  remark  as  having  been
    made as a "throw-away" remark (if made at all) perhaps  based  on  what
    other migrants had  told  her,  in  the  light  of  her  sustained  and
    consistent evidence that she did not  know  about  compulsory  military
    conscription for all men and women from the age of 18 in Eritrea.

15. Secondly, Mr Sharif submitted that the judge's reasoning in para 26(ii)
    was inadequate.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's explanation why she  did
    not  speak  (although  she  could  understand)  Tigrinyan  and   lacked
    knowledge of their customs and traditions.  Mr  Sharif  submitted  that
    the judge had failed to take into account the appellant's evidence that
    she had left Eritrea with her aunt and uncle when she was 2 or 3  years
    old in 1993 to live in Ethiopia.

16. I do not accept Mr Sharif's submission.  It is not suggested  that  the
    appellant did not lack the knowledge of her ethnic group nor  that  she
    did not speak Tigrinyan.  Tigrinyan was, of course, her native language
    as well as that of her family.  It was the language of her parents and,
    as the judge notes in para 14 of his determination, her  aunt  and  her
    family were also Tigrinyan.  The appellant's explanation was  that  she
    lived in an Amharic community and did not "associate with those (namely
    Tigrinyan) people".  It was, in my judgment, properly open to the judge
    to reason that Tigrinyan was the family's native language  and  it  was
    not believable that it was not spoke at home with her  aunt  and  uncle
    even if Amharic was also spoken.

17. Mr Sharif placed some reliance on the fact  that  in  para  26(ii)  the
    judge accepted that the appellant had some knowledge of  the  geography
    of Eritrea but, even in relation to that,  the  judge  noted  that  her
    knowledge could have been obtained  elsewhere,  for  example  from  the
    internet.

18. The grounds do not challenge the judge's reasoning in  para  26(iv)  in
    which he relied upon inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence as  to
    her claimed arrest and when it occurred and for how long.  The evidence
    is set out at para 16 of the judge's determination.  As I have  already
    said, the judge's reasoning in this regard is  not  challenged  in  the
    grounds.  It was clearly open to the judge to  take  into  account  the
    inconsistencies as being significant factors in determining whether the
    appellant claim to be Eritrean was credible.

19. In my judgment, the judge's  reasoning  in  para  26(i)-(iv)  was  both
    adequate and sufficient to found his adverse finding that the appellant
    had failed to establish that she is an Eritrean national.

20. Thirdly, in the grounds of appeal the appellant raises a further  point
    in relation to her nationality.  There, at para 2.2 reliance is  placed
    upon the 1992 Eritrean Nationality  Proclamation  (No.  21/1992)  which
    states, in Art 2(1), that "any person born to a  father  or  mother  of
    Eritrean origin in Eritrea or abroad is an Eritrean national by birth".
     The grounds argue that the judge failed to engage with this  provision
    and whether the appellant had acquired Eritrean nationality through one
    of her parents.

21. In his oral submissions, Mr Sharif accepted that this  matter  had  not
    been relied upon before Judge O'Rourke.  It is difficult, therefore, to
    conclude that he fell into error by not considering it.   But,  in  any
    event, there was no factual basis upon which the judge could have found
    in the appellant's favour even if the  Eritrean  law  had  been  relied
    upon.  It was, of course, a matter for the appellant to prove both what
    was the foreign law and that she met its requirements.   Paragraph  2.2
    of the grounds sets out the definition of who is of  "Eritrean  origin"
    as being "any person who was resident in Eritrea in 1933".   There  was
    no evidence before the judge regarding the appellant's parents.  It was
    the appellant's claim that they had died and that  was  why  she  moved
    with her aunt and uncle to Sudan when she was 2 or  3.   There  was  no
    evidence of their ages or whether either  lived  in  Eritrea  in  1933.
    Even, therefore, leaving aside the fact that the appellant did not rely
    upon this as a basis to establish her Eritrean nationality,  there  was
    no evidential basis upon which the appellant could  succeed  under  the
    law as set out in para 2.2 of the appellant's grounds.  Mr  Sharif  was
    right not to place any reliance on this ground in his oral submissions.

22. Fourthly, the grounds also seek to challenge the judge's  reasoning  in
    para 27 of  his  determination  that  led  him  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant had not established that she was a Pentecostal  Christian  on
    the basis that the judge failed to give adequate  weight  to  the  oral
    evidence of Mr Tekle and a letter from the City Temple Church (where Mr
    Tekle was Leader of the Eritrean & Ethiopian Fellowship) (at page 33 of
    the bundle).

23. The judge's adverse finding in  relation  to  the  appellant's  claimed
    religion was, of course, not material  to  his  decision  once  he  had
    concluded that she was not an Eritrean national.  If that was  not  her
    country of nationality or a country to which she could be returned, she
    could not succeed in establishing her claim even if her religious faith
    were accepted.

24. However, I do not, in any event, accept Mr Sharif's submission that the
    judge either failed to give adequate reasons or  "adequate  weight"  to
    the evidence before him.  The  judge's  reasoning  is  at  para  27  as
    follows:

         "27.     Religion.  While,  if  she  is  not  Eritrean,  the  other
             elements of her appeal to some extent fall away, I nonetheless
             consider her claim to be a Pentecostal Christian and find that
             she is not of that faith.  I do  so  because  her  answers  in
             interview were so inaccurate as to that religion's tenets that
             it is impossible to believe that somebody going to the  effort
             of practising it in secret, with the risk of arrest or  worse,
             would not have applied themselves to acquire greater,  easily-
             recalled knowledge of its central beliefs.  I note Mr  Tekle's
             evidence, but it's entirely possible that  her  attendance  at
             his church is an attempt to bolster her claim for asylum and I
             consider it more significant that before any such  attendance,
             but having apparently practised her religion since birth,  she
             was unable, despite her clearly being  an  intelligent  person
             (her answers to questions at this hearing  were  detailed  and
             she gave them some thought and consideration) to describe  the
             Pentecostal (after which her church is named) and  placed  the
             story in the first book of the Old Testament."

25. As the judge's reasoning makes  plain,  the  judge  had  regard  to  Mr
    Tekle's evidence which he set out at para 18 together with a  reference
    to the joint letter from Mr Tekle and the Reverend Gibson at page 33 of
    the bundle.  Both confirm the appellant's attendance at the City Temple
    Church in Cardiff.  That letter also  sets  out  their  view  that  the
    appellant is a "genuine Pentecostal Christian".

26. The judge did not doubt the sincerity of the evidence  put  forward  on
    the appellant's behalf in relation to her claimed religion.  He clearly
    took it into account.  However, even if it was genuinely believed  that
    the appellant was a Pentecostal Christian,  the  judge  had  to  decide
    whether in fact it was established that  was  her  religion.   In  that
    regard, the judge took into account  answers  given  by  the  appellant
    about her religion which were wholly  inaccurate.   The  appellant  was
    cross-examined about her answers as the judge records at para 19 of his
    determination as follows:

         "19.     She was challenged, in cross-examination, as to  why  some
             of her answers at interview about her religion had been vague,
             or incorrect.  At Q.34 she said that the  Pentecost  could  be
             found in the book of Genesis in the Old Testament, rather than
             in the New Testament at the Book of Acts.  Further, at  Q.136,
             when asked  to  describe  the  story  of  the  Pentecost,  she
             recounted the story of Noah  and  the  Ark,  rather  than  the
             descent of  the  Holy  Spirit  unto  the  apostles,  following
             Christ's  death  and  resurrection.    She   explained   these
             discrepancies  by  saying  that  at  interview  she  had  been
             confused and stressed and had misunderstood what she was being
             asked.  She was also challenged on this assertion, as she  had
             concluded the interview by agreeing that  she  understood  the
             interpreter and was happy with the conduct, but she said  that
             she was nervous and stressed and just wanted to get out of the
             room."

27. In  reaching  his  findings,  the  judge  did  not  consider  that  the
    appellant's nervousness or  stress  warranted  the  inaccuracy  in  her
    evidence generally.  At para 28 he said this:

         "28.     I note that she says that she was stressed and worried  at
             the interviews, to explain the identified discrepancies in her
             account and while, no doubt, such  interviews  are  stressful,
             she appeared at this hearing as  calm  and  collected  and  as
             previously stated, was clearly an intelligent person,  capable
             of expressing herself clearly and understanding questions  put
             to her.  Overall, I did not find her a credible witness, based
             on  the  number  and  variety  of  the  discrepancies  in  her
             account."

28. In my judgment, the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's  lack  of,  and  indeed  inaccurate,  knowledge  about  her
    religion as a highly significant matter in assessing  the  veracity  of
    her claim to be a Pentecostal Christian.  That evidence was taken  into
    account together with the supporting evidence.  The judge gave adequate
    and sufficient reasons for concluding that the appellant had failed  to
    establish her claimed religion.  On the evidence, that finding was  not
    irrational or perverse.

29. For these reasons, I reject grounds 1, 2 and 3.   The  judge's  adverse
    finding in relation to the appellant's nationality  and  religion  were
    properly open to him on the evidence for the reasons he gave.

30. Given those findings, ground 4 has no basis.  That ground  argues  that
    the judge failed to consider the risk to  the  appellant  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker who had illegally exited Eritrea.  Given that  the  judge
    found that the appellant had failed to establish she was a national  of
    Eritrea, there was no basis for this claimed risk and the judge was not
    required to consider it, effectively on a hypothetical basis  that  she
    had established she was an Eritrean national.

31. Ground 5 criticises the judge for not considering para  276ADE  of  the
    Rules.  Mr  Sharif  submitted  that  para  276ADE  was  raised  in  the
    appellant's  skeleton  argument  before  Judge  O'Rourke.   Mr   Sharif
    submitted that the judge had erred in law by failing to  consider  para
    276ADE and Art 8 of the ECHR.

32. Paragraph 276ADE and Art 8 were  raised  in  the  appellant's  skeleton
    argument at paras 14-20.  In particular, at para 26 it is  stated  that
    there  would  be  "very  significant  obstacles  to   the   appellant's
    integration  into  Eritrea  were  she  required  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom."

33. Mr Sharif did not seek to contradict Judge O'Rourke's statement in para
    29 that at the hearing that no submissions had been made in respect  of
    the appellant's Art 8 rights.  It remained, however, the case that  the
    appellant was relying upon para 276ADE and Art 8.   The  judge  should,
    therefore, have considered it even  though  no  oral  submissions  were
    made.

34. That said, I accept Mr Richards submission that the judge's failure  to
    consider Art 8 was not a material error of law.  The case  put  forward
    in the skeleton argument was that there were very significant obstacles
    to the appellant's  integration  "into  Eritrea".   Given  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant was not from Eritrea, this was not a  proper
    basis upon which to consider para 276ADE.  Where the appellant would be
    returned was not raised before the judge.  Even  if  the  most  obvious
    place would be Ethiopia, the appellant  produced  no  evidence  and  no
    submissions were made on her  behalf  in  relation  to  her  return  to
    Ethiopia or, indeed, anywhere apart from Eritrea.

35. In truth, at the hearing the appellant did  not  in  her  evidence,  or
    through her legal representative, put forward any positive  case  under
    Art 8.  The skeleton argument goes little further than a recitation  of
    the relevant legal provisions together with a bare assertion that there
    are very significant obstacles to the  appellant's  reintegration  into
    Eritrea and that her return would cause the  family  to  be  separated.
    The reference to "the family" being separated is unexplained and it was
    no part of the appellant's case before the judge that she had family in
    the UK from whom she would be separated if she were removed.

36. In short, there was no conceivable  basis  upon  which  the  appellant,
    given the total lack of supporting evidence, could have succeeded under
    Art 8 of the ECHR.  The judge's failure to consider it was not,  in  my
    judgment, material to his decision to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

37. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds did not involve the making  of  a
    material error of law.  The decision stands.

38. Thus, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                 Date:



