
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02001/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2019                      |On 6 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. K.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Lieu, Solicitor, as agent for Immigration Advice
Centre Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, entered the UK illegally and made a
protection claim which was refused on 26 January 2018. The Appellant's
appeal against that decision was heard, and dismissed, by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Saffer, in a decision promulgated on 7 September 2018.

The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by First-
tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale on 2 October 2018 on the ground that it was
arguable the Judge had erred in his approach to the corroborative evidence
he relied upon. The Respondent did not reply to that grant with a Rule 24
response.

As the Judge records in his decision, the Appellant had provided a letter
in support of his appeal which was said to be from the Komala party. The
Respondent argued that no weight could be given to it, because it was not
an original, and since that contention is repeated by the Judge, without
comment, in his decision [19] it is now argued on behalf of the Appellant
that he must have accepted it and placed weight upon it. If he did so, then
it is agreed before me that the Judge was in error, because the original
letter was supplied by email, from what appears to be the Komala Party
directly to his solicitor.

There is also a further argument relating to the approach taken to this
letter. The Judge found that there was an inconsistency between the
Appellant's evidence, and the content of the letter; not just as to his
date of birth, but also as to whether he was a member of the Komala Party.
The Appellant has used a number of different dates of birth in his dealings
with immigration authorities, both as he travelled across Europe, and once
in the UK. Again it is agreed before me that to simply decline to place
weight upon the letter on that ground alone, on the basis it might refer to
someone else, was an error. It is also agreed that there was in fact no
discrepancy between the wording of the letter, and the Appellant's
evidence, over whether he was ever formally admitted to membership of the
Komala party.

Since the presenting officer chose not to cross-examine the Appellant at
the hearing, it is also agreed before me that the Judge's approach to the
Appellant's evidence disclosed a further error. The Appellant had confirmed
in evidence in chief that what he had said in his witness statement was
true. His evidence was not then challenged.

In consequence, by consent, the appeal is remitted for hearing afresh. None
of the findings of fact made by the Judge are safe, or can be preserved. In
circumstances such as this, where it would appear that the relevant
evidence has not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the
effect of that error of law has been to deprive the parties of the
opportunity for their case to be properly considered by the First Tier
Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.
Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise required is such
that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of
the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other than
First tier Tribunal Judge Saffer, at the North Shields Hearing Centre. A
Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required. The parties accept they have
already filed the evidence they wish to place before the Tribunal.
Accordingly the remitted appeal is suitable for the short warned list. The
parties should expect the appeal to called on for hearing at short notice.



Notice of decision
 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
[pic]
