
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02596/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd January 2019                  |On 7th February 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     M A
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K. Cronin of counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mrs A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL


1.   The Appellant was born in Somalia on 24 September  1978  but  moved  to
    Kenya at the age of three to live with her aunt and  uncle,  after  her
    mother died. First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp and the  judges  who
    subsequently considered the Appellant's claim  accepted  that  she  was
    sexually abused by her uncle from the age of five to eight. It was also
    accepted that she went to work for a family as a house  girl  from  the
    age of 16 to 18.  She then returned to her aunt's home and  helped  her
    run her market stall selling items such as fish, tomatoes and beans.


2.   The Appellant's aunt had a friend,  called  Helen  Brown,  who  visited
    Kenya for business purposes from time to time and, when  she  did,  the
    Appellant would assist her and Helen Brown would pay her a little money
    or buy her some clothes. On 5 September 2014,  after  an  incident,  in
    which the Appellant was told her aunt had been  killed  by  the  Kenyan
    authorities, Helen Brown took the Appellant to Uganda, where she had  a
    large house in gated community. The Appellant remained  in  this  house
    until 17 September 2014. Helen Brown then told the Appellant that  they
    were going to travel to Dubai and provided her  with  a  ticket  and  a
    document that appeared to be a passport. However, she  was  brought  to
    the United Kingdom, arriving here on 17 September 2014.


3.   It is now accepted that, in fact, Helen Brown trafficked the  Appellant
    to the United Kingdom for the purpose  of  sexual  exploitation.   They
    were met at the airport by a woman called Sophia and Helen  Brown  left
    the Appellant with Sophia in a large detached house, where she realised
    that she had been brought there to be prostituted either at  the  house
    or at "sex parties" which took place at other large houses.


4.   One day, as the Appellant and two other women were being taken  to  one
    of these parties, the vehicle in which they were travelling broke  down
    and the Appellant and the other women were able to escape.  A  stranger
    then assisted the Appellant and drove her to Croydon and  informed  her
    that she should got to the Home Office and ask for assistance.


5.   An asylum screening interview was conducted the next day, which was  16
    July 2015. UKVI referred  the  Applicant  into  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism on 22 July 2015, as a woman who may have been trafficked into
    the United Kingdom.  On 28 July 2015 the competent authority found that
    there were reasonable grounds to believe that the  Appellant  had  been
    trafficked and she was granted temporary admission until  10  September
    2015.  Subsequently,  on  28  February  2017,  the  Respondent  made  a
    conclusive grounds decision that she had been trafficked to the  United
    Kingdom but decided that she did not qualify for leave to remain  as  a
    person who had been trafficked to the United Kingdom.


6.   On 28 September 2017, the Respondent refused  to  grant  the  Appellant
    asylum. He accepted that the Appellant was a former  victim  of  modern
    slavery, who had been trafficked from Kenya to the United  Kingdom  but
    found that there would be a sufficiency of protection for her in  Kenya
    and that she would be able to relocate in safety  to  another  part  of
    Kenya.


7.   She appealed against the decision and First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-
    Kemp MBE allowed her appeal.  However, the Respondent appealed  against
    this  decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pedro   granted   him
    permission to appeal on 24 November 2017 and in a decision  promulgated
    on 14 March 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley  found  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp MBE had made errors of law in her  decision.
    However, in paragraph 7 of his decision, he noted that "it  was  agreed
    with the representatives that all findings up to and including those at
    paragraph 23 of the determination [of First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-
    Kemp MBE)" should stand. He then remitted the appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


8.   The Appellant's appeal was  listed  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Watson, who dismissed her appeal in a decision promulgated on  20  July
    2018. It was noted in paragraph 3 of the  decision  that  the  findings
    made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp MBE in paragraphs  1-  23
    of her decision were preserved. The  Appellant  appealed  against  this
    decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott  Baker  granted   her
    permission to appeal on 6 September 2018.  When doing so, she said that
    it was arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson had not  provided
    adequate reasons for finding that a  lone  woman  with  health  issues,
    having been trafficked,  could  return  to  Kenya  without  any  family
    support or that there would be an adequacy of protection for her there.
      She  also  found  that  the  findings  on  relocation  were  arguably
    inadequate.


ERROR OF LAW HEARING


9.   Counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office Presenting  Officer  made
    oral submissions and I have taken these into account when  reaching  my
    decisions below.


ERROR OF LAW DECISION


10.  When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott
    Baker found that First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson had  made  inadequate
    reasons for finding that  a  woman  with  the  characteristics  of  the
    Appellant would be able to access a sufficiency of protection in Kenya.


11.  In paragraph 37 of  her  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Watson
    found that the  Appellant  had  no  financial  resources  and  had  not
    contacted anyone in Kenya since she left there in 2014.   In  paragraph
    28 of her decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson also found that the
    Appellant's aunt had not been killed as claimed. However, she  did  not
    address the fact that  in   paragraph  21of  his  decision,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp found that "as neither  the  appellant,  her
    aunt or her uncle had any previous issues with the  Kenyan  authorities
    and, as the appellant is not even certain that her uncle  was  involved
    with Al-Shahbab, and as the appellant  was  told  about  events  by  an
    unidentified man whilst she was with a women  involved  in  trafficking
    her, then I find the most plausible explanation is that the account  of
    her aunt being killed and needing to leave was most  likely  arouse  to
    ensure that she left Kenya and went to  the  property  in  Uganda  from
    where she was then trafficked to the United Kingdom".


12.  This may suggest that the Appellant's aunt  was  still  alive,  but  it
    could equally suggest that her aunt had colluded with  Helen  Brown  to
    facilitate her plan to traffic  and  exploit  the  Appellant  and  this
    needed to be addressed. If she did not have any family to return to and
    if her aunt had colluded with Helen  Brown,  the  assistance  that  the
    Appellant may be able to access in Kenya assumed greater significance.


13.  Therefore, it was very relevant that, in paragraph 30 of his  decision,
    when considering whether there would be a sufficiency of protection for
    the Appellant in Kenya, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Watson  referred  to
    paragraph 41 of the refusal letter, which quoted from the US Department
    of State's Trafficking in Persons report for 2016, and noted  that  the
    Nigerian  government  had  "reported  prosecution  of   762   suspected
    traffickers  and  456  convictions  during  the  reporting  period,  in
    comparison to 65  prosecutions  and  33  convictions  in  the  previous
    reporting period.  However, she did not take into  account  the  up  to
    date US Department of State Trafficking in  Persons  Report  for  2017,
    which was at page B80 of the Appellant's Bundle.  It noted  that  Kenya
    continued to be classed as a Tier 2 state, as it had not fully met  the
    minimum standards for the elimination of  trafficking.   Significantly,
    it stated that "the  availability  of  protective  services  for  adult
    victims remains negligible". The number of prosecutions was  also  much
    lower than those relied upon by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  it
    was said that "the  government  reported  initiating  281  prosecutions
    during the reporting year, compared with 762 in 2015 and 65  in  2014".
    It  was  also  said  that  "the  government  reported  convicting   105
    traffickers, compared to 456 in 2015..."


14.  The reference to the availability  of  protection  services  for  adult
    victims also  rendered  the  finding  in  paragraph  30  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Watson's decision irrational as there was  no  basis  on
    which she could find in paragraph 30 of her  decision  that  Kenya  was
    able and willing to offer protection  to  victims  who  approached  the
    authorities.


15.  In paragraph 34 of the decision First-tier Tribunal Judge  Watson  also
    referred to COIS February 2018 and stated that "this indicates that  in
    general where the threat is from non-state agents, internal  relocation
    in Kenya is likely to be reasonable". However, paragraph 2.3.3  of  the
    Country Policy and  Information  Note  Kenya;  Background  information,
    including actors of protection and internal relocation, February  2018,
    read in its entirety stated "In general, where the threat is from  non-
    state agents, internal relocation to another area of Kenya is likely to
    be reasonable, depending on the nature and origin of  the  threat,  and
    the individual circumstances of the person".


16   It also stated in paragraph 2.3.4 "women and girls face  discrimination
    and restrictions in their social  and  economic  rights  and  may  find
    relocation more difficult than men".


17.    Nevertheless, First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson found in paragraph  39
    of the decision that "the COIS indicates that relocation in general  is
    not unduly harsh and I  find  that  the  appellant  is  not  especially
    vulnerable and if she chooses not to return to her home village she can
    relocate in Kenya which is a large and populous country".


18.  As a consequence, there were  errors  of  law  in  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Watson's decision.


Decision


(1)  The appeal is allowed.


(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson is set aside  but  the
    findings of fact made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp, MBE, in
    paragraphs 1 to 23 of her decision are maintained.


(3)  The parties did not believe that a further hearing was needed and  that
    the Upper Tribunal could remake  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the
    preserved findings and the objective evidence.  Therefore,  I  retained
    the appeal in the Upper Tribunal and reserved it to myself in order  to
    remake it on the material already before the Upper Tribunal.





SUBSTANTIVE DECISION


THE ADMISSION OF FURTHER EVIDENCE


1.   The Applicant's solicitors had made an  application  to  admit  further
    evidence under Rule 15 2A of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 on  13  September  2018.  They  had  attached  a  bundle  of
    documents to the letter which contained that new evidence the Appellant
    wished to rely upon if  the  Upper  Tribunal  went  on  to  remake  the
    decision on her appeal.  These documents  related  to  the  Appellant's
    physical and mental health. All but two of these  documents  post-dated
    the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson. Of these two,  one
    of these was a letter by Dr. Feinberg, was dated 19 June 2018, but  had
    only been sent to the Appellant's solicitors by her support  worker  on
    12 December 2018. The other was a copy of the US Department  of  State:
    Trafficking in Persons Report 2018,  dated  27  June  2018,  which  was
    relevant to the findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Watson  who
    had only taken into account an earlier 2016 US State Department Report.




2.   Therefore, I find that there was no unreasonable  delay  in  submitting
    this new evidence,  I  also  find  that  this  evidence  is  of  direct
    relevance to the issues to be re-considered by the Upper  Tribunal  and
    should be admitted.


FINDINGS OF FACT


3.   In  keeping  with  paragraph  7  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley's
    decision  and  paragraph  3  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Watson's
    decision, paragraphs 1 to 23 of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Boylan-Kemp
    MBE findings of fact have been preserved.  This was also agreed by  the
    parties at the error of law hearing before me.


NATIONALITY AND IMMIGRATION STATUS IN KENYA


4.   In paragraph 15 of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boylan-Kemp's  decision
    she accepted that the Appellant had been born in Somalia but  had  been
    living in Kenya from  a  very  young  age.  She  also  found  that  the
    Appellant spoke the languages of Kenya but not Somalia but  found  that
    this was not a determinative factor when assessing her nationality.  In
    paragraph 16 of her decision, she  then  found  that  "taking  all  the
    evidence in the round, I am satisfied that it is more likely  than  not
    that the appellant is Kenyan,  or  alternatively,  that  she  could  be
    granted Kenyan citizenship because she had  lived  there  lawfully  for
    over seven years".


5.   Therefore, First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp did not find that  the
    Appellant was in possession of a Kenyan passport or  a  Kenya  identity
    card or that she had previously been recognised as a  Kenyan  national,
    even though she had lived there from the age of three. There is also no
    other evidence to suggest that the Appellant has been in possession  of
    a Kenyan passport or identity card in the past. In reply to question 48
    of her asylum interview, she said that she had never had any status  in
    Kenya and was just seen as a Somali living in Kenya. Her  evidence  has
    continued to be consistent in relation to this assertion.


6.   In addition, I note that what section 13 of the Kenya  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2011  states  about  obtaining  Kenyan  citizenship  by
    lawful residence is that:


         (1)  A person who has attained the age of majority and capacity who
         has been lawfully resident in Kenya for a continuous period of at
         least seven years may on application be registered as a citizen if
         that person-


             (a)  has been ordinarily resident in Kenya  for  a  period  of
                  seven   years,   immediately   preceding   the   date   of
                  application;


             ...


             (c)  has resided in Kenya throughout the period of twelve
                  months immediately preceding the date of the application;


             ...


             (e)  is able to understand and  speak  Kiswahili  or  a  local
                  dialect;


             (f)   understands  the  nature  of   the   application   under
                  subsection (1);


             (g)  has not been convicted of an  offence  and  sentenced  to
                  imprisonment for a term of three years or longer;


             ...


             (i)  has been determined, through an objective  criteria,  and
                  the justification made, in writing, that  he  or  she  has
                  made or is capable of making a substantive contribution to
                  the progress  or  advancement  in  any  area  of  national
                  development within Kenya; and


             (j)  is not an adjudged bankrupt".


7.   Therefore, I find that, if the Appellant were to be returned to  Kenya,
    she would have to establish her entitlement to Kenyan  citizenship  and
    most significantly would have to show  that  she  had  been  ordinarily
    resident  there  for  the  seven  years   immediately   preceding   her
    application.  As a consequence, I find that she would be  returning  as
    someone without extant Kenyan citizenship.


CONVENTION REASON


8.   In SB (PSG - Protection Regulations - Reg 6) Moldova  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
    00002 the Upper Tribunal found that former victims of  trafficking  can
    form a particular social group within regulation 6(1)(d) of the Refugee
    or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection   (Qualification)
    Regulations 2006.


9.   In paragraph 23 of her decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Boylan-Kemp
    MBE found that "former  victims  of  trafficking  do  have  a  distinct
    identity in Kenyan society and therefore a former VOT in Kenya  can  be
    considered to be a member  of  a  particular  social  group  under  the
    Convention". Therefore, I find that the Appellant  is  a  member  of  a
    particular social group for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.


PERSECUTION


10.  Regulation 5(2) of the Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International
    Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 also states that:


         "An act of persecution may, for example, take the form of:


         (a)  an act of physical or mental violence,  including  an  act  of
         sexual violence".


11.  If the Appellant were to be re-trafficked, she is likely  to  be  raped
    and sexually assaulted and, therefore, be persecuted for  the  purposes
    of regulation 5(2).


ACTORS OF PERSECUTION OR SERIOUS HARM


12.  Regulation 3 states that "persecution or serious harm can be  committed
    by:


         (c)  any non-State actor if it can be demonstrated that [the State]
         ...is unable or unwilling to provide protection against persecution
         or serious harm".


RISK OF PERSECUTION


13.  It  has  been  found  that  the  Appellant  will  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution by the Kenyan authorities but  it  is  her  case  that  she
    continues to be at risk Helen Brown and the international criminal gang
    she was part of or other potential human  traffickers.  When  assessing
    the risk that may arise in the future, I find that a number of features
    about the  account  which  was  given  by  the  Appellant  about  being
    trafficked and exploited and which was accepted by both  the  competent
    authority within the National Referral Mechanism  and  the  Judges  who
    have considered her case, are potentially significant.


14.  It was accepted that Helen Brown  was  a  woman  who  travelled  across
    international borders with ease and had large houses  in  a  number  of
    different countries. She also had a driver working for her and was able
    to obtain a passport in order to traffic the Appellant  to  the  United
    Kingdom within a matter of days. She was then met at a British  airport
    by another woman with whom she was familiar, who  immediately  put  the
    Appellant to work as a prostitute. Both the house in Uganda and the one
    in the United Kingdom  were  said  to  be  large  and  detached,  which
    suggests that they were expensive. The Appellant  was  accommodated  in
    her own room in the house in  the  United  Kingdom  and  provided  with
    sufficient food, clothes  and  make  up.  Significantly,  she  was  not
    required to have sex with many men each week.  She has also required to
    attend "sex parties" in big houses where there were men in smart  suits
    and she and other girls were taken to these "parties" in  a  car  which
    has a glass panel between the front seats and the seats  at  the  rear,
    which suggests that it was some sort of limousine. All of this tends to
    indicate that the gang was supplying women for the higher  end  of  the
    sexual exploitation market and that the gang were making a good  living
    from this trade.


15.  In addition, as noted  above,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moylan-Kemp
    found that the Appellant had been told that her aunt was dead, as  part
    of plan to traffic and exploit her. As I found  above  when  making  my
    error of law  decision,  this  means  that  there  must  be  a  serious
    possibility that her aunt colluded  with  her  traffickers.  Therefore,
    there is  also  a  serious  possibility  that  the  Appellant  will  be
    returning to Kenya as a single woman with no family members to turn  to
    for assistance and as a woman who had  escaped  from  an  international
    trafficking gang which operated in Kenya, Uganda and the United Kingdom
    and possibly elsewhere.


16.  I have not given any significant weight to the fact that the  Appellant
    is no forty years old. She was initially trafficked when she was in her
    later 30s and there is no evidence to suggest that only girls and young
    women are trafficked from Kenya. Neither do I find that  her  knowledge
    of being trafficked in the past will  offer  her  much  protection.  In
    contrast, her own individual characteristics will render her vulnerable
    to re-trafficking.


17.  In considering what methodology to adopt to consider  whether  a  woman
    who has been trafficked from Kenya would be  safe  on  return,  I  have
    adopted the approach taken by the Upper Tribunal  in    HD  (Trafficked
    women) Nigeria CG [2016] UKUT 00454 (IAC) and  TD  and  AD  (Trafficked
    women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC). I accept that the  country  guidance
    applies to these two specific countries but in my view the  methodology
    has a wider application. This is because Nigeria and Albania  are  also
    source, transit and destination country for human trafficking and Kenya
    and Albania are both on Tier 2 and Nigeria is on the Tier 2 watch  list
    for the purposes of the US Department of State's  2018  Trafficking  in
    Persons Report.


18.  For example, in HD (Trafficked women)  Nigeria  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00454
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal noted that:


         "4.  Whether a woman returning to Nigeria  having  previously  been
         trafficked to the United Kingdom faces on return  a  real  risk  of
         being trafficked afresh will require a detailed assessment  of  her
         particular  and  individual  characteristics.  Factors  that   will
         indicate an enhanced risk of being trafficked include, but are  not
         limited to:


             a.   The absence of a supportive family willing  to  take  her
                  back into the family unit;


             b.   Visible or discernible characteristics of  vulnerability,
                  such as having no social support network to assist her, no
                  or little education or vocational  skills,  mental  health
                  conditions, which may well have been caused by experiences
                  of  abuse  when  originally   trafficked,   material   and
                  financial deprivation such as to mean  that  she  will  be
                  living in poverty or in conditions of destitution;


             c.   The fact that a woman was previously trafficked is likely
                  to mean that she was then identified by the traffickers as
                  someone disclosing characteristics of  vulnerability  such
                  as to give rise to a real risk  of  being  trafficked.  On
                  returning  to  Nigeria,  it   is   probable   that   those
                  characteristics of vulnerability will be enhanced  further
                  in the absence of factors that suggest otherwise.


19.  In current case, it is accepted that the Appellant was trafficked  from
    Nigeria and that she had been sexually exploited in the United  Kingdom
    for nine months. It is also accepted that she has had no  contact  with
    anyone in Kenya since 2014. In addition, for the reasons  given  above,
    there is a serious possibility that her aunt with whom she used to live
    colluded with her trafficker.  Her  history  also  indicates  that  her
    family history, including historic sexual abuse as a  child,  left  her
    vulnerable and isolated to being trafficked in the past.  She  did  not
    complete her secondary education and her only formal employment was  as
    a domestic servant or assisting her aunt on a market stall. Although it
    is true that she started a course in computing in the United Kingdom, a
    deterioration in her mental health from October 2017 has meant that she
    was unable to complete it.


20.  There is also a significant amount of evidence  to  indicate  that  the
    Applicant continues to suffer from anxiety,  which  is  rooted  in  her
    childhood sexual abuse and  her  experience  of  being  trafficked  and
    sexually exploited over a nine-month period. The letter from  Stockland
    Green Primary Care Centre, dated 30 November 2018, confirmed  that  she
    was referred to the Mental Health Trust in 2016 as  she  was  suffering
    from anxiety. It also noted that the reference was not  successful  "as
    they asked her to fill in a diary for assessment and she felt as though
    it  was  making  her  more  anxious,  possibly   reinforcing   previous
    experiences she had gone through with the Home Office". The letter also
    confirmed that she is monitored by the Mental Health Trust on a regular
    basis and noted that she continues  to  suffer  from  stress,  fleeting
    suicide thoughts and had problems trusting people.  I have  also  noted
    that the letter, dated 28 September 2018, from Dr. Onuba,  states  that
    she was being prescribed with a new anti-depressant and that  this  was
    at more than the lowest dosage.


21.  It is also clear from some of  the  evidence,  that  her  distress  has
    prevented her from taking full advantage of the counselling and support
    services offered to her. For example, the letter from Restore, dated 12
    December 2018 indicated that her ability to feel  able  to  communicate
    and meet with other people has deteriorated from 2015/2016 when she was
    attending a number of social  activities  and  also  volunteering.  The
    letter also explained that she had struggled to leave  her  home  since
    October 2017. The letter from The  Adavu  Project,  dated  11  December
    2018, noted that the Appellant "continued to struggle with memories  of
    the sexual exploitation and is unable to speak about it in detail as it
    retraumatises her. I have discussed returning to counselling with  [the
    Appellant] consistently and during our initial sessions and she  stated
    that she had found the sessions difficult with Women's Aid during 2015-
    2016, the recall made her distressed [and] caused her to feel "worse"".
    The letter from BIRCH (Birmingham Community Hosting Network),  dated  3
    December 2018, confirmed that, although the Appellant was  initially  a
    valued and regular weekly volunteer for its "meet and greet" session at
    St Martins Youth Centre, she had not been able to  help  since  October
    2017 because of serious health problems. The letter does  not  describe
    the nature of these problems but the earlier two letters indicate  that
    it was her mental ill  health  which  was  the  main  obstacle  to  her
    communicating with others and which was leading to her isolation.


22.  As a consequence, I find that the evidence  indicates  that  even  with
    the engagement of her GP, the Mental Health Trust and various voluntary
    groups the Appellant has not yet  been  able  to  address  the  anxiety
    caused by her previous trauma. Removing the Appellant from  the  United
    Kingdom will deprive of her current support and is likely to lead to  a
    further deterioration of her mental health.


23.  The medical evidence also confirmed that the  Appellant  needs  surgery
    to remove large uterine fibroids but  that  the  operation  had  to  be
    cancelled as she is also suffering from  supraventricular  tachycardia.
    This has now been addressed but she is still waiting for her surgery to
    be rescheduled.


24.  I also find that there is  an  additional  factor  in  the  Appellant's
    case, which is that for the reasons given in paragraphs 5  -  7  above,
    the Appellant  would  be  returning  to  Kenya  without  the  necessary
    immigration status or documents to prove her  nationality.  This  would
    impede her ability to access employment and  services  and  render  her
    additionally vulnerable to being re-trafficked and exploited, if not by
    Helen Brown and the international criminal gang to which she  belonged,
    then by another similar gang.


THE KENYAN GOVERNMENT AS AN AGENT OF PROTECTION


25.  The US Department of State  Trafficking  in  Persons  Report  for  2018
    confirms that the Kenyan government  continues  to  fail  to  meet  the
    minimum standards in several key areas and was a  source,  transit  and
    destination country for human trafficking.  It also  stated  that  "the
    government maintained law enforcement efforts, but incomplete data from
    the government made it difficult to fully  assess  those  efforts".  In
    addition, it was noted that "at the close of the reported  period,  the
    government did not report any trafficking  convictions,  and  the  nine
    prosecutions remained on-going, compared with 105 convictions in 2016.


26.  It also confirmed that "services for adult victims in-country  remained
    negligible". It was also clear  that  the  few  shelters  and  drop  in
    centres which were financially supported by the Government catered  for
    child, as opposed to  adult,  victims  of  trafficking".  It  was  also
    significant that  the  Report  also  noted  that  "NGOs  reported  that
    internally displaced persons, particular those  who  live  close  to  a
    major  highway  or  local  trading  centre,  are  more  vulnerable   to
    trafficking than persons in settled communities". I find that this is a
    relevant  factor  as  Appellant's   the   particular   characteristics,
    including her lack of family support, her  mental  ill-health  and  her
    lack of immigration status  suggest  that  she  will  not  be  able  to
    assimilate into a settled community.


27.  The fact that it is  internationally  and  nationally  recognised  that
    former and potential  victims  of  human  trafficking  require  special
    protection mean  that  the  Respondent  cannot  merely  rely  upon  the
    decision in Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000]
    UKHL 37 and the protection generally provided to those in Kenya.  As  a
    consequence, I find that, due to her  particular  characteristics,  the
    Appellant would not be able to access sufficient  protection  in  Kenya
    from the government there.


INTERNAL FLIGHT


28.  For the reasons given above, I find that  the  Appellant  would  be  at
    risk wherever she moved in Kenya. Relocating to Nairobi or another city
    would not resolve her lack of immigration status  or  her  mental  ill-
    health and on-going vulnerability to exploitation. In addition,  in  AA
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    579, Lord Justice Buxton was considering whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to return a woman to Uganda. However, the general principles have
    greater applicability. In particular, he found that:


         "22. Even if the foregoing is wrong, and it was open to the AIT  to
         hold that it would not  be  unduly  harsh  to  return  young  women
         generally to Kampala, it is still necessary to consider whether  AA
         has characteristics that would render remission unduly harsh in her
         particular  case.    That  is  made  plain  in  the   authoritative
         statements of the law cited in �7 above.  Lord  Bingham  said  that
         the enquiry must be directed to the  situation  of  the  particular
         applicant; and Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood that the  claimant
         must be as well able as most to bear the  hardship  suffered  by  a
         significant minority in the country of  relocation.   It  was  this
         aspect of the case that  occupied  most  of  the  submissions  both
         before the AIT and before us.


         23. The two particular characteristics of AA that were relied on as
         making her particularly vulnerable were,  first,  that  AA  has  no
         formal qualifications; and second  that  she  was  traumatised  and
         suffering from anxiety and depression."


29.  In the current case expecting the Appellant to both to another part  of
    Kenya would also be unduly harsh  because  she  will  not  be  able  to
    establish her right to Kenyan nationality and will have  no  family  or
    education and employment history to assist her.


Decision


The appeal is allowed.


Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 31 January2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
