

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02919/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11th July 2017                             |On 12th July 2017            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     WA
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Ahmad, of Counsel, instructed by BHD Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS
    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Iran born in 1994. He arrived in the UK
       in September 2016 and applied for asylum the next day. His claim was
       refused on 10th March 2017. His  appeal  against  the  decision  was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Courtney in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 8th May 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes
       on 1st June 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  First-
       tier judge had erred in  law  in  failing  to  make  clear  why  the
       claimant's internet activities would have come to the  attention  of
       the Iranian authorities, and why he would be  asked  about  them  on
       return to Iran; and further in failing to  apply  SS  (Iran)  [2008]
       EWCA Civ and in considering that AB and Others (internet - state  of
       evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 is a country guidance case.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In her grounds of appeal the Secretary of State argues that  it  was
       an error of law for the First-tier Tribunal to have found  that  the
       appellant's Facebook posts put him at risk on return. The First-tier
       Tribunal was not bound by AB and Others  as  it  is  not  a  country
       guidance case and should have given lesser weight to it than such  a
       case. The authorities would not be likely to view  the  contents  of
       his Facebook in the same light due to his being illiterate, and this
       relevant factor has not been considered. In SS (Iran) the  Court  of
       Appeal find that it is necessary to show how the Iranian authorities
       will be aware  of  an  opponent's  activities  in  the  UK.  As  the
       appellant's activities were very limited in scope and time he cannot
       be said to have discharged the lower standard of proof.  Mr  Bramble
       said he was not  going  to  make  any  further  submissions  on  the
       application.

    5. I indicated to both parties that  I  did  not  find  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons set out  in  the  grounds,
       but would put my full reasoning in a written decision.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    6. There is no evidence that the First-tier Tribunal saw the case of AB
       and Others as a country guidance case, it is not referred to as such
       at paragraph 36, and in  contrast  when  referring  to  the  country
       guidance case of SSH and HR (Iran) the First-tier Tribunal is  clear
       to note that this is  a  country  guidance  case  and  consider  the
       particular circumstances in which  it  can  be  departed  from,  see
       paragraphs 28 to 35 of the decision.

    7. It was quite proper for the First-tier Tribunal,  at  paragraphs  36
       and 45 of the decision, to place reliance on  AB  and  Others  as  a
       reported decision of the Upper Tribunal. Further, matters of  weight
       to be given to evidence are ones for the  judge  hearing  any  case,
       unless such weight is irrational which this cannot be  said  to  be.
       The extract from AB and Others, cited at paragraph 36, goes  to  the
       issue  as  to  why  it  is  likely  that  the  appellant's  Facebook
       activities might come to the attention of  the  authorities.  It  is
       supported by two other reasons: the appellant's travel on a  special
       travel document and his return as a Kurd - the  latter  point  being
       supported by an ECtHR case, SF and Others v Sweden.  Similarly, when
       AB and Others is cited at paragraph 45 it is found to  be  supported
       by what is said in SF and Others v Sweden in relation to the risk to
       the appellant even if his posted the material  in  an  opportunistic
       fashion. The Secretary of State does not point to any evidence  that
       suggests that the Iranian authorities will perceive the appellant as
       someone who does not oppose them just because he is not an  educated
       man.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal cites in  detail  the  appellant's  Facebook
       postings at paragraph 37 of the decision, and considers issues  with
       the spelling of his name but concludes that  a  search  against  his
       correct name brings up his site. The conclusion  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal is that given the low tolerance of criticism by the Iranian
       regime, the critical  nature  of  the  Facebook  postings,  and  the
       likelihood  of  the  material  coming  to  the  attention   of   the
       intelligence services at the airport that the appellant faced a well
       founded fear of persecution  by  virtue  of  his  imputed  political
       opinions. I find that the decision is well reasoned and contains  no
       errors of law.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I do not set aside the decision

   3. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal
      on asylum and human rights grounds.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 11th July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







