





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02286/2019


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th December 2019                 |On 12th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     MSS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THe Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Allison instructed by J D Spicer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gillespie promulgated on the 19th September 2019 whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    appellant to refuse the  appellant's  claims  to  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and relief on the grounds of articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having  considered  all  the  circumstances  I  consider  it
    appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted Tribunal Judge Grant-
    Hutchinson on the 4 November 2019. Thus the case appeared before me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. The grounds of appeal had raised 4 principal grounds for  arguing  that
    there was a material error of law. At the outset of the hearing  before
    me it was accepted by the representative for the  respondent  that  the
    3rd and 4th grounds  were  made  out.  The  appellant's  representative
    wished to argue further that the first 2 grounds were also made out.

 5. The appellant is a national of Somalia, an Ashraf and a Sufi Muslim. He
    lived in Qoryoley district of Lower Shabelle. In the past the Hawiye, a
    majority clan harassed and persecuted the minority clans in  the  area.
    The leader of the Hawiye is now a leader in the Somali Defence Force.

 6. Latterly the area in which the appellant lived came under  the  control
    of Al Shabaab. Al Shabaab would come to the area and to the appellant's
    village and would harass and persecute the minority  clans.  The  minor
    clan members were given the alternative of joining Al Shabaab and fight
    against the government or be mistreated or killed.

 7. Al Shabaab  came  to  the  appellant's  family  shop  and  ordered  the
    appellant's  father  to  join  them.  The  appellant's  father  refused
    indicating that he was an old man and that Sufism was against violence.
    The appellant's claim was that as a result his father  disappeared.  Al
    Shabaab were then coming to the area and were expecting  the  appellant
    and other young men to join them. The appellant fled leaving Somali and
    going to Ethiopia. Ultimately the appellant came to the UK and  claimed
    asylum.

 8. As part of the decision it was accepted that the appellant was  a  Sufi
    Muslim and that he could not practice his faith in his  home  area.  It
    was  accepted  that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk   of   conduct
    constituting persecution  in  his  home  area  either  because  of  his
    opposition to Al Shabaab, or on the basis  of  being  a  minority  clan
    member or of having an imputed political opinion adverse to Al  Shabaab
    or because of his Sufi faith and non-violence. It was accepted that the
    appellant was at risk in his home area.

 9. It was accepted by the respondent's representative that  those  finding
    of fact should stand. The issue thereafter was  whether  the  appellant
    could be reasonably expected to relocate to another area of the country
    including Mogadishu.

10. In essence the first 2 grounds seek to argue that a concession had been
    made in the reasons for refusal letter that  the  appellant  could  not
    relocate to Mogadishu. As the judge had made a finding adverse  to  the
    appellant on the issue of relocation to Mogadishu, it was claimed  that
    the judge had failed to abide by the concession and made findings on an
    issue which was not in dispute because of the concession.

11. Further whilst it had been accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a  Sufi
    Muslim and would not be safe in his own area following the Sufi  branch
    of Islam. There had been an expert report, which clearly confirmed that
    the appellant would be at risk in his home area.  As  the  prospect  of
    relocation to Mogadishu had not commented upon by  the  expert.  It  is
    claimed that the expert had not been  asked  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant as a Sufi would  be  at  risk  in  Mogadishu  thus  rendering
    relocation  there  impossible.  The  appellant's  representatives  were
    claiming the it was conceded that the appellant could not  relocate  to
    Mogadishu. The respondent's representative did not accept that  such  a
    concession was made.

12. The claim that a concession had been made is based on paragraphs 82 and
    83 of the refusal letter.  In the paragraphs the position in  Mogadishu
    had been considered and it  was  noted  that  the  appellant  may  have
    problems in relocating to Mogadishu given the country guidance.

13. The country guidance case, AMM & others v SSHD  2011 UKUT 00445  (IAC),
    in respect of Somalia had dealt with relocation to Mogadishu and  dealt
    specifically with relocation by minority clan members.  In  considering
    whether minority clan members could relocate to Mogadishu, it had  been
    noted that such individuals would find  it  difficult  to  relocate  to
    Mogadishu if they had no  prior  connection  with  the  city,  such  as
    previously living there, knowing clan members on whom they  could  call
    for support, having family members there or  having  financial  support
    such that they could establish themselves in accommodation.   Given the
    economic development in Mogadishu an individual who  had  such  backing
    could then establish themselves in Mogadishu.

14. At paragraph 39 of the decision the judge had specifically  noted  that
    the appellant had an uncle, who he had made  contact  with.  The  uncle
    lived in London. The uncle had contact with family members in Mogadishu
    to whom the uncle sends funds.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant
    therefore would not be without family or  clan  support  or  access  to
    funds.

15. The uncle had been called by the appellant at the hearing. It does  not
    appear that the uncle's position was known to  the  respondent  at  the
    time of writing the refusal letter.

16. In the refusal letter, paragraphs 82 and 83 as indicated, it  had  been
    set out that  the  appellant  would  have  problems  in  relocating  to
    Mogadishu. Considering the country guidance case that appears merely to
    be acknowledging the problems identified in the case law. The case  law
    had specifically identified that those without clan support, or  family
    support or  financial  support  would  have  problems  in  establishing
    themselves in Mogadishu.

17. The respondent would not know whether the appellant had support or clan
    or family connections on which he could rely at the time of writing the
    refusal letter. It would be for the appellant to prove that he had  not
    and therefore it would be for the appellant to advance evidence to show
    that it would be unduly harsh for  him  to  relocate  to  Mogadishu  or
    another area of Somalia.

18. The appellant's representative was seeking to assert that paragraphs 82
    and 83 were a concession that  the  appellant  could  not  relocate  to
    Mogadishu. Have considered the wording of the paragraphs, I do not  see
    that there is a concession. The paragraphs merely acknowledge that  the
    appellant would have to face the very problems that were identified  in
    the country guidance case. In which event it was for the  appellant  to
    prove that it would be unduly harsh for him to relocate to another area
    of Somalia including Mogadishu. The appellant's representative accepted
    that the burden of proving such was on the appellant.

19. In the event I do not find that the first two grounds are made  out.  I
    do not find that the paragraphs  in  the  refusal  letter  referred  to
    constitute a concession. The paragraphs merely acknowledge the problems
    identified in the case law. In the circumstances I do not find that the
    first two grounds are made out.

20. It has been conceded by the respondent's representative that the  judge
    has failed to give reasons or adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate and that such  will
    require the appeal to be further considered with evidence to cover  the
    issues raised.

21. For the avoidance of doubt the finding that the appellant is at risk in
    his home area is to stand and the issues to  be  determined  relate  to
    whether internal relocation is available  to  the  appellant  including
    relocation to Mogadishu. Equally the evidence that the appellant has an
    uncle and  that  the  uncle  is  in  contact  with  family  members  in
    Mogadishu, that the uncle provides funds to those family members  is  a
    factor also to be taken into account in any  further  consideration  of
    this appeal.

22. In light of the issues to  be  determined  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appropriate course was for this matter to be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for further evidence on the  issues  identified  including  if
    appropriate evidence from an expert relating to the position  of  Sufis
    in Mogadishu and whether they are  free  to  practice  their  faith  in
    Mogadishu and whether as a  member  of  the  Ashraf  and/or  Sufis  the
    appellant would be able to relocate to Mogadishu  or  another  area  of
    Somalia.




    Notice of Decision

23. To the limited extent identified I allow the appeal and remit the  case
    to the First -tier Tribunal to be reheard on the issues identified.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 10th December 2019

Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed      Date 10th December 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
