
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/02742/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2019                           |On 16 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                    Between

                                     S R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Winter, instructed by Jain, Neil & Ruddy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hands, promulgated on 11 July 2017.  The  appellant
    successfully challenged that decision and  was  granted  leave  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on  20  December  2017,  the
    Upper Tribunal found no error of law, upholding the decision  of  Judge
    Hands.  That decision was in turn challenged by way of  an  application
    for permission to appeal to the Court of  Session  which  was  granted.
    The matter was then remitted by the  Court  of  Session  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, its decision having been set aside.  It was agreed there  was
    an error of law in the decision of Judge Hands and the appeal proceeded
    on that basis.

 2. It is necessary to set out in some detail  the  history  both  of  what
    happened to the appellant in Malaysia,  a  large  part  of  it  is  now
    accepted by the Secretary of State, and the procedural history.

 3. The appellant was born in 1986.  She is  a  citizen  of  Malaysia  and,
    although a Hindu by birth (as were her parents) she later converted  to
    Christianity.  The appellant's father although  born  a  Hindu,  stated
    that he had converted to Islam when the company in which he worked  was
    bought by Imam Khalid who asked him to convert to Islam which  he  did.
    Imam Khalid also wanted him to abandon his Hindu  wife  and  marry  his
    niece instead and, when the father refused, he was in  2003  beaten  by
    two of Imam Khalid's associates.  There was a further incident when  an
    associate in 2010 when associates  of  Imam  Khalid  entered  the  home
    attacking the appellant's mother; a further incident occurred later  in
    June 2010 when two Malay Muslim men entered  the  appellant's  father's
    factory and went after him with a knife.

 4. In addition to these incidents, on 11 August 2014,  five  Malay  Muslim
    men entered the family home  holding  them  at  gun  and  knife  point,
    accusing the father of cheating Imam Khalid.

 5. The case, as is put, is that the family were able to avoid further ill-
    treatment on the basis that they should they all convert to Islam.  The
    process of doing so was commenced the following  day  when  the  family
    attended the Islamic office and started the conversion process, signing
    the relevant papers.  Fearing that this would not make them safe,  they
    fled from Kuala Lumpur to Penang and then overland to Thailand,  flying
    from Bangkok to Glasgow via Dubai.

 6. The appellant's case is that she is at  risk  from  JAKIM  (an  Islamic
    office within Malaysia) and Imam Khalid; and, her signature on  a  form
    to convert to Islam would mean  that  the  Malaysian  authorities  were
    considered to be as Muslim, requiring her to  follow  their  traditions
    contrary to her beliefs as a Christian.

 7. The appellant's initial application for asylum was refused on 10  March
    2015 and the appeal against that decision was dismissed on  6  November
    2015.  An appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  that  decision  was
    ultimately unsuccessful.

 8. Further submissions were made to  the  Home  Office  in  particular  an
    expert report from Dr Christoph Bluth and a  letter  from  D  M  Rao  &
    Company, Advocates and Solicitors in Malaysia who  had  made  enquiries
    seeking confirmation from the  Department  of  Islamic  Affairs  as  to
    whether the family had started the conversion process.

 9. In the refusal letter of 3 March 2017 the Secretary of State took  note
    of the first immigration appeal decision noting the  findings  that  it
    had not been established that there was  any  connection  between  Imam
    Khalid and JAKIM and that whilst it was  accepted  that  the  incidents
    referred to had occurred, it was not accepted there was any  connection
    with the state.  It was also noted that there was no credible  evidence
    that the family had been subjected to ill-treatment  by  the  Malaysian
    authorities on account of their religion or that they  had  signed  the
    forms stating  they  intended  to  convert.   The  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that those who signed the relevant  documents  to  convert  to
    Islam at the Department of  Islamic  Affairs  would  be  likely  to  be
    considered as Muslim, but did not accept that this had occurred.

10. The issue has now become  narrower,  it  being  accepted  that  if  the
    Appellant had signed the form, she  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Malaysia.

11. The first appeal was  a  joint  appeal  in  which  the  appellant,  her
    brother, and her father were appellants.   In  respect  of  the  second
    appeal, this concerned only  the  appellant  although  the  appellant's
    father, brother and sister gave evidence in her support.

12. Judge Hands did not accept  the  appellant's  account  of  having  been
    compelled to sign the relevant forms, taking  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision by Judge McGavin as her starting point.  She  considered  that
    the only evidence in addition to that before Judge McGavin  [34]  is  a
    letter from D M Rao & Co.  The judge concluded at [49] to [52] that:

      i) it was unlikely that the appellant would have been able to look  at
         the contents of the documents she signed if she did in fact sign it
         as she was an educated woman who has ran her own business;

     ii) the questions in respect of Imam Khalid and JAKIM are irrelevant to
         the appeal despite the report  of  Christoph  Bluth  as  they  were
         really the subject of findings of fact made  by  Judge  McGavin  in
         which the appellant's account and that of her family was found  not
         to be credible;

    iii) that none of the witnesses were made to repeat the words identified
         by the expert as being sufficient to convert  to  Islam;  that  the
         letter from the lawyers did not confirm  that  the  form  has  been
         signed that it was unlikely that the photographs said to have  been
         taken at the office where they intended to sign the forms were  not
         taken by the brother as it was unlikely if, as it was  taken  on  a
         phone, that he had not taken a photograph of himself if as  he  had
         said it was such an important day for them noting that  there  were
         no officials on the photographs and the  only  person  wearing  any
         form of identity badge is the father who did not need to  sign  any
         of the documents, the photographs showing only that they were in  a
         waiting room with a sign that says just the "Islamic Office";

     iv) while these points looked at  individually  could  be  said  to  be
         inconsequential, viewed as a whole, the accounts of  what  happened
         on 12 August 2014 and  thereafter  are  not  consistent  with  what
         happened in connection with the appellant's father; and,  that  she
         has fabricated her account in being forced to convert to  Islam  by
         signing a form.

13. Given the terms of the agreement between the parties, I then  proceeded
    to hear evidence.

14. The appellant adopted her witness statements  and  was  cross-examined.
    She confirmed that the photographs provided were of  her,  her  mother,
    her father and her sister.  She said her brother took  the  photographs
    but did not know why.  She confirmed that none of the photographs shown
    to her are  of  signing  a  form  and  could  not  recall  whether  the
    photographs were taken before or after they were called to  give  thumb
    prints and for their photographs to be taken.

15. The appellant said that she had glanced at the form and had not read it
    in detail as they were forced to attend.  She said she just  wanted  to
    sign it and get out.

16. She said she did not have a copy of the  document  with  her  when  she
    left.

17. The appellant confirmed that the letter from D M Rao & Co was from  the
    solicitors in Malaysia and that, after  the  family  had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom, they had asked him to seek the document.  She said they
    had not taken legal advice before signing it as they had to go the next
    day and had no time to do so.

18. The appellant was referred to a supplementary bundle annexed which  had
    contained an exchange of e-mails.  It was to the effect that these  she
    would have to attend personally to obtain a copy of the documents.

19. Asked if she had tried contacting the Islamic office in  the  UK.   She
    said that because she had been told she needed to go  there  in  person
    she was afraid to contact them.  She did not know if that would  worsen
    her situation or that of any of her family who are  still  there.   She
    said that she fears JAKIM and the people  who  had  attacked  them  had
    identified themselves as JAKIM.

20. I asked the appellant why she thought that her making  enquiries  would
    cause problems for her family.  She said that she had  actually  phoned
    them to request the forms and that the lady who spoke to her was unable
    to give any information over the phone because they  could  not  verify
    her identity.  She e-mailed them and told them that she would  need  to
    refer to a specific office.  She said that she had contacted them  with
    hesitation and feared that asking them for that information and putting
    pressure on them it might infuriate them.  She knew she was  safe  here
    and she tried her best to get the documents.

21. I asked the appellant to describe the document she had  been  asked  to
    sign.  She said it was like a booklet that  it  was  A4  in  size.   It
    contained all her personal details for her work, where she works and so
    on and at the back was the declaration that Allah is the only God.

22. I then heard evidence from  the  appellant's  sister  who  adopted  her
    witness statements and confirmed her presence in the photographs.   She
    said she did not know why her brother was not in any of  them  and  did
    not recall if they were taken before or after signing  the  form.   She
    said she had not read the form before signing it as she  was  just  too
    nervous.  She said that her sister (the appellant)  had  not  contacted
    had not discussed contacting the office but they had signed the form.

23. The  appellant's  brother  then  gave  evidence  adopting  his  witness
    statements confirming that he took the photographs and that he had done
    so because he felt it was important to him  as  it  was  against  their
    will.  He said it was important because they were forced to  be  there.
    He said he had his phone with him and wanted  pictures  of  that,  that
    being the purpose of  them.   He  said  that  he  was  the  one  taking
    photographs and could not do so but was suffering so much  trauma  that
    he did not think of asking his father to take one of him.

24. The appellant's brother said that he did look at the form and  that  he
    was not sure if his sisters had looked  at  the  form  as  he  had  not
    discussed it with them.  He said the form he remembered  had  his  name
    and date of birth written on it but he did not, given the trauma he had
    suffered, actually notice what was written on it.  He just  glanced  at
    it and signed it.  He said he did not know  if  his  elder  sister  had
    attempted to contact the office to get a copy of the form  and  it  was
    more than two years since he had lived with them.

Submissions

25. Mr Clarke for the  respondent  said  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    incidents took place but it was not  conceded  that  the  attacks  were
    carried out by JAKIM or by persons related to the Malaysian government.
     He submitted that the appellant  had  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    showing that the process was carried out; that  the  photographs  added
    little; they did not show them signing or the timescale.

26. Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant's brother  had  not  provided  a
    proper, reasonable  explanation  for  taking  the  photographs,  simply
    saying that they were important, thus suggesting that these photographs
    were taken to embellish the claim.

27. It was submitted further that the reasons for signing the form  do  not
    ring true.  It was submitted further the appellant had  only  now  said
    that she had attempted to contact the Islamic office directly when  she
    had said she had not and had failed properly to  say  why  she  thought
    that these enquiries would infuriate them.

28. Mr Winter submitted the evidence I had heard was consistent  with  that
    given to Judge McGavin as set out  in  paragraphs  13  and  14  of  her
    decision.  He submitted that the  further  evidence  showed  that  Imam
    Khalid was connected to the government; that the  photographs  provided
    some support the witnesses confirmed that they had  signed  the  forms.
    He submitted that had there been an attempt to embellish the claim, the
    photographs would have been done of them signing forms.   He  submitted
    that the evidence from the appellant as the contact was consistent with
    the letter from D M Rao had added nothing and that the judge had  erred
    in her assessment of Dr Bluth's report.



Findings

29. It is for the appellant to establish  her  case  to  a  lower  standard
    applicable in asylum appeals.  In reaching my conclusions I have  taken
    into account all of the evidence and in particular the  decisions  both
    of Judge Hands and Judge McGavin albeit  that  the  decision  of  Judge
    Hands has been set aside.

30. I bear in mind the principles set out in Devaseelan,  bearing  in  mind
    that some of the points Judge McGavin rejected such as  the  connection
    between Imam Khalid, JAKIM and the state are addressed.

31. In assessing the evidence of what happened on 12 August 2014, I bear in
    mind the acceptance that the events of the  previous  day  are  not  in
    dispute.  On any view an armed gang breaking into the family  home  and
    holding people at gun and knife point  would  inevitably  have  been  a
    traumatic event.  It is in that context that I view evidence of what is
    said to have happened the next day.

32. I do not discern any material discrepancy between the accounts given by
    the appellants and the witnesses.  There are some  differences  between
    their recollection about what the form looked like and what  they  were
    to sign but in the context of an event now some 5 years ago, if it took
    place, and as  people perceived things differently and recalled  things
    differently.

33. With the exception of the inconsistency in the appellant's evidence  as
    to whether she had been in contact with the  authorities  in  Malaysia,
    the accounts given by the other witnesses are consistent  allowing  for
    different recollections of the same event.  They are also consistent on
    these points with the appellant.

34. I do not consider in the context of the violent  assault  the  previous
    day that there is anything implausible in the appellant's  brother  not
    taking a photograph of himself nor of the absence of any photographs of
    the forms being signed.  There is little merit in the  submission  that
    these photographs may have been taken to  embellish  the  claim;  after
    all, if you were going to embellish a claim one might think this  would
    at least have had photographs taken of  people  signing  documents.  It
    would also  have   required  a  considerable  degree  of  planning  and
    foresight, it being evident that the photographs were taken before  the
    family left Malaysia.

35. There is good reason to think that the photographs were  taken  in  the
    Islamic office and whilst I note, as did Judge  Hands,  that  only  the
    father is wearing an ID card, no questions were put about that and I do
    not consider that any inferences can be drawn from that.  It  could  be
    is that as head of the family in a patriarchal society he had  to  wear
    identity but as it is not from the form based on any questioning  I  do
    not consider it is material.

36. There is an inconsistency in the appellant's account  whether  she  had
    been in contact with the authorities in Malaysia.  Initially  she  said
    she had not as she did not wish to infuriate them.  In response  to  my
    question she confirmed that  she  had  contacted  them  but  could  not
    explain why she thought they would be infuriated in any  rational  way.
    The account she gave of the offices refusing to hand  over  authorities
    as a result of her telephone call they could not  verify  her  identity
    rings true.  That is consistent with the letter  from  the  lawyers  in
    Malaysia and it makes sense that the appellant  who  is  after  all  an
    educated  woman  thought  that  she  might  be  able  to  contact   the
    authorities and speak to  them  directly  which  would  have  a  better
    result.  I do not consider that this evidence  is  an  after  the  fact
    embellishment and I consider it is little more than a clarification.  I
    do not consider that  it  detracts  in  any  meaningful  way  from  the
    evidence.

37. Turning to the decision in Devaseelan,  the  basic  principle  is  that
    there had to be good reason to depart from the credibility finding made
    by the First-tier  Tribunal.   But  the  context  of  Devaseelan  is  a
    situation where there had not been a fresh asylum decision made by  the
    Secretary of State after the submission of additional material.

38. Much of Judge McGavin's reasoning and analysis is  taken  up  with  the
    evidence of the father on which I received I no submissions.   None  of
    the other material before me addresses in detail the position of  JAKIM
    other than the report of Mr Bluth which indicated that  it  is  closely
    connected to the state.  It is however instructive to read the  refusal
    letter at paragraph 45 whereby it is not accepted  that  the  Malaysian
    authorities had persecuted the appellant.  That, with respect,  is  not
    the point; the issue is risk on return.  Again, at [63]  the  issue  is
    the fear of return is considered ersecution from non-state agents.

39. The evidence of Dr Bluth is that JAKIM is associated with the Malaysian
    state.  He states at 6.2 as follows

         "The Department of  Islamic  Advancement  of  Malaysia  (JAKIM)  is
         extremely important and powerful in Malaysia.  It carries  out  the
         systematic persecution of violators of Islamic laws and engages  in
         raids  on  churches,  hotels  and  the  policing  of  Islamic   law
         throughout Malaysia in meting out punishment against offenders.  It
         is not possible to disappear in  Malaysia  as  any  person  can  be
         traced through their identity card  (MyKad)  which  is  compulsory.
         Consequently JAKIM  would  be  able  to  identify  and  locate  the
         applicants if they returned to Malaysia.  An Imam working with  the
         JAKIM would be able to use the  organisation  to  act  against  the
         applicants as he  did  previously.   Judge  McGavin  elaborated  in
         considerable detail the question of Imam Khalid's  relationship  to
         the JAKIM and whether or not he  had  any  position  of  authority.
         However,  this  is  not  necessarily  relevant   given   that   the
         circumstances of the situation of the applicant  would  engage  the
         interest of the JAKIM and Imam Khalid would just need to report  it
         to them.  It is not possible for  (the  appellant)  and  the  other
         family members to internally relocate in Malaysia and be safe  from
         the sources they feared there."

40. Looking at the evidence in the round,  I  conclude  that  JAKIM  is  in
    effect part of the state and certainly has a role within it insofar  as
    it relates to Muslims.  Its role and functions vary from state to state
    within Malaysia and some Imams may or may  not  may  be  more  or  less
    involved with it.  That is not to say that I accept  that  Imam  Khalid
    would be part of the state; it is really to observe that what is or  is
    not the authorities state in particular territory is not always easy to
    discern and I bear that in mind in analysing the  evidence  put  before
    me.

41. Taking all of these factors into account and viewing the evidence as  a
    whole, bearing in mind the previous findings and  applying  Devaseelan;
    and, having observed the appellant and her siblings give evidence, I am
    satisfied that they had provided  me  with  an  accurate  and  truthful
    account of what occurred on 12 August 2014.  I am satisfied  that  they
    were compelled to sign the relevant forms and  had  accordingly,  given
    the concessions made by the Secretary of State, they  are  at  risk  on
    return to Malaysia.  Accordingly, for these reasons I allow the  appeal
    on asylum grounds.  Given also the concession by the Secretary of State
    that anything following from this would be in breach of  Article  3  of
    the Human Rights  Convention,  I  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

42. It follows, given that the appellant is entitled to  be  treated  as  a
    refugee, that  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  must
    formally be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2) I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights
    grounds.

 3) I make an anonymity order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent  but  does  not  prevent
the appellant from supplying a copy to her father, mother  or  siblings  for
use in other proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 30 January 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

