
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02103/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields, Newcastle             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2018                            |On 15 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                     AT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, instructed by Malik and Malik
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant who is a national of Albania has been granted  permission
    to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Head-Rapson.  For
    reasons given in her decision dated 13 April 2018, the judge  dismissed
    the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights  grounds
    against the Secretary of State's decision dated 26 January  2018.   The
    judge records that  on  3  March  2016  a  referral  was  made  on  the
    appellant's behalf to the National Referral Mechanism for the competent
    authority to make  a  decision  as  to  whether  she  fell  within  the
    definition of modern slavery as defined by the Modern Slavery Act 2015.
     It concluded that she was not for reasons given in a decision dated 29
    March 2017 which was upheld on review on 11 April 2017.

 2. The judge noted in her decision that the appellant had left Albania  on
    26 or 27 June 2015 via Italy  and  had  claimed  she  had  escaped  the
    traffickers on 2 or 3  September  2015  by  travelling  to  Milan.  She
    ultimately reached the United Kingdom by clandestine entry  leading  to
    her asylum claim made on 14 September 2015.

 3. The appellant's claim recorded by the judge is that she had met her ex-
    boyfriend Eduard in December 2014 and had begun  a  relationship.   She
    had made the journey to Italy with him in June the following year.   On
    arrival, a friend of Eduard called Elvis took her to a house;  she  did
    not see Eduard after he left her  to  collect  her  bags.   Eduard  had
    informed the appellant that she was his property and beat her  up  when
    she resisted.  She was forced to work for him in the sex industry until
    she  managed  to  escape  in  early  September  whilst  a  client   was
    unconscious. She left with another young woman called Leyla.  They made
    their way to Milan  and  from  there  onto  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant fears that on return, she faced harm from her  family  and/or
    her traffickers.

 4. After reviewing the country evidence, including the decision in TD  and
    AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC), the judge concluded that
    the account by the appellant had been inconsistent  and  that  she  had
    failed to provide any reasonable explanation why this was so in respect
    of the detail of her claim of events leading up to her escape which she
    therefore rejected.  The judge concluded at [63] to [68]:

         "63. I do not accept the account which the Appellant  gave  to  the
             Tribunal, as it is riddled with discrepancies relating to  the
             core  issue  of  the  problems  which  she  claims   to   have
             encountered in Albania.  The answers which she gave in  cross-
             examination contradict the evidence she provided in the Asylum
             and Screening Interviews.  The Appellant displayed significant
             inconsistencies.

         64.  When it was put to her that she changed  her  story,  she  was
             unable to answer the questions directly.  On occasion, she was
             asked  the  same  question  twice  and  was  evasive  on  both
             occasions.  She added to her account and changed it.  I am not
             satisfied that I have  received  a  truthful  picture  of  the
             circumstances of the Appellant's case.   Having  observed  her
             over the period in which  she  gave  evidence  and  heard  her
             responses to questions put in  cross-examination  and  by  me,
             which have been shown to be lacking  in  credibility,  I  also
             consider  that  this  reflects  upon  her  propensity  to   be
             dishonest whenever she sees it in her own interest.

         65.  I found her account to be a graphic  untruthful  demonstration
             drawn  from  a  rather  fertile  imagination.   Vitally,   her
             evidence on the core issue, as set out above, was  wanting  in
             any consistency and credibility.  It will  be  clear  from  my
             analysis of  the  evidence  above  that  there  were  numerous
             aspects that I was and remain dubious about.  I treat all  the
             evidence with some caution, as her evidence was  not  entirely
             convincing.

         66.  In addition to the doubts I have concerning her credibility, I
             place significant weight upon the  findings  of  the  National
             Referral Mechanism (NRM) dated 29 March 2017.  The Appellant's
             claim to be a victim of modern slavery was rejected on account
             of her adverse credibility.  This  decision  was  upheld  upon
             review on 11 April 2017.

         67.  I reject the Appellant's  Representative's  submissions,  that
             despite the NRM's rejection of the Appellant's account of  her
             trafficking from Albania, she is a victim of trafficking and a
             credible witness.  I  note  the  Appellant's  Representative's
             submission that the NRM's conclusive grounds are made based on
             the  higher  threshold  of  the  balance   of   probabilities.
             However, I  find  that,  even  on  the  lower  threshold,  the
             Appellant's   evidence   of   her   alleged   trafficking   is
             considerably below the standard.

         68.  Considering all the above, I find that the Appellant does  not
             have a genuine subjective fear on return to Albania."

 5. Furthermore, the judge did not accept the appellant's claim  to  be  at
    risk of suicide should her mental health deteriorate. She noted this at
    [69] to [71] before reaching her conclusion at [73] as follows:

         "69. The Appellant also claims that she is, "at risk of suicide  in
             Albania if her mental health deteriorates" (skeleton argument,
             para 22).  However, the evidence before the Tribunal does  not
             concur with  this  submission.   The  Appellant  provided  two
             letters from an individual called "A de  Ruano"  addressed  to
             the Appellant's GP (dated 21 October 2015 and 19 April  2016).
             Both letters  state  that  the  Appellant  "may  benefit  from
             counselling or other help with depression".  These letters  do
             not support the Appellant's submissions of being  at  risk  of
             suicide.

         70.   The  Appellant  takes  Amitriptyline  (10mg)  per  day.   She
             initially took it for her gynaecological problem, but has more
             recently taken it for insomnia.  It is a very  low  dosage  of
             first line anti-depressants.  She has not been referred on for
             mental health issues to a specialist.  There  is  no  evidence
             that she has seen a psychologist or psychiatrist.  I find that
             this letter adds very little weight to the Appellant's  claims
             of severity of risk to the extent that she is  suicidal.   The
             letter of 13 March 2018 from Dr White states that  she/he  has
             never met the Appellant.  The  Appellant  has  only  seen  the
             nurse practitioner.  Dr White comments that the Appellant  has
             not expressed any suicidal ideation.  She also comments on the
             quality of available treatment in Albania:

                  "I have no detailed knowledge of  the  medical  system  in
                  Albania but would feel it unlikely that she would get  the
                  same level of treatment and medical facilities that she is
                  receiving in the UK."

         71.  Dr White's assumptions, and this is what they are, as they are
             not  based  on  facts  or  evidence,  are  at  odds  with  the
             background evidence cited by the Respondent:

                  "The Appellant claims to have mental health issues and  an
                  issue with her heart beat and shortness  of  breath.   She
                  has previously spoken to a doctor about suicidal  thoughts
                  she had whilst in Italy and in the UK in 2015.   Howe3ver,
                  the Appellant is able to access protection and support  in
                  Albania.  In addition, on return  as  country  information
                  confirms,  healthcare  for  victims  of   trafficking   is
                  provided free of charge (Country Information and Guidance,
                  Albania: Female victims of trafficking, Version 5.0,  July
                  2016, Para.6.4):

                  "GRETA described medical care  available  for  victims  of
                  trafficking: At the end of 2014, Law No. 141/2014  Amended
                  Law  No.  103832001  on   Compulsory   Health   Insurance,
                  entitling victims of THB to free access  to  health  care.
                  Victims must be issued with a card entitling them to  free
                  access to medical care provided  outside  shelters.   This
                  will,  inter   alia,   enable   victims   suffering   from
                  psychiatric problems who cannot be cared."

         72.  I remind myself that in N V UK Application  26565/05  and  IAS
             1.7.08 the Grand Chamber upheld the decision of the  House  of
             Lords and found that in medical cases Article 3  only  applied
             in  very  exceptional  circumstances,  particularly   as   the
             suffering was not the result of an intentional act or omission
             of a State or non-State body.  The threshold was  not  reached
             in the present case which could not be relied  on  to  address
             the disparity in medical care between Contracting  States  and
             the applicant's state of origin.

         73.  The Appellant has not demonstrated  that  death  is  virtually
             certain or that there is a real risk of treatment  that  would
             amount  to  a  breach  of  Article  2.   Neither   are   there
             substantial grounds for believing that there is a real risk of
             torture, inhuman treatment, punishment or degrading  treatment
             under Article 3."

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by the First tier Tribunal in response
    to an application that relied on grounds in terms that  the  judge  had
    failed to particularise the evidence that had led  to  the  conclusions
    set out in [63] to [65] of the decision as quoted above.  In  addition,
    it was argued that the one  aspect  that  identified  an  inconsistency
    (whether she had been at a house for one or two months) did not justify
    the  conclusion  at  [63]  that  the   evidence   was   "riddled   with
    inconsistencies".  The  judge  had  erred  in  her  assessment  of  the
    plausibility of events and no examples had been given  of  the  way  in
    which the appellant had been evasive in giving  her  evidence.  It  had
    been an error to place "excessive "weight" on the NRM  decision.  These
    errors infected the findings on protection and internal relocation.

 7. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Diwnycz readily  accepted  that
    the judge erred in law as asserted in the grounds and agreed  that  the
    decision should be set aside. Accordingly, by consent, the decision  of
    First tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.

 8. Neither party required us to give reasons nevertheless, we  make  these
    brief observations.

 9. The judge's reason for dismissing the appeal  was  principally  on  the
    grounds that the appellant failed  to  establish  a  credible  account.
    That was also the position of the Secretary of State  in  refusing  the
    claim.  When reading the decision, it is not easy to ascertain  whether
    the judge adopted the Secretary  of  State's  reasons  as  her  own  or
    whether she carried out a review of  those  reasons  which  she  simply
    endorsed.  For  example  [48]  of  her  decision,  which  expresses   a
    conclusion on credibility, is in the same terms as [12] of the  refusal
    letter. There follows an analysis  of  the  sufficiency  of  protection
    which in part closely reflects the text of the  refusal  letter  before
    the judge sets out the passages cited above that return to  the  matter
    of credibility. The passages at [63]  to  [68]  do  not  reference  any
    specific examples in the evidence but instead are  remarks  of  general
    observation on the appellant's credibility and on any  reading,  it  is
    impossible to discern with any precision what aspects of  the  evidence
    led the judge to be concerned. Furthermore, it appears to us  that  the
    judge did not take a legally correct approach to the  decision  of  the
    competent authority by reference to ES (s82  NIA  2002;  negative  NRM)
    Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC).

10. This case requires the issue  of  the  appellant's  credibility  to  be
    determined de novo and it is appropriate that the case be  remitted  to
    the FtT for that purpose in accordance with the Practise Statements.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 2 November 2018

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
