
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02758/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 03 May 2017                       |On 10 May 2017                       |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                    [I P]
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Wass, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Housego (FtJ), promulgated on 08 August  2016,  dismissing
        the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  of  03
        November 2015 to refuse his protection and human rights claims.




   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Albania, date of birth [ ] 1993.  He
        claims to have left Albania on 17 April 2014. He travelled  by  air
        to Paris and remained in France until mid-2015 when he  arrived  in
        the United Kingdom concealed in a  lorry.  He  made  an  protection
        claim on 13 August 2015 which can be summarised as follows.


     3. The appellant was a member of the Democratic Party in Albania  and,
        as a result of his  membership  and  support  for  the  Party,  was
        targeted by the police and other  individuals,  eventually  forcing
        him to flee the country. The appellant's father, a long-time member
        of the Democratic Party, was sacked from his  employment  with  the
        Post Office as a result of his political affiliations following the
        defeat of the Democratic Party in general elections held on 23 June
        2013. The appellant was arrested in the early part of 2014  due  to
        his proximity to a  demonstration  outside  the  Greek  embassy  in
        Tirana. He was recognised as being a member of the Democratic Party
        and was assaulted by a police officer using a truncheon causing  an
        injury to  his  right  ear.  The  appellant  had  suffered  hearing
        problems in his left ear for some years prior to this incident.  He
        claims that the assault led to hearing problems in his  right  ear.
        The appellant was arrested at the protest and detained at a  police
        station. He only obtained his release after  Democratic  Party  MPs
        and/or Deputies came to the police station and secured his release.
        His release on the same day received media coverage and he  gave  a
        statement to the media outside the police  station.  Following  his
        release the appellant returned to his home area of  Kukes.  He  was
        then approached by well-dressed individuals who threatened him.  As
        a result of these threats the appellant left Albania. Subsequent to
        his leaving his family encountered problems as a  result  of  their
        political affiliation and his  brother  was  arrested  in  February
        2015. The appellant's family have now left Albania.


      The Reasons For Refusal Letter


     4. The respondent accepted the appellant's nationality and that he had
        been a member of the  Democratic  Party  since  20  June  2013  (in
        reliance on a membership  card  provided  by  the  appellant).  The
        respondent did not however accept that the appellant was an  active
        member of the party and rejected his account of being detained  and
        threatened. This was based, inter alia, on the appellant's lack  of
        knowledge of previous Democratic Party leaders, his  identification
        of the wrong individual as the current leader  of  the  Party,  his
        lack of awareness of the Party's policies and aims, inconsistencies
        in his account relating to the number of people  canvassing  during
        election campaigns, the implausible description of his  arrest  and
        mistakes by him in relation to the dates upon which he was arrested
        and threatened. The respondent did not accept the appellant was  of
        any interest to the authorities given that he was able to leave the
        country without any  difficulty,  and  there  was  said  to  be  no
        specific documents supporting his claim that his brother  had  been
        arrested. The respondent additionally  drew  an  adverse  inference
        under section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
        Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004  based  on  the  appellant's  delay  in
        claiming asylum and his failure to claim asylum in France.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. The appellant produced two bundles of documents for his  First-tier
        Tribunal appeal. He brought with him a DVD said to contain film  of
        his assault. No request was however made  to  view  this  film.  It
        appears  that  reference  was  first  made  to  the  film  by   the
        appellant's representative during her closing submissions.  In  his
        decision the FtJ set out, at length, the  relevant  provisions  and
        authorities governing the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  before
        detailing the questions asked and answers given by the appellant at
        the appeal hearing. After setting out the submissions made  by  the
        party's representatives the FtJ considered, at [74]  to  [84],  the
        credibility of appellant's account.


     6. At [74] the judge stated,


             "I note that although the video was said to be critical to the
             case of the appellant in proving an assault on him  by  police
             such as to damage his hearing, and a DVD  said  to  contain  a
             YouTube clip of it produced at the hearing, no still from that
             clip was produced to me, nor were any  arrangements  requested
             for me to see it. I do not consider it appropriate for  me  to
             try to find or to view such a YouTube clip after  the  hearing
             and in the absence of the Home Office Presenting Officer."


     7. The FtJ noted the absence of any evidence as to the nature  of  the
        appellant's hearing problems in his left ear or whether these  were
        specific to one ear or likely to be bilateral  (and  so  likely  to
        have a cause other than that claimed by  the  appellant).  The  FtJ
        found that  the  appellant  had  given  different  explanations  in
        respect of events following his release from police custody ([76]).
        The FtJ was not satisfied that  the  explanation  advanced  by  the
        appellant's  legal  representative  adequately  dealt  with   these
        inconsistencies. The  FtJ  noted  further  inconsistencies  in  the
        appellant's evidence relating to his  possession  of  a  Democratic
        Party ID card [78]. The FtJ found the appellant's evidence relating
        to the contact he had with his family after they left Albania,  and
        the reluctance by his family  to  disclose  their  whereabouts  and
        circumstances, to be completely implausible [79]. The FtJ  rejected
        the explanation proffered by the appellant as to why his father, on
        leaving Albania, did not take his party membership card  [80].  The
        judge did not find  that  a  document  purportedly  issued  by  the
        Democratic Party  in  February  2016  was  convincing  or  reliable
        because the Democratic Party always had  a  blue  logo  whilst  the
        document provided was a photocopy on which text had  been  inserted
        [81]. There was said to be an absence of evidence from anyone  else
        confirming the appellant's claim, not even a short  report  from  a
        doctor who, according to the appellant's evidence, had been  called
        out at 5 AM to treat his injuries  [82].  No  credible  reason  was
        advanced as  to  the  absence  of  evidence  from  the  appellant's
        parents, or from a friend of his who allegedly forwarded  documents
        from Albania, or from his aunt  [83].  There  was  said  to  be  no
        evidence of systematic persecution of Democratic Party  members  in
        Albania by the authorities, which made  it  less  likely  that  the
        appellant was persecuted as, on his own account,  he  was  of  only
        minor importance in the party [84]. Whilst the  FtJ  accepted  that
        the appellant's father was a member of the  Democratic  Party,  and
        that he had lost his job in a reorganisation following the  general
        election, the FtJ was unable  to  conclude  whether  this  was  for
        economic  or  political  reasons  [85].  The  FtJ  found  that  the
        appellant was involved with the Democratic Party as a result of his
        father's activities within the party. At [86] the FtJ stated,


             "If the appellant was hit by police in a demonstration it  was
             not a targeted attack,  but  simply  as  he  was  there  as  a
             demonstrator. Even to the lower standard, I do not  find  that
             he was so attacked. There are  so  many  credibility  problems
             with the account of the appellant and inconsistencies  in  his
             evidence that he has not  shown  this.  Without  some  medical
             evidence that his right ear hearing  problems  may  have  been
             caused by a blow I do not accept that it was so (and I bear in
             mind the lower standard applicable)."

     8. The FtJ found that the appellant's family continued  to  reside  in
        Albania and that the appellant was an economic migrant  who  sought
        to use his father's membership of the Democratic Party to  stay  in
        the  UK  [88].  The  FtJ  dismissed  the  appeal  on   asylum   and
        humanitarian protection grounds. The FtJ additionally dismissed the
        appeal on article 8 human rights grounds.  No  challenge  has  been
        made to the FtJ's article 8 assessment.

The grounds of appeal

     9. The grounds  firstly  contend  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  properly
        consider evidence going to the issue of credibility.  The  FtJ  did
        not consider the DVD evidence which, it  was  claimed,  showed  the
        attack by the police.  It  was  submitted  that  the  evidence  had
        already been provided to the Home Office  in  the  form  of  a  USB
        stick. The failure to view the DVD was said to amount to a material
        legal error. The 2nd ground contends that the FtJ  failed  to  make
        any findings at all in respect to the  appellant's  claim  to  have
        been arrested and detained by the Albanian police. The  3rd  ground
        contends that the FtJ made contradictory findings  in  relation  to
        the letter purportedly issued by the Democratic Party  in  February
        2016. On the one hand the FtJ did not  find  this  document  to  be
        reliable, but on the other hand he accepted that the appellant  was
        a member of the Democratic Party.


    10. Permission was granted on all grounds.

Submissions at the error of law hearing


    11. Whilst accepting that she had not asked for the DVD to be shown  at
        the First-tier Tribunal hearing  Ms  Wass  submitted  that  it  was
        nevertheless a material error of law for the FtJ to have failed  to
        have considered the DVD. The FtJ had  been  invited  to  do  so  in
        retirement. The DVD had been served on the respondent prior to  the
        hearing and the respondent therefore had an  opportunity  to  raise
        issues in relation to the contents  of  the  DVD.  No  issues  were
        raised. It was submitted that the absence of any  finding  relating
        to the appellant's arrest and detention was material as this was  a
        crucial incident demonstrating that he had been targeted.  The  FtJ
        was not entitled to doubt the reliability of the  Democratic  Party
        letter issued in February 2016, especially in light  of  the  FtJ's
        acceptance that the appellant was indeed a member of the Party. The
        FtJ relied on the concerns he had with the letter in rejecting  the
        appellant's credibility. The principal issue  before  the  Tribunal
        was whether the appellant was an active member  of  the  Democratic
        Party. If he was  an  active  member  then,  as  a  result  of  his
        activities, he had been targeted. His activeness within  the  Party
        was key to his claim.


    12. Mr Jarvis submitted that the issue whether  the  appellant  was  an
        active member of the party was a 'red herring'. The real  issue  to
        be determined  was  whether  the  appellant  had  been,  and  would
        continue to be, targeted by the  authorities  or  other  agents  of
        persecution. The fact that the respondent had not seen the DVD  did
        not amount to a concession that  the  assertions  relating  to  its
        content were accepted.  The  fact  remained  that  the  appellant's
        representative failed to apply to the First-tier Tribunal  for  the
        DVD to be shown. The failure to consider the DVD was  not,  in  any
        event, material given that the FtJ made a lawful finding in respect
        of the purpose for which the DVD had been  advanced.  Even  if  the
        appellant had been hit on  the  right  ear  there  was  no  medical
        evidence establishing that this assault caused any  damage  to  the
        hearing in his right ear. In any event, the FtJ found [86] that the
        appellant had not been directly targeted by the police in  relation
        to this incident. It was clear from a full reading of the  decision
        that the FtJ did not accept the  events  that  were  said  to  have
        occurred after the appellant's  release  from  detention.  Nor  was
        there any evidence from the appellant's family and no evidence from
        the Party concerning  the  alleged  detention.  In  the  First-tier
        Tribunal (at [44]) the appellant claimed  that  there  was  another
        Democratic Party letter referring to his detention but this had not
        been provided to the First-tier Tribunal. Even if the reasons given
        by the FtJ in placing no reliance on the  Democratic  Party  letter
        issued in February 2016 were poor,  the  appellant  had  failed  to
        produce evidence relating to the core of his claim. There were said
        to be an abundance of findings supporting the  FtJ's  rejection  of
        the appellant's claim to have come to the adverse attention of  the
        authorities.


    13. In response Ms Wass noted  that  some  medical  evidence  had  been
        provided  relating  to  the  appellant's  hearing  and   that   the
        conclusions reached by the FtJ were sufficiently uncertain such  as
        to render the decision unsafe. The question whether  the  appellant
        was an active member  of  the  Democratic  Party  was  not  a  'red
        herring' but a logical first  step  in  assessing  whether  he  was
        somebody at risk.


      Discussion

    14. The first ground contends that the judge should have viewed  a  DVD
        relating to the appellant's assault by a police officer despite  no
        request having been made to arrange a  viewing  during  the  actual
        hearing. Having considered the hearing notes maintained by the  FtJ
        it appears that no reference was made to the DVD prior to Ms  Wass'
        closing submissions. Ms Wass accepted as much at the error  of  law
        hearing. The judge was only invited to  consider  the  DVD  in  his
        retirement. As the FtJ properly explained  [74],  this  would  have
        provided no opportunity for  the  respondent,  represented  by  the
        Presenting  Officer,  to  ask  questions  or  make  submissions  in
        relation to the DVD, and it  would  also  have  prevented  the  FtJ
        himself from asking questions or making relevant enquiries based on
        what he viewed. The burden of proof rests on the appellant,  albeit
        to the lower standard of proof, and it is for the appellant or  his
        representatives  to  adduce  all   relevant   evidence   for   fair
        consideration by both parties at the hearing.  The  FtJ  was  fully
        entitled to conclude that it was not appropriate for  him  to  view
        the clip after the hearing  and  in  the  absence  of  one  of  the
        parties, and without the opportunity to raise any issues that might
        flow from viewing the film.


    15. I observe in passing that although arrangements were made  to  view
        the relevant clip at the Upper Tribunal error  of  law  hearing  Ms
        Wass did not at any stage invite me to consider the  film.  If  the
        appellant's legal representatives believed the film of the  alleged
        assault to be relevant to the fair determination of the appeal they
        should have arrange with the First-tier Tribunal to view  the  film
        before the FtJ and both parties. This was not done.


    16. Miss Wass submitted that the respondent had  possession  of  a  USB
        stick containing the film and could have watched the film prior  to
        the hearing. During the appellant's asylum interview he did seek to
        serve a USB  stick  on  the  respondent  but  was  informed,  quite
        rationally, that the respondent would be unable to view the film in
        the medium offered given the strictures of the Home Office computer
        system. In any event, the fact that the respondent did not view the
        film prior to the hearing cannot, on any rational view, be regarded
        as a concession that the content of the film were as claimed by the
        appellant. Nor does the respondent's failure to view the film prior
        to the hearing render the judge's refusal to view  the  film  after
        the close of the hearing even arguably unlawful. In any  event  the
        FtJ found, in the alternative, that if the  appellant  was  hit  by
        police at a demonstration it was not a targeted attack  but  simply
        because he was there was  a  demonstrator  (see  the  beginning  of
        [86]). Thus the failure to view the film would not have amounted to
        a material error.

    17. In relation to the 2nd ground,  I  accept  that  the  FtJ  did  not
        explicitly refer to any  finding  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
        alleged arrest and detention. It would have been advisable for  the
        FtJ to have  made  express  reference  to  all  material  findings.
        However,  having  considered  the  decision  as  a  whole,  and  in
        particular the FtJ's findings from [74] to [84], it is irresistibly
        implicit in the decision that  the  FtJ  rejected  the  appellant's
        claim to have been detained. The FtJ comprehensively  rejected  the
        events that were alleged to have occurred following the appellant's
        release from custody. No challenge has been made to  these  adverse
        credibility findings. They were findings  the  FtJ  was  rationally
        entitled to reach. The FtJ noted  the  absence  of  any  supporting
        evidence relating to the alleged assault and  found  there  was  no
        credible reason for the absence of evidence  from  the  appellant's
        parents and, in particular, the  Democratic  Party  of  Albania  in
        respect of his alleged detention. This is particularly relevant  as
        the appellant claimed his release was facilitated by pressure  from
        Democratic  Party  MPs  or  Deputies,  and  that  there  was  media
        attention  outside  the  police  station  following  his   release.
        Although there is no requirement for corroborated evidence in  this
        jurisdiction the FtJ was fully entitled to have  drawn  an  adverse
        inference  from  the  failure  to  provide  evidence   that   could
        reasonably be expected to have been provided. There was however  no
        evidence from anyone  in  the  Democratic  Party  relating  to  the
        appellant's detention, despite the intervention by  the  Democratic
        Party in obtaining the appellant's release. The FtJ was  rationally
        entitled to draw an adverse inference  in  these  circumstances  (I
        note, in any event, that no challenge has been made to this  aspect
        of the decision). Having regard to the decision read as a  whole  I
        am satisfied that, despite no express reference to the  appellant's
        detention,  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  adverse  credibility
        findings lead irresistibly to the conclusion that the appellant was
        not detained. I therefore find that any failure  by  the  judge  to
        expressly refer to his findings in respect of  the  detention  does
        not amount to a material legal error.


    18. The FtJ's conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  a  member  of  the
        Democratic Party is not inconsistent  with  his  rejection  of  the
        reliability of the letter  purportedly  issued  by  the  Democratic
        Party in February 2016. The FtJ was entitled to express his concern
        that the letter was a photo copy onto which text had been inserted.
        The original was produced before me at the error of law hearing and
        conforms to the FtJ's description of the letter. The  logo  on  the
        letter was not in blue, although I accept that my attention was not
        drawn to any evidence  indicating  that  such  logos  would  always
        appear in blue. To this extent the FtJ may be criticised for making
        an assertion that had little evidential basis.


    19. The fact remains  however  that  even  if  the  FtJ  was  wrong  in
        rejecting the reliability of the letter,  and  therefore  wrong  in
        finding this undermined the appellant's credibility, he gave  other
        significant reasons  for  concluding  that  the  appellant  was  an
        incredible witness. Taken at its highest the letter indicated  that
        the appellant was an active member of the Democratic Party. Ms Wass
        submitted that this was highly relevant and that everything  flowed
        from an acceptance that the appellant was actively involved in  the
        party. The issue that the FtJ ultimately had to  determine  however
        was whether  the  appellant  had  been  targeted  by  the  Albanian
        authorities, and whether there was a real risk  that  he  would  be
        targeted  if  returned  to  Albania.   The   FtJ   gave   otherwise
        comprehensive and unchallenged  reasons  for  rejecting  this  core
        feature of the appellant's claim. I am not persuaded that the FtJ's
        rejection  of  this  particular  letter  undermined  his  otherwise
        detailed assessment and his rejection of the appellant's  claim  to
        have been targeted by the authorities. I am not therefore satisfied
        that any error was material.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an error of law

I make no anonymity direction.

[pic]                               09 May 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal FtJ Blum


