
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number: PA/
02618/ 2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 June 2017                           |On 13 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    S K B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Warren, Counsel instructed by Alex Bell
Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court. I  make  this  order  because  there  is  always  a  risk  in
       protection cases that publicity will itself create  a  risk  to  the
       applicant's safety in the event of his  return  to  his  country  of
       nationality.

    2. This is an appeal against a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
       respondent that he  is  not  a  refugee  or  otherwise  entitled  to
       international protection.

    3. In very simple terms the appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  who
       follows the Hindu religion and who has tried to establish  a  career
       in the British Army but who did  not  complete  his  basic  training
       because he was injured.  Without in any way suggesting that it is an
       appeal that ought to have succeeded, it  is  clear  from  background
       evidence that minority groups  such  as  Hindus  in  Bangladesh  are
       having difficulties.  This  is  something  which  is  known  to  the
       Secretary of State and something with which the Tribunal  must  deal
       when the occasion arises.

    4. The judge disbelieved the appellant in many aspects of his case.   I
       wish to make it plain that there are reasons in the  decision  which
       could, possibly, lead to a proper conclusion that the appellant  has
       not told the truth.  However,  I  am  satisfied  that  some  of  the
       reasons that have been relied on to support that  conclusion  should
       not have been relied upon and that the  credibility  findings  as  a
       whole are irredeemably tainted by points that should not  have  been
       made.

    5. As Mr Kotas, I think, accepted, the jewel in that  particular  crown
       is the finding by the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant was  to
       be disbelieved because he had not supported his claim  with  medical
       evidence but the fact is that he did support the claim with  medical
       evidence and that the judge ignored.  The evidence appears is that a
       medical report was made available when the application was made  and
       the judge misunderstood the  evidence.   I  regard  that  as  a  bad
       mistake and one which has, at least to some degree, impacted on  all
       the other findings so that they are unsound.

    6. Another point that concerns me considerably is the analysis  of  the
       medical evidence about the injuries  sustained  by  the  appellant's
       father.  At paragraph 38 of the Decision and Reasons the judge  says
       "The comment states 'all injuries are simple  in  nature  caused  by
       blunt weapon number 3 injury attempted  of  throttling'."  I  assume
       that the judge is accurately quoting the report  author's  eccentric
       grammar. Very soon afterwards  the  judge  says  "I  find  that  the
       injuries could have been caused by an accident".  I am completely at
       a loss to see how injuries caused by attempted throttling  could  be
       caused by accident, certainly without some explanation to make  that
       highly improbable chain of events in the  least  bit  credible.   It
       concerns me the judge reached the conclusion that she did  for  that
       reason in the context of an  asylum  appeal.   There  may  be  other
       reasons for disregarding the medical evidence, I make no comment  on
       that.  The judge has not disregarded it; she  has  accepted  it  and
       then decided for herself that the signs  of  throttling  could  have
       been caused by accident.  I do not see how that can be justified.

    7. There is a similar but less serious problem in  the  next  paragraph
       where the judge opined, for  no  discernible  reason,  that  if  the
       appellant's father had been injured as alleged, he would  have  been
       more seriously injured.  That to me looks like speculation  at  best
       and really should not have featured in the decision.

    8.  The  judge  was  quite  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  given
       inconsistent evidence about the number of occasions the  family  had
       reported problems to the police. The judge found  the  evidence  was
       inconsistent but I am not at all sure that that is justified.

    9. At question 67 the appellant was asked what did  his  family  do  in
       response to the threats and he replied that his mother went  to  the
       police station on the third occasion.  He was then asked at 68  "Had
       your family been to the police before?" and he replied with  another
       question, "Before as well?"  The officer did not explain but  simply
       repeated the question and the appellant is recorded as  saying  "Two
       times".  Whether that meant two occasions before the one he had just
       been talking about or two in all was not established. It should have
       been. It is not difficult to ask a further supplementary question so
       that the meaning of the answers is clear.

   10. It is also a matter of surprise  that  the  judge  appears  to  have
       ignored evidence from the appellant's solicitors that they  went  to
       the trouble of gathering in response to criticisms  in  the  refusal
       letter about the source of documentary evidence in  the  form  of  a
       newspaper report.  The appellant's solicitors say that it came  from
       the Bangladesh  Hindu,  Buddha,  Christian  Unity  Council  and  had
       produced evidence to that effect.  It  does  not  follow  from  that
       claim that the evidence is reliable but the judge does not  seem  to
       have addressed the explanation at all and I find that  a  concerning
       error.

   11. It is also a matter  of  comment  that  the  judge  found  that  the
       appellant had tried to join the British Army  for  entirely  cynical
       reasons. As was pointed out in argument, foreign nationals  in  some
       circumstances are excused immigration control if they serve  in  the
       British Army. It is an incentive to serve and is not a reason to  be
       held against people who chose to take advantage of  the  opportunity
       that the state offers.  Quite why the judge went in  this  direction
       is not clear and it necessarily sets up the suspicion that the judge
       was looking for reasons to disbelieve the evidence  rather  than  to
       make proper findings on the totality of the evidence that was before
       her.

   12. I am also concerned that the  judge  commented  five  times  on  the
       absence  of  corroboration.   It  is  trite  immigration  law   that
       corroboration is not  necessary  in  asylum  appeals.   It  is  also
       equally trite that the absence of supportive evidence  of  the  kind
       that might reasonably be expected is a perfectly proper  matter  for
       judicial comment and can assist decision making.  If the  judge  had
       said that certain evidence was unsupported and it was reasonable  to
       think it would be supported if it were reliable then  she  may  have
       made a good point, but the repeated use of the word  "corroboration"
       again leaves one wondering quite where the judge's focus lay.

   13.  Cumulatively,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying   this   is   an
       unsatisfactory determination.  It is wobbly in many places and plain
       wrong in others and I set it aside. The  appellant  has  not  had  a
       proper hearing. I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
       and I direct  that  the  case  is  heard  again  in  the  First-tier
       tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
and I direct that the appeal be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 July 2017                   |







