

                                        [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/02383/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 March 2018                              |On 14 March 2018               |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                      EH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing an appeal by the appellant against the respondent's decision
    of 20 February 2017 refusing her application for asylum.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Albania  born  on  26  July  1986.   She
    arrived in the UK on 22 December 2013 accompanied by her daughter.  She
    had been granted entry clearance to join her husband, her sponsor, with
    leave to enter valid to 3  January  2015.   The  sponsor  was  born  in
    Albania on 24 June 1973 and was granted indefinite leave to  remain  in
    the UK on 4 February 2008, subsequently  becoming  a  British  citizen.
    Their relationship began in 2006 and in  December  2009  the  appellant
    became pregnant and their daughter was born on 24 September 2010.  They
    married on 18 May 2012.  After the appellant came to the UK she  claims
    that her marriage broke down in June  2015.   On  23  August  2016  she
    applied for asylum.

3.    In brief outline, the appellant's claim can be summarised as  follows.
     Her father died in 1993 but before his death,  he  promised  that  the
    appellant would marry his best friend's son.  However, in 2006 she  met
    the sponsor when she was visiting a female cousin.  She entered into  a
    relationship with him a few days later and he spoke about marriage.  He
    returned to the UK but kept in contact with her, regularly returning to
    Albania to see her every two months.  She remained living in the family
    home.  Her family started putting pressure on her  to  enter  into  the
    arranged marriage in accordance with her late father's wishes, but  she
    was able to put it off by  saying  that  she  wanted  to  continue  her
    studies.  She became pregnant in 2009 and was able to  hide  this  from
    her mother and sisters and the rest of her family.  In March  2010  her
    mother and brother told her that the family of her father's friend  was
    coming to arrange the marriage. The appellant left  home  in  May  2010
    while her family were attending a wedding and  travelled  to  meet  the
    sponsor's brother who took her to their family home on the  other  side
    of Albania.

4.    Her own family reported her to the authorities as  a  missing  person.
    She continued to live with the sponsor's family  in  secret  until  she
    left for the UK to join him in December 2013.  Their relationship broke
    down in 2015 when they separated.  Her daughter is living with her  and
    she said that the sponsor has regular contact.  The  appellant  claimed
    that she would be at risk from her own family because she had run  away
    from them and the arranged  marriage.   She  was  also  afraid  of  the
    sponsor's family as they had threatened to take her daughter away  from
    her as they believed that she belonged to them.

5.    The respondent accepted the appellant's nationality and  identity  but
    not that she had run away from her family or the arranged  marriage  to
    be with the sponsor or that if she returned to Albania,  the  sponsor's
    family would take  her  daughter  away  from  her.   It  was  also  the
    respondent's view that, in any event, the appellant would  be  able  to
    look to the authorities in Albania for protection or could relocate and
    live in safety away from her home area.

The Hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal

6.    At [37]  of  his  decision  the  judge  said  that,  having  carefully
    considered the appellant's account, he had serious concerns  about  her
    credibility and he summarised his conclusions at [48]  by  saying  that
    her credibility was totally suspect and that she had simply  fabricated
    her asylum claim.  She was never at risk from her family and would  not
    be at risk on return.  Equally, she was not at risk from the  sponsor's
    family.  He totally rejected her account that the sponsor's family  had
    threatened that they would take her daughter away from her.


7.    The judge said that the appellant had failed to provide  any  credible
    explanation of how she was able to keep her relationship and  pregnancy
    secret.  He did not find it credible or plausible that she  would  have
    remained in hiding during the period up to her departure to the  UK  in
    December 2013 or that she would not have  been  traced  by  her  family
    whilst living in Albania for three and half  years  in  the  same  area
    where her family was living if she was adverse interest  to  them.   If
    the sponsor and his family in Albania were close to the  child  to  the
    extent that the family had  threatened  to  take  the  child  from  the
    appellant if she returned to Albania, he said he  would  have  expected
    the sponsor to come and give evidence, claiming that the  child  should
    not be removed.  He also commented that the appellant  was  aware  that
    she had no status in this country after 3 January 2015, but she did not
    claim asylum until 23 August 2016 after overstaying for 20 months.   He
    said that there was no credible explanation for this  inordinate  delay
    in claiming asylum.


The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

8.    In the grounds of appeal, it is argued that the appellant came from  a
    conservative family in the north of Albania, the most conservative part
    of the country and that, although this was noted in the  decision,  the
    judge had failed to consider her account in this context or to consider
    plausibility in her particular circumstances.   It  is  further  argued
    that the judge commented that the appellant had failed to  provide  any
    credible explanation for  how  she  was  able  to  avoid  the  arranged
    marriage for so long but it was not clear whether he had taken  account
    of her explanation that she wished to prolong her studies.  He had  not
    made it clear whether her explanation had been considered or  not.   It
    is then argued that his conclusions at [41] were based on an assumption
    that the authorities in Albania were actually looking for her but there
    was no evidence of this. The  judge  had  repeatedly  stated  that  the
    appellant had remained in the same area of Albania, but  this  was  not
    correct as she was in hiding in a place away from her home area.

9.    When granting permission to appeal in the Upper  Tribunal,  UTJ  Grubb
    said that it was arguable on the basis of the grounds  that  the  judge
    had failed to put the appellant's claim in the context of coming from a
    conservative area in the north of Albania and that he appeared to  have
    made a factual mistake in [42] in believing that she  had  remained  in
    her home area from 2010 when it appeared that  she  had  moved  to  her
    sponsor's  home,  some  considerable  distance  away.   He   had   less
    conviction  that  the  other  grounds  would  succeed  but  he  granted
    permission on all grounds.

10.   At the hearing before  me,  Ms  Reid  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    considered the case in a vacuum not setting it in its  proper  context.
    It was not necessarily improbable that the appellant would be  able  to
    keep a pregnancy hidden.  The judge had said at [40] that  it  was  not
    credible that she had been able to  resist  pressure  from  her  family
    relying simply on the basis that it was  improbable.   This  failed  to
    consider the cultural background of a very  conservative  family.   The
    judge had further erred, so she submitted, by proceeding on  the  false
    premise that the appellant had continued living in her home area  after
    leaving home when in fact she had  gone  to  stay  with  the  sponsor's
    family on the other side of the country: he had  failed  to  appreciate
    that it was her  evidence  that  she  went  to  live  in  a  completely
    different part of the country.  She submitted that the judge had failed
    to consider the issue of credibility  holistically  and  had  erred  by
    assessing plausibility without taking proper account of her  background
    and situation.

11.   Mr Nath submitted that the judge's  findings  were  properly  open  to
    him.  He had not found  the  appellant  to  be  credible  and  had  not
    accepted that she had gone to live with the sponsor's  family.   In  so
    far as the judge had erred by referring to the appellant living in  the
    same area, that error was not material as it  was  clear  that  he  had
    rejected the appellant's evidence in full.

Assessment of the Issues

12.   I must assess whether the judge erred in law such  that  his  decision
    should be set aside.  He found that the appellant  had  fabricated  her
    account and that she had never been at risk  from  either  her  or  the
    sponsor's  family.   When  granting  permission  to  appeal  UTJ  Grubb
    identified two issues which he regarded as arguable.  The first is that
    the judge failed to put the claim in the  context  that  the  appellant
    came from a conservative area in  the  north  of  Albania.   I  am  not
    satisfied that this ground by itself has any substance.  The judge  was
    clearly aware of the background and referred at [39] to the  fact  that
    she came from a traditional family where marriages were  by  and  large
    arranged by the family, she would be expected to accept  that  decision
    and would be under pressure to go through with the marriage.  There  is
    no reason to believe that the judge was not fully aware of the cultural
    background or failed to take it into account.

13.   The second ground identified by UTJ Grubb was that the judge  appeared
    to have made a factual mistake in [42], believing  that  the  appellant
    remained in her home area from  2010  without  any  problems  from  her
    family when it was her case that she moved to her husband's  home  some
    considerable distance away.  The judge referred to the appellant  still
    living in the same area after leaving home in both [41] and  [42].   In
    [41] the first reference to her living in the same area  after  leaving
    home in May 2010 is followed by reference to  the  fact  that  she  got
    married in the local register office, applied for a passport  and  then
    for entry clearance.  The judge said that all  this  happened,  so  the
    appellant claimed, when she was living with her in-laws and was  living
    in hiding.  He then says that she continued to live in the  local  area
    when she was in Albania, despite on her account her family appearing on
    TV  reporting  her  as  a  missing  person  and  that  presumably   the
    authorities had been looking for her,  adding  that  no  one  from  the
    authorities ever came to look for when they clearly knew where she  was
    living.

14.   Later in [41] the judge referred to the appellant leaving Albania  and
    arriving in the UK after  being  in  a  secret  relationship  with  the
    sponsor for seven years having left her family home three  and  a  half
    years previously.  He did not accept that neither the  authorities  nor
    her family would be able to find her when she continued to live in  the
    same area and had been reported as a missing person.  In [42] the judge
    said again that he did not find it plausible that the  appellant  would
    not have been traced by her family when  living  in  Albania  for  over
    three years in the same area where they  were  living  if  she  was  of
    adverse interest to them.

15.   The frequent references the  judge  made  in  [41]  and  [42]  to  the
    appellant remaining in the same area as her family  indicates  that  he
    was proceeding on a misapprehension about  her  evidence,  rather  than
    giving reasons why he did not accept it. It was clearly her  case  that
    she had moved to the sponsor's family home in May  2010  on  the  other
    side of the country from where her own family lived.  She claimed  that
    after moving there, she never left their home because  she  was  scared
    and that when her daughter was born in September 2010, this  was  in  a
    private hospital as she was too scared  to  give  birth  in  a  general
    hospital because there would be  an  electronic  register  and  details
    might be picked up and matched and the authorities alerted.  She  added
    that after the birth of her daughter, she  stayed  indoors  like  in  a
    prison and never went out.  However, the judge analysed her evidence on
    the basis that she was saying that, although living with her  sponsor's
    family, she had continued to live in the same area as before.

16.   I am, therefore, satisfied that the judge erred in law by  failing  to
    take into account the appellant's evidence about where she said she had
    been living after leaving home. Whilst there are a  number  of  factors
    capable of detracting from her credibility on this and on other issues,
    the judge's misunderstanding  of  her  evidence  had  the  effect  that
    relevant evidence was left out of  account  capable  of  affecting  his
    decision on credibility. I cannot say  with  any  confidence  that  the
    result would inevitably have  been  the  same  if  the  judge  had  not
    proceeded under this misapprehension.  The error is  material  and  the
    proper course is for the decision to be set aside.

17.   Both representatives agreed that if the  finding  on  credibility  was
    set aside, the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    reconsideration by way of a full rehearing.

Decision

18.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and is set aside.  The appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration  by  way  of  a
    full rehearing by a different judge.

19.   The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains  in  force
    until further order.



Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
         Dated:  12 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
