
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02978/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                               |On 23 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                 ramzan [S]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Kotak, Counsel instructed by Rahman & Company
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Pakistan born on  [  ]  1944
    who appeals the decision of the  respondent  dated  14  March  2017  to
    refuse his application for asylum.  In a  decision  promulgated  on  27
    November 2017, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chapman  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  on  the
    following grounds:

      a) the appellant had  been  diagnosed  with  Alzheimer's  disease  and
         arguably the judge  should  have  applied  the  Joint  Presidential
         Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010, paragraph 15 and should have  recorded
         whether the appellant was vulnerable;

      b)  there  was  procedural  irregularity  in  failing  to   grant   an
         adjournment for the purpose of obtaining medical evidence as to the
         appellant's fitness to give evidence;

      c) there was procedural irregularity in the concerns  expressed  about
         an expert's report which were not ventilated at the hearing;

      d) the Tribunal's approach to Article 8 amounted to an error of law in
         light of the above arguments.

    Error of Law Discussion

 3. For the reasons set out below I am not satisfied that any error of  law
    is disclosed.

    Grounds 1 and 2

 4. Ms Kotak submitted that the Tribunal ought to have  reached  a  finding
    whether or not the appellant was  vulnerable.   Although  she  accepted
    that the absence of a specific finding did not mean that  the  guidance
    was not applied, she submitted there was nothing to  suggest  that  the
    judge had considered the issue.   She  submitted  that  the  Tribunal's
    findings at [70] were inconsistent.  On the one hand the Tribunal found
    that the conclusion was reached on the basis of the evidence before the
    judge and that no adverse inferences were  made  from  the  appellant's
    failure to give  evidence.   On  the  other  hand,  the  Tribunal  made
    alternative findings that if it had been necessary for the Tribunal  to
    do so the Tribunal would have concluded that the appellant's failure to
    give evidence was not necessitated  by  his  mental  health  condition,
    bearing in mind the medical evidence before the Tribunal.  That did not
    suggest that the appellant had such a significant mental health problem
    to prevent him giving evidence.

 5. I take into account that the Tribunal went  on  to  confirm  that  this
    finding would only have been reached had it been necessary  to  do  so,
    which the Tribunal did not so find.   The  Tribunal  had  before  it  a
    patient care plan for the appellant from the Memory Clinic of  the  NHS
    Foundation dated 6 September 2017.  This document  confirmed  that  the
    appellant presented with a five year history of cognitive problems  and
    that he spoke lucidly and with insight about his cognitive  functioning
    and that there were anecdotal examples of short-term  memory  loss  and
    some repetition of conversation, but that there were no obvious changes
    in his personality, behaviour or social awareness and  that  his  long-
    term memory seemed well-preserved.  The report went on  to  state  that
    the appellant had a mild cognitive impairment with a score of 22 out of
    30 in one of the relevant tests which indicated that he was  likely  to
    be suffering from a degenerative condition and  that  his  presentation
    was consistent with Alzheimer's pathology.  The report  concluded  that
    whilst there were tangible problems with cognitive impairment and  some
    consequential difficulties with daily routines there was no evidence of
    significantly increased  risk  and  that  the  appellant's  memory  and
    executive functioning were not reduced to  the  point  of  compromising
    safety.  The report considered that he was suffering  from  Alzheimer's
    disease and that they were  commencing  a  trial  of  memory  enhancing
    medication.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal specifically directed itself in relation to the
    appellant's mental health issues as follows:

         "31. Before the hearing, because of the mental health issues of the
             Appellant raised in the patient's care plan  prepared  by  his
             clinical nurse specialist, I reminded myself of the principles
             set out in the recent case of AM (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2017]
             EWCA Civ 1123, concerning child and vulnerable appellants, the
             Practice  Direction  'First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal  Child,
             Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive  Witnesses',  issued  on  30
             October 2008, and the joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of
             2010."

 7. The Tribunal therefore had in mind the  relevant  guidance  and  it  is
    evident from the totality of the decision that the Tribunal treated the
    appellant as a vulnerable witness, which the Tribunal would  have  been
    aware extends beyond the consideration of oral evidence.  This included
    that the Tribunal, when the appellant's representative  indicated  that
    the appellant would not be giving evidence because of loss  of  memory,
    highlighted that this in his view was  not  supported  by  the  medical
    report given that  long-term  memory  was  preserved.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal also allowed time for instructions on this  issue.   The  fact
    that the Tribunal ultimately refused  the  adjournment  request  for  a
    medico-legal report on the  appellant's  medical  condition  which  the
    appellant's representative thought was relevant to the issue of whether
    or not he should give evidence and to rebut  any  suggestion  that  his
    failure to do so would adversely impact on  his  credibility,  did  not
    mean that the judge failed to apply the correct guidance.

 8. Ms Kotak accepted that the appellant did not give evidence and was  not
    intending to give evidence.  It was not suggested that a further report
    would not have changed that decision.  Given that the Tribunal  reached
    the decisions it did on the basis of the documentary evidence before it
    as set out in considerable detail from [54] to  [70]  and  specifically
    concluded that these conclusions were reached and no adverse inferences
    were made from the appellant's failure to give evidence, any  error  in
    failing to adjourn for a further report as to why  there  was  no  oral
    evidence could not be material, notwithstanding the Tribunal's findings
    in the alternative at [70] setting out the Tribunal's views as  to  why
    the appellant had not given evidence.

 9. I take into consideration that the  judge  had  before  him  a  medical
    report in relation to  the  appellant's  condition  and  there  was  no
    suggestion, prior to the hearing,  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    giving evidence.  The appellant and his representatives would have been
    aware that the report indicated that his long-term memory seemed  well-
    preserved and therefore the judge raising this at the hearing ought not
    to have, been a surprise.  In considering the issue of  an  adjournment
    it is well-established, including in the case of Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  taking  into  consideration   SH
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1284, that the question is not whether an adjournment is reasonable
    but whether it is fair and whether there  is  any  deprivation  of  the
    affected parties right  to  a  fair  hearing.   The  Tribunal  properly
    directed itself to these issues including at [36] and took into account
    that the hearing had already been adjourned for expert reports and  any
    further investigations into the appellant's  condition  ought  to  have
    been conducted before the hearing in question.  I am not satisfied that
    any unfairness was disclosed in the Tribunal's approach in  failing  to
    adjourn the hearing.

10. It was Ms Kotak's submission, and she took the Upper  Tribunal  through
    the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No2 of  2010  (the  Guidance)  on
    vulnerable witnesses,  that  the  judge  did  not  follow  the  correct
    approach including at paragraph 14 of the Guidance  that  consideration
    should  be  given  for  varying  degrees  of  understanding  and   when
    considering the evidence  must  consider  'the  extent  to  which  age,
    vulnerability or sensitivity of the  witness  is  an  element  of  that
    discrepancy or lack of clarity' and that  the  decision  should  record
    whether the Tribunal had concluded that the appellant is  a  vulnerable
    witness and therefore aware of  that  vulnerability  in  assessing  the
    evidence.  In addition, at paragraph 15 the Guidance indicates that  in
    asylum appeals weight should be given to objective indications of  risk
    rather than necessarily to a state of mind (relying on paragraph 351 of
    the Immigration Rules).

11. I am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  followed  the  correct  approach,
    including in assessing in considerable detail  the  objective  evidence
    before it in reaching the conclusions it did, both in relation  to  the
    appellant's credibility and  with regard to sufficiency  of  protection
    and the availability of internal relocation.

12. Ms Kotak further submitted that the Tribunal erred in relation  to  the
    appellant's son's evidence which the Tribunal considered  and  recorded
    the evidence in summary at [37] and [38].  The Tribunal noted  at  [71]
    that the appellant's son "accepted, however, that the events  described
    by the appellant were not within his personal knowledge, and  therefore
    I can attach  little  weight  to  his  evidence  about  the  events  in
    Pakistan".

13. Although Ms Kotak took me to the appellant's  son's  witness  statement
    where there was reference on a number of occasions to  the  appellant's
    son being told about events in Pakistan, it is  difficult  to  see  how
    there can be any error in the judge's conclusion,  including  that  the
    appellant's son had accepted that  none  of  the  events  were  in  his
    personal knowledge.  Although normal evidence rules  do  not  apply  in
    this Tribunal weight is a matter for the judge and  there  was  nothing
    irrational in the judge's approach in attaching little  weight  to  the
    evidence of the appellant's son who was recounting what had  been  told
    to him and did not witness the claimed events in Pakistan (and I accept
    that his evidence includes recording that his father received  a  phone
    call in the UK in relation to claimed events).




    Ground 3

14. Ms Kotak referred to a supplementary report provided with  the  grounds
    of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  from  the  country  expert  which  she
    indicated addressed a number of  the  issues  which  the  Tribunal  had
    raised with the expert's evidence.  It was argued that  the  judge  had
    attached little weight to the expert's report but  did  not  raise  the
    points set out at sub-paragraphs (1) to (6) of [58] at the hearing  and
    it was submitted  that  procedural  fairness  required  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to raise these points and give the expert  an  opportunity  to
    respond.  That cannot be  the  case.   The  appellant's  representative
    provided the report from Mrs Moeen and the Tribunal set out a number of
    concerns with that report in some detail at sub-paragraphs (1)  to  (6)
    of [56] and further concluded that the expert's conclusions were little
    more than a conclusion that  the  appellant's  account  was  plausible,
    which the Tribunal accepted was the case.  If,  as  identified  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the report raised questions including  as  to  the
    role and experience of the expert, the Tribunal  cannot  be  criticised
    for drawing an inference in relation to those issues.  The report ought
    to have stood on its own and there is no issue  of  unfairness  in  the
    Tribunal not giving an expert  an  additional  opportunity  to  further
    address the adequately reasoned conclusions that the Tribunal  made  on
    that report.

15. In any event, even if the First-tier Tribunal erred in its approach  to
    either  the  evidence  from  the  appellant's  son  and/or  the  expert
    evidence, which I am not satisfied has been established to be the case,
    the Tribunal finds that although the appellant's account was  plausible
    it was not credible, and in the alternative, even if the appellant were
    at risk the Tribunal was satisfied from the objective evidence and from
    the case of AW (sufficiency of  protection)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  31
    (IAC) (26 January 2011) that there was a sufficiency of  protection  in
    Pakistan and that in  general  access  to  effective  state  protection
    remains possible which in this case must be considered on its facts.

16. The First-tier Tribunal summarised the objective evidence at [58]  sub-
    paragraphs (1) to (6) and no challenge  was  made  to  those  findings.
    Neither was there any challenge to the judge's conclusions  that  there
    was a sufficiency of protection and the option of  internal  relocation
    at [69].  Although Ms Kotak submitted that this was not the case  given
    the challenge to the judge's findings  on  Mrs  Moeen's  expert  report
    which she stated challenged the background information, that  challenge
    is misconceived; the Tribunal reached alternative  findings,  at  [57],
    which were not challenged, that Mrs Moeen's report, even  if  accepted,
    was little more than a conclusion  that  the  appellant's  account  was
    plausible (which the Tribunal accepted).  The Tribunal went on to  find
    at [57] that where the expert's conclusions appeared to contradict  the
    respondent's country and information guidance the judge  preferred  the
    latter.  Ms Kotak did not point to any information that  might  suggest
    that the Tribunal ought to have disregarded the country guidance in  AW
    and for the reasons the Tribunal gave the Tribunal was  satisfied  that
    firstly the appellant was not credible, but even if he  were,  that  he
    could safely relocate and/or would have  a  sufficiency  of  protection
    available to him in Pakistan.

17. Ms Kotak did not pursue any grounds under Article 8 before me and I  am
    not satisfied that  these  are  made  out.   The  Tribunal's  carefully
    reasoned conclusions at [73 to [80],  under  Article  8  were  findings
    properly open to the Tribunal.

18. In addition Ms Kotak sought to argue two further grounds which were not
    in the application for  permission.   These  related  to  [64]  of  the
    Decision and Reasons, where it was alleged the  judge  missed  evidence
    and did not take into account that the appellant had said that  he  was
    going to appeal the court case decision in Pakistan, whereas the  judge
    found it not credible that those  he  had  accused  threatened  him  or
    attempted to kill him at a time when they had been successful in having
    the case against them discharged.  Ms Kotak's argument, that he  stated
    he was going to appeal, does not take that case  any  further  and  the
    findings were open to the Tribunal if  such  grounds  were  before  me,
    which I am not satisfied it was.

19. A further additional ground in relation to the  Tribunal's  conclusions
    at [66] that the appellant had not satisfactorily explained why, having
    already threatened to kill him and  having  attempted  to  do  so,  his
    opponents would be willing to finally compromise a dispute between them
    by offering to pay the money said to be owed by them.  Ms Kotak  stated
    that it was a misunderstanding because they had offered to pay half the
    money.  However, it is unclear how that changes the judge's conclusions
    that they offered to pay any money at all was not credible,  given  the
    claim that these individuals had threatened to kill the  appellant  and
    attempted to do so,  including  enlisting  the  help  of  an  extremist
    organisation but then went on to offer to pay money to  the  appellant.
    The fact that it was only half again  does  not  take  the  appellant's
    argument any further.  In any event I am not  satisfied  those  grounds
    were properly before me.

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is required in this case.

Signed                                  Date:  22 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable and the appeal is dismissed.   No  fee  award  is
made.

Signed                                  Date:  22 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
