
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02924/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th January 2019                          |On 6 February 2019            |
|Typed, corrected, signed and sent to          |                              |
|promulgation on 31st January 2019             |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    [M R]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dixon of Counsel instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iran who appeals  against  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State made on 18th  February  2018  to  refuse  his
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection and to give directions for
    his removal from the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant was born on [~] 1984.  He was born  in  Iran  and  is  of
    Kurdish ethnicity.  He was raised in the tradition and faith  of  Islam
    and he was married.  He worked as a  kolber  working  and  transferring
    goods on the border.  He claims that  whilst  living  in  Iran  he  was
    involved with the Komala Party and began to help  them  three  to  four
    years ago. He claims that he would be at risk on return as a result. In
    the alternative, he was not particularly involved with the  party,  but
    sought to help all Kurds and would likewise  be  at  risk  of  harm  on
    return.

3.   From about the age of 25, the appellant claims that he  began  to  feel
    increasingly disillusioned with Islam.  A friend of his, [N], talked to
    him about Christianity.  Whilst still in Iran the appellant decided  to
    embrace Christianity.  This was about a year and nine months before the
    appellant was interviewed in connection with his asylum  claim  in  the
    United Kingdom.  That interview was conducted at  the  end  of  January
    2018 and so it would have been about the end of  April  2016  that  the
    appellant decided to embrace Islam.

4.   The appellant left  Iran  for  two  reasons.   First  his  former  wife
    threatened to report his political activities to the  authorities,  and
    secondly he felt he had to leave because of his  Christian  faith.   He
    entered the United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on  22nd  August  2017  and
    claimed asylum on the same day.

5.   The appellant appealed the decision of the Secretary of State  of  18th
    February 2018 to the First-tier Tribunal and his appeal  was  heard  at
    Sheldon Court, Birmingham on 3rd  April  2018  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Hagan.  The judge concluded that he could not be  satisfied  on
    the evidence adduced before him that the appellant has established that
    he is a Christian convert.  He was not satisfied that the appellant had
    discharged the burden of proving that he faces a  substantial  risk  of
    serious harm in his home country.  The judge dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum, human rights and humanitarian protection grounds  and
    under the Immigration Rules.

6.   Dissatisfied with that decision the appellant decided  to  appeal.   In
    granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson said
    this:-

         "2.  The grounds argue that the judge  erred  as  follows:  in  his
             assessment of the evidence of a  pastor  in  relation  to  the
             appellant's claimed Christian conversion: in  concluding  that
             little  by  way  of  checks   were   undertaken,   the   judge
             misunderstanding the extent of the  appellant's  contact  with
             the pastor and the fact that the appellant had been  attending
             baptismal classes; when  considering  that  baptismal  classes
             were insufficient in terms of checks, in  failing  to  provide
             the  pastor  with  the  opportunity  to  comment   upon   this
             (procedural unfairness); in concluding  that  the  conversions
             between the pastor and the appellant were necessarily limited,
             due to the need for an interpreter, and in failing to  explore
             this at the hearing; in making  certain  findings  based  upon
             assumption/speculation, which involved procedural  unfairness;
             in making assumptions as to  how  Christians  are  treated  in
             modern day Britain; in making no allowance for the appellant's
             nervousness and forgetfulness at interview.


         3.   Whilst the judge's decision is, as  always  with  this  judge,
             carefully  written,  it  is  arguable  that  he   has   failed
             adequately or satisfactorily to consider the evidence  of  the
             pastor who attended the hearing and that there are elements of
             arguable procedural unfairness, for the reasons set out in the
             grounds.   Permission  is  granted  on  all  grounds   pleaded
             although some  of  the  grounds  are  arguably  stronger  than
             others".

7.   I was ably assisted by submissions made on behalf of the  appellant  by
    Mr Dixon.  He went through his grounds of challenge  with  me  at  some
    length and in detail.

8.   The first challenge was the  failure  to  have  regard  to  a  relevant
    consideration when considering the evidence of Pastor Hooper.  Mr Dixon
    submitted that the  evidence  of  the  pastor  was  that  he  was  very
    accustomed to the danger of false  claimants,  who  saw  the  Christian
    faith as a means of staying in the United Kingdom.  This  was  all  the
    more so because the church has  around  80%  asylum  seekers  (with  by
    obvious implication, at least  a  proportion  of  those  being  claimed
    Iranian converts).  The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted  the  pastor
    as having credible evidence but, for the reasons given did  not  accept
    the pastor's assessment of the genuineness of the appellant's faith was
    well-founded.  In fact, however, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  failed
    to have  regard  to  a  material  consideration;  namely  the  pastor's
    sensitivity to the particular need to be  astute  to  false  claimants.
    This was bound to have influenced the pastor's approach and  assessment
    and means that his assessment is capable (for that ignored  reason)  of
    being reliable in an enhanced way.  Where the First-tier Tribunal finds
    that the "church carries out little by way of checks  before  baptising
    people" (paragraph 42) he has done so failing to  have  regard  to  the
    sensitivity factor.

9.   The difficulty with this submission is that it was the judge's  job  to
    decide,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  him,  whether   the
    appellant's claimed conversion was  genuine  or  not.   The  fact  that
    Pastor Hooper is satisfied is, of course very relevant, but  not,  with
    respect, decisive.  The First Tier Tribunal  Judge  carefully  examined
    the evidence of the Reverend  Hooper  who  said  that  he  had  been  a
    Christian for some 50 years and  had  been  involved  in  founding  his
    church some twenty years ago.  Prior to that he was part of  a  Baptist
    church in Selly Park and then in Balsall Heath.   The  Reverend  Hooper
    had said that his church follows  the  beliefs  and  doctrines  of  the
    traditional  church  but  is  far  less   rigid   than   normal.    The
    determination records that Mr Dixon, in asking  questions  evidence-in-
    chief asked how the appellant's baptism  on  12th  November  2018  came
    about and the Reverend Hooper said that the church's regular  baptismal
    classes  cover  the  main  beliefs  of  repentance  and   faith.    The
    opportunity is given for people to decide and  to  ask  questions.   He
    said that he had also met with the appellant to whom he spoke with  the
    assistance of an interpreter.   This  was  in  addition  to  the  Bible
    classes.  The other leaders involved with him were Graham who leads the
    Bible studies and Jenny who is a longstanding church member.  The judge
    carefully noted that the Reverend Hooper said that his church had up to
    100 regular attendees and in terms of the  appellant's  attendance,  he
    did not believe that the appellant had missed a  Sunday  service  or  a
    Thursday Bible study since September.

10.  When asked how he knew the appellant  to  be  a  Christian,  Mr  Hooper
    acknowledged that it is always difficult.  He said that he had to  deal
    with so many people that he felt he could  recognise  someone  genuine.
    He acknowledged that so many people are just after a visa.   He  looked
    at whether someone had been living a new life outside the old religion.
     Many people are attracted to the good news, and it is a life  changing
    experience.  He said that he  does  not  personally  attend  the  Bible
    classes.  He told the judge that  Graham  does  personally  attend  the
    Bible classes and that he also does  a  lot  of  teaching.   The  judge
    recorded that returning to the risk of  people  just  wanting  a  visa,
    particularly as the church is close to the hostel,  Counsel  asked  the
    Reverend Hooper whether the church had a system.

11.  The Reverend Hooper was recorded  by  the  judge  as  saying  that  the
    church welcomes anyone, including those who are not genuine.  Many come
    along wanting visas, but  become  Christians.   Asked  whether  he  had
    refused to baptise people, the Reverend Hooper said that  he  had,  but
    very rarely.  He acknowledged the  possibility  that  he  had  baptised
    people who were not genuine.  It was, he said, difficult to prove.   In
    the New Testament people believe and  are  baptised,  often  the  proof
    comes after when he sees the change in people's lives.  For the  people
    with whom he comes to court, often the change is seen  after.   Finally
    the judge recorded at  paragraph  26  of  the  determination  that  the
    Reverend Hooper was asked in  examination-in-chief  by  Counsel  if  he
    could comment on how the appellant interacts in the Bible  studies  led
    by Graham.  The Reverend Hooper said that he could not as  he  had  not
    asked; he added that Graham believes the appellant to be genuine.

12.  The judge noted cross-examination of the Reverend Hooper when  he  said
    that he had attended dozens of hearings over the past  five  years  and
    estimated  that  80%  of  his  congregation  are  asylum  seekers.   He
    explained that the congregation is very transient, many  are  dispersed
    post-hearing although many return to say how they are getting  on.   He
    reiterated what he had said about being able  to  tell  if  someone  is
    genuine after baptism.

13.  I have concluded that there is no merit in this challenge.   The  judge
    simply did not fail to have regard  to  a  relevant  consideration;  he
    carefully considered all the  relevant  oral  evidence  and  reached  a
    conclusion that was open to him.  He specifically reminded himself that
    the Reverend Hooper believed that he was able to tell  if  someone  was
    genuine after baptism, but the  judge  had  a  duty  to  make  his  own
    decision based on the evidence and this he has done.

14.  The next criticism alleges a failure to have regard to  the  extent  of
    contact and baptismal classes.  At paragraph 42  of  the  determination
    the judge said that the church carried out little in the way of  checks
    before baptising people.  Mr Dixon told me that, in actual fact, it was
    the Reverend Hooper who said that the church carries out little in  the
    way of checks before baptising people.   Nonetheless,  it  is  asserted
    that the judge has made an error as to the evidence.  The  evidence  of
    the pastor was that he had met the appellant on a number  of  occasions
    (four or five) on a one-to-one basis with the benefit of an interpreter
    in addition to baptismal classes which had been  held.   The  appellant
    had therefore had more contact with  the  pastor  than  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  appears  to  have  understood,  submitted  Mr   Dixon.
    Moreover and in any event, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  appears  to
    have left out of the  count  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
    attending baptismal classes.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  mentions
    these at paragraph 48 so it is difficult to see what his  asserting  of
    "little checks" being made before baptism is based  on.   The  evidence
    was that baptismal classes were undertaken and there is  no  suggestion
    that baptismal classes were deficient or superficial.  It  is  part  of
    his determination where he refers to little  by  way  of  checks  being
    undertaken, therefore the judge appears to have overlooked the evidence
    of baptismal classes urged Counsel.

15.  I am satisfied from perusing the determination that this is simply  not
    the  case.   This  appellant  started  attending  this  church  on  7th
    September 2017.  Some two months later on 12th  November  2017  he  was
    baptised.  He was invited to be baptised and he said that he  had  been
    chosen.  The Reverend Hooper was asked by Mr Dixon how the baptism came
    about and the judge recorded  his  evidence  at  paragraph  23  of  the
    determination.  Reverend Hooper explained  that  the  church's  regular
    baptismal classes cover the main benefits of repentance and faith.  The
    opportunity is given for people to decide and  to  ask  questions.   He
    said that he had also met with the appellant to whom he had spoken with
    the assistance of an  interpreter.   This  was  in  addition  to  Bible
    classes.

16.  It is quite clear to me from reading the determination that  the  judge
    was perfectly well  aware  that  the  appellant  had  been  undertaking
    baptismal classes as  well  as  attending  Bible  classes  and  regular
    services.  The reference to the church carrying out little in  the  way
    of checks before baptising  people  actually  came  directly  from  the
    Reverend Hooper's own oral evidence.  At paragraph 25 the judge records
    this:-

         "Returning to the risk of people just wanting a visa,  particularly
         as the church is close to the hostel, Mr Dixon  asked  whether  the
         church has a system.  Reverend Hooper said that the church welcomes
         anyone, including those who are not genuine.  He told me that  many
         come along wanting visas, but become Christians.  Asked whether  he
         had ever refused to baptise people, he said he had but very rarely.
          He acknowledged the possibility that he had  baptised  people  who
         were not genuine.  It was he said difficult to prove.  In  the  New
         Testament people are believed and  are  baptised  often  the  proof
         comes after when he sees the change in people's lives.  For  people
         with whom he comes to court often the change was seen after".

    The judge did at paragraph 42 in referring  to  the  Reverend  Hooper's
    evidence say "I noted that, on his own account, his church carries  out
    little in the way of checks before baptising  people".   That  was  the
    judge commenting on the evidence of the Reverend Hooper.

17.  The next challenge suggests procedural unfairness on the  part  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal Judge.  It suggests that if the judge regarded  the
    baptismal classes as insufficient or potentially  so,  then  he  should
    have given the pastor an opportunity to comment on  those  classes  and
    what was covered in them.  With very  great  respect,  the  judge  very
    carefully considered the evidence of the pastor and decided the  appeal
    on the basis of that evidence.  To suggest that he should  have  cross-
    examined the Reverend Hooper himself misunderstands the  judge's  role.
    The judge was not expressing concern at the content of the classes, but
    simply the speed with which the appellant  had  been  baptised,  having
    only first attended church on 7th September.  It  may  very  well  have
    been of course  that  the  church's  service  was  conducted  with  the
    assistance of interpreters so that the appellant understood  everything
    that was going on and similarly, that the  baptismal  classes  and  the
    Bible classes were  conducted  with  interpreters  to  enable  everyone
    attending to understand what was going on.  The  point  the  judge  was
    making was that although Reverend Hooper was clear that he believed the
    appellant, the reality was that he did not know him particularly  well.
    He may well have met the appellant on a one-to-one  basis  on  four  or
    five occasions with the aid of an interpreter and he may well have  met
    him too at Bible classes,  at  the  weekly  service  and  at  baptismal
    classes, but even so during the course of two months or  so  the  judge
    did not believe that the  Reverend  Hooper  could  know  the  appellant
    particularly well.  It is suggested that the judge should have put  his
    concerns to the Reverend Hooper and invite  him  to  comment  on  them.
    With very great respect, the judge's role is to hear the  evidence  and
    then to decide what he makes of it.  He cannot be expected to put every
    single point which he may take against an appellant to a witness.

18.  The  grounds  speak  of  further  procedural  unfairness  concerning  a
    failure to give an opportunity to comment relating to what is  recorded
    at paragraph 44 of the determination.  There, it is asserted  that  the
    judge makes assumptions as to the degree to which the pastor  was  able
    to speak to the appellant "they could not  communicate  directly  since
    they do not speak the same language.  Although Reverend Hooper told  me
    he had spoken to the appellant with the help  of  an  interpreter  that
    would necessarily have been limited".  It follows that  if  there  were
    only four  or  five  meetings  between  the  Reverend  Hooper  and  the
    appellant when the appellant met the Reverend Hooper in addition to the
    baptismal classes, then with very  great  respect  their  conversations
    would have been limited.

19.  The last challenge is I believe based on a genuine misunderstanding  by
    Counsel.  At paragraph 42 the judge said this:-

         "I turn to the supporting  witness  from  whom  I  heard,  Reverend
         Hooper.  The impression he conveyed was of a sincerely devout  man.
         I do not doubt that he himself  believes  the  appellant  to  be  a
         genuine convert.  Given that  he  is  an  experienced  pastor  that
         carries weight.  Whilst I  give  due  weight  to  that  there  were
         features of the evidence that cause me concern.  I note that on his
         own account his church carries out little  in  the  way  of  checks
         before baptising people.  He explained this in the context  of  the
         New Testament teaching on baptism.  The  difficulty  with  that  is
         that teaching in the Pauline epistles was written at  a  time  when
         the  church  was  persecuted.   In   that   context,   to   profess
         Christianity carried risks and no worldly benefit.  At the risk  of
         being obvious, that is not the case for people in the  position  of
         the appellant in 20th century Britain".

20.  Criticism is made in the grounds that in the context  of  a  persecuted
    church one can be fairly sure that a Christian is  a  genuine  believer
    because otherwise it would not be reasonable to risk  so  much  on  the
    basis that the Christian church in the  United  Kingdom  today  is  not
    persecuted.  This is not the case.  It is highly arguable however  that
    in this respect the judge has erred it is suggested.  With  very  great
    respect, I do not believe that that is what the judge  was  saying.   I
    think he was pointing out the difference between life  as  it  was  and
    life as it  is  today  but  I  can  detect  no  error  in  the  judge's
    determination.

21.  I agree with the submissions made by Mrs Aboni.   The  judge  has  very
    carefully recorded the evidence he heard and made  clear,  logical  and
    properly reasoned findings on that evidence.  There is nothing, I would
    suggest, to indicate that he has in any way misunderstood anything that
    he was told.  He noted that the  Reverend  Hooper  was  an  experienced
    pastor and that by itself carried weight.  I believe that he  did  very
    properly assess the evidence of the Reverend Hooper and was entitled to
    find as he did.

22.  The judge very carefully examined the evidence of  the  appellant.   He
    noted that at interview the appellant was unable to explain the meaning
    and significance of Easter.  In giving evidence the appellant was  able
    to explain Easter to the judge, but that was  given  in  the  knowledge
    that the point was raised in the refusal letter and so was likely to be
    raised at the hearing.  However, the  appellant's  evidence  was  still
    somewhat confused, because he described Easter  as  being  a  Christian
    festival which celebrates that one day Christ will come back  to  life.
    As the judge puts it, that rather fundamentally misses the  point  that
    Christians believe that Christ arose from death on the Sunday after the
    crucifixion and is alive now.

23.  I have concluded that the determination of Judge R A  O'Hagan  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point  of  law  and  I  uphold  his
    determination.  The appellant's appeals are dismissed.

Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

