
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02625/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st November 2016                |On 25th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    s s r
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Watton, instructed by Lamptons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 8th October  1990.   His
    appeal against the refusal of his protection  claim  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi in a decision  dated  14th  September
    2016.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on the ground that the evidence of  the
    Appellant's witness Mr S, that he had attended gay nightclubs with  the
    Appellant and his partner and had witnessed physical affection  between
    them, was material relevant to the assessment of the Appellant's  claim
    and the outcome of the appeal. The credibility findings in relation  to
    the Appellant and other witnesses should  have  been  assessed  in  the
    light of this corroborative evidence and the judge had failed to do so.
    If the evidence of Mr S did not affect the judge's  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's credibility she had a duty to provide reasons for that. The
    judge failed to give reasons for why she could not attach  any  or  any
    sufficient weight to the evidence of Mr  S  and  her  failure  to  give
    reasons was a material error of law.

3.   The grounds  rely  on  the  case  of  AK  (Failure  to  assess  witness
    evidence) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00230 in which it was held that a failure
    to make any assessment of credibility of witnesses was an error of law:



         "10. In addition to his failure to summarise properly the  evidence
             given by the five witnesses called on the Appellant's  behalf,
             the adjudicator has also failed to make any assessment  as  to
             the credibility or otherwise of that evidence or to  give  any
             reason  for  arriving  at  his  assessment.  Save   in   those
             exceptional cases where the material facts are  not  in  issue
             between  the  parties,  it  is  an  essential   part   of   an
             adjudicator's responsibility to make clear findings of fact on
             the material issues, and  to  give  proper,  intelligible  and
             adequate  reasons  for  arriving   at   those   findings.   An
             adjudicator who fails to do so is  liable  to  find  that  his
             determination is vulnerable to challenge on appeal at the  sit
             of the losing party. That is the position here.

         11.  With respect to this experienced adjudicator, we are bound  to
             say that his failure to make any findings of fact in  relation
             to any of the five witnesses called on the Appellant's  behalf
             was a serious error on his part. It is an error which,  as  Mr
             Buckley very properly recognised, is in itself  sufficient  to
             render the determination fatally flawed."

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on 28th October 2016. She states:

         "It is arguable that the judge has  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
         properly consider and give reasons for why she accepted or rejected
         the evidence of the Appellant's third witness Mr  S  who  supported
         the Appellant's account that the Appellant attended gay  nightclubs
         with him and he witnessed physical affection between the  Appellant
         and his partner which may be material to the outcome."

Submissions

5.   Ms Watton submitted that the only issue in this appeal was whether  the
    Appellant was gay. The Respondent in the Rule 24 response had relied on
    the judge's findings at paragraphs 36 and 40, but  this  did  not  show
    that the judge had assessed the evidence of  the  witness,  Mr  S.  The
    judge had made no  credibility  finding  in  relation  to  Mr  S.  This
    amounted to an error of law which was material to the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

6.   The judge decided that the Appellant and his partner, Mr  I,  were  not
    credible and this had infected the Appellant's credibility as a  whole.
    However, the evidence of Mr S could have  rescued  it  because  it  was
    corroborative of the relationship. The judge had failed to state in her
    decision why she placed no weight on the evidence  of  Mr  S.   If  the
    witness had seen the Appellant and his partner hugging and kissing  the
    judge had to assess why  that  was  not  credible.  Following  AK  this
    amounted to a material error of law.

7.   Mr Jarvis submitted that there was no material  error.  The  judge  was
    required to give reasons for settling disputes, but  did  not  have  to
    make findings  on  every  single  piece  of  evidence.  The  judge  had
    approached this case very carefully. The core  issue  was  whether  the
    Appellant was in a relationship with his partner Mr I. The judge  noted
    the evidence of Mr S at paragraph 23 where his evidence was summarised.
    The judge then went on to make a number of devastating findings against
    the Appellant which went to the heart of his  case.  She  rejected  his
    account in its entirety and this was not challenged in the  grounds  of
    appeal.

8.   The judge recognised that the witnesses called by the  Appellant  could
    corroborate the Appellant's  account  and  it  was  possible  that  the
    Appellant was gay, even if he was not in  a  relationship  with  Mr  I.
    However, at paragraph 42 the  judge  did  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    evidence was reliable. The judge found that there was no other evidence
    to which she could  attach  sufficient  weight  to  detract  from  this
    finding. The judge's approach was a proper one. It was difficult to see
    how the evidence of Mr S could lead to a finding that the Appellant was
    gay when the evidence of the Appellant, his partner Mr I and the  other
    witness had been rejected by the judge.

9.   The case of AK required the judge to be aware of the  evidence  and  to
    give reasons for rejecting it. It was not a surprise in this case  that
    evidence that the Appellant was kissing and hugging Mr I was not enough
    to undo the damage done to  the  Appellant's  credibility  in  his  own
    evidence.

10.  In response, Ms Watton submitted that at paragraph 23 of the  decision,
    where the judge summarised the evidence of Mr S, there was  no  mention
    of kissing and hugging. At paragraph 28 Ms Watton had made  submissions
    that the witnesses were relevant to the key dates  and  the  issues  at
    hand. There was a requirement to assess the credibility  of  a  witness
    and the judge had failed to make credibility findings in relation to Mr
    S or the other witness Mr Q.

Discussion and Conclusions

11.  The grounds submit that Mr S  gave  the  following  evidence.   In  his
    witness statement he gave details of attending gay nightclubs with  the
    Appellant  and  in  cross-examination,  when  asked  how  he  knew  the
    Appellant and Mr I were in  a  relationship  he  gave  details  of  the
    contact he had had with the two of them and noted that this  could  not
    be friendly contact because he had seen them kissing  and  hugging.  At
    the end of Mr S's evidence the judge asked him to repeat this  question
    because she did not hear the answer. The grounds submit that  the  oral
    evidence has not been taken into account  in  the  judge's  credibility
    findings at paragraphs 29 to 42.

12.  In submissions before the First-tier Tribunal  Ms  Watton  invited  the
    judge to find that the Appellant and his partner had been consistent as
    to the key dates and events. In submissions before  me,  she  submitted
    that Mr S could assist and corroborate this evidence.

13.  In his witness statement Mr S stated that he met the Appellant  in  the
    Shadow Lounge Club on 11th November 2015 and he had met the Appellant's
    partner, Mr I, on numerous occasions.

14.  The note on the court file of Mr S's oral evidence was that he did  not
    know when the Appellant's relationship with Mr I started because he did
    not discuss the past. He knew that they were in a relationship and  had
    seen them together. He was asked if they could just be friends  but  he
    said no, he had seen them kissing and hugging and friends  did  not  do
    that.  He was not in any of the photographs because he did not want  to
    be.

15.  The judge summarised the evidence of each witness  and  summarised  the
    submissions. In relation to Mr S she stated:

         "23. The witness, Mr S, explained that he met the  Appellant  in  a
             gay bar in November 2015 and the Appellant introduced Mr I  as
             his partner. They have been friends since then."

16.  The judge set out her findings in relation to the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant and Mr I at paragraphs 29 to 42.  She found that  there  were
    differences in the evidence given by the Appellant and his  partner  as
    to the start of their relationship, which were  significant.  She  made
    the following findings:

         "34. I find the significant difference in the accounts given by the
             appellant and Mr I on  these  key  aspects  of  their  claimed
             romantic relationship to be very damaging  to  both  of  their
             credibility. The beginning of a gay relationship  between  two
             people who had not long met, both of Pakistani  origin,  is  a
             very significant event, especially in light of the way such  a
             matter is treated in Pakistan. I do not accept that the detail
             of that, having taken place less than  two  years  ago,  would
             easily be forgotten or misremembered.

         ...

         36.   The  appellant's  witnesses  appeared  to   corroborate   the
             appellant's claim to be gay and that he and  Mr  I  are  in  a
             relationship. However, the appellant's evidence that Mr I  had
             introduced him to Mr Q as his partner on visiting the showroom
             in February 2015 was inconsistent with Mr Q's evidence that he
             did not know they were in a  relationship  till  he  dined  at
             their house in October 2015."

17.  The judge then went on to consider other evidence and  the  documentary
    evidence and concluded at paragraphs 41 and 42:

         "41. Considering all the evidence in the round,  having  regard  to
             the damage done to the appellant's  and  Mr  I's  credibility,
             applying the lower standard of proof, the appellant has failed
             to satisfy me that he and Mr I are in a romantic relationship.

         42.  It is of course possible that the appellant  may  nevertheless
             be gay even if not in a relationship with Mr I.  However,  the
             damage done to his and Mr I's credibility infects the rest  of
             the appellant's evidence in such a way that  I  am  unable  to
             accept it as being reliable. I have not identified  any  other
             evidence to which I can attach sufficient weight  to  overcome
             this damage. It follows that even to the lower  standard,  the
             appellant has failed to satisfy me that he is gay."

18.  The judge assessed the evidence of the Appellant and  his  partner,  Mr
    I, and concluded  that  the  significant  discrepancies  damaged  their
    credibility. She gave cogent reasons for  coming  to  that  conclusion.
    She then assessed the other evidence and whether that  was  capable  of
    supporting their account. She noted an inconsistency in the evidence of
    Mr Q, but made no reference to any inconsistencies in the  evidence  of
    Mr S. She found at paragraph 36 that the Appellant's witnesses appeared
    to corroborate the Appellant's claim to be gay. It was quite clear that
    she  has  accepted  that  there  was  evidence  which  was  capable  of
    supporting the existence of a relationship.

19.  However, the judge found that  the  significant  discrepancies  between
    the Appellant and his partner, Mr I, were such that she was  unable  to
    identify any other evidence to which she could attach sufficient weight
    to overcome this damage. In other words, even though Mr S had seen  the
    Appellant and Mr I hugging and kissing this was  insufficient  to  show
    that  they  were  in  a  relationship  because   of   the   significant
    discrepancies about that relationship in the accounts of the  Appellant
    and Mr I.

20.  Ms Watton submits that the judge failed to specifically deal  with  the
    credibility of Mr S and failed to state reasons why she attached little
    weight to his evidence. Even if that were the case, it was not material
    to the decision. This was not a case that was similar to AK because  in
    this case the judge clearly noted the  evidence  of  Mr  S,  found  his
    evidence to be capable of corroborating the  Appellant's  account,  but
    then concluded that she was unable to attach sufficient weight to it.

21.  In the case of AK the judge  failed  to  deal  with  any  of  the  five
    witnesses. In this case the judge dealt with the two main witnesses  in
    great detail. She commented on Mr Q's evidence and  she  quite  clearly
    found that Mr S had given corroborative evidence.  However,  she  found
    that she could not attach sufficient  weight  to  it  to  overcome  the
    significant differences in  the  accounts  of  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner.

22.  I accept that the judge failed to note in her summary of  the  evidence
    of Mr S that he had seen the Appellant hugging and kissing Mr I, but it
    was evident from the Record of Proceedings that he had said  that.  Any
    lack of reasoning for why the judge attached little weight  to  Mr  S's
    evidence was not material because the judge did not find the  Appellant
    to be a witness of truth and his evidence was not something that  could
    be relied on. The evidence of Mr S in itself was insufficient  to  show
    that the Appellant was in a relationship with Mr I or  indeed  that  he
    was gay as he claimed.  The  evidence  of  Mr  S  was  insufficient  to
    overcome the credibility issues that the judge identified  in  relation
    to the Appellant's claimed relationship with Mr I.

23.  Accordingly, I find that the judge has not made  a  material  error  of
    law in failing to make findings as to the  credibility  of  Mr  S.  She
    quite clearly took his evidence into account, but found that  it  could
    not overcome the credibility issues raised by the Appellant. There  was
    no error of law in the judge's decision dated 14th September 2016 and I
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                  J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 24th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 24th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
