
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03038/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th October 2018                         |On 14 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     AH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr.  S Ell, Counsel instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge Brunnen promulgated on 24th April 2018.  The FtT Judge dismissed
      the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 20th
      February 2018 refusing his claim for international protection.


   2. There was no application for anonymity before the First-tier Tribunal
      ("FtT") and the FtT Judge considered there to be no reason to make a
      direction for anonymity.  Although no application is made before me,
      the appeal concerns a claim for asylum and international protection
      and in my judgement it is appropriate for an anonymity order to be
      made under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
      2008.  AH is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report
      of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This
      direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure
      to comply with this direction could lead to proceedings being brought
      for contempt of court.


   3. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  His immigration history
      is set out at paragraphs [10] and [11] of the decision of the FtT
      Judge.  The appellant's account of events is to be found at paragraphs
      [12] to [22] of the decision, and at paragraphs [23] to [50], the FtT
      Judge sets out his findings and conclusions.  The Judge concluded that
      the appellant has failed to establish that he has a well-founded fear
      of persecution in Afghanistan, or that on return there, he would be at
      real risk of suffering serious harm or suffering inhuman or degrading
      treatment or punishment.


   4. The FtT Judge's findings are succinctly set out at paragraph [45] of
      the decision as follows:


         "45. I am prepared to accept that the Appellant is the son of a
         wealthy family. I am also prepared to accept that his father was a
         supporter of the Taliban until they began to interfere with his
         family.  I am prepared to accept that the Appellant's sisters were
         abducted and that his father's health deteriorated.  However, in
         the light of the inconsistencies concerning the incidents in Balkh
         and, even more so, the inconsistencies concerning the incident in
         Kabul, I do not accept that there is even a reasonable degree of
         likelihood that the Appellant attempted to sell the land, or that
         he was threatened in Balkh and in Kabul. I do not accept that the
         order for his arrest is genuine or that the Taliban have mobilised
         their resources to find him.  I do not accept that he would be of
         any interest to them if he were to return to Kabul."


   5. The FtT Judge referred to the Country Guidance decision of AS (safety
      in Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT (IAC) and having considered, at
      [47], the appellant's case, concluded that the appellant does not fall
      within any of the categories of persons identified in the country
      guidance, as being at risk.  For the reasons set out at paragraphs
      [48] and [49], the FtT Judge concluded that relocation to Kabul would
      not be unreasonable or unduly harsh.


Error of Law


   6. Although the appellant was represented, the grounds of appeal appear
      to have been prepared by the appellant himself.  The appellant refers
      to the various aspects of his claim that were accepted by the FtT
      Judge, and challenges the Judge's conclusions where the Judge did not
      accept the account advanced by the appellant.  The appellant maintains
      that the Judge erred in his conclusion that there is no reasonable
      likelihood that the appellant attempted to sell land, and in finding
      that the appellant was not threatened in Balkh and in Kabul.   The
      appellant maintains that the arrest warrant that he relied upon is
      genuine and claims the Judge erred in failing to accept that the order
      for his arrest, is genuine.  The appellant maintains that he has a
      high profile and that the Judge's conclusion to the contrary, is
      irrational.  He claims that the Judge accepted that the appellant is
      the eldest son of a wealthy family, and the son of an individual that
      supported the Taliban, and "..this automatically makes me a high
      profile individual.." and subject to the interest of the Taliban.  The
      appellant also claims that the Judge's conclusion that the appellant
      can internally relocate because he is someone able to afford carrying
      guns and hiring a bodyguard, is irrational, because if he were not a
      'high profile individual', there would be no need for him to carry
      guns and hire bodyguards.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 16th
      July 2018.  On behalf of the appellant, Mr Ell was content to adopt
      the two grounds summarised by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch in her order.
       First, the FtT Judge failed to adopt a holistic approach to the
      evidence and consider the totality of the evidence before reaching a
      decision in relation to the credibility of the appellant's account and
      second, the FtT Judge failed to give sufficient, or at times, any
      reasons, for believing parts of the appellant's account, but not
      others.


   8. The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of the FtT
      Judge involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to
      remake the decision.


   9. Mr Ell submits that the appellant was found by the FtT Judge to be
      credible in a number of respects, and noted, at [27] and [34], that
      before reaching any conclusions upon various aspects of the
      appellant's claim and his credibility, it would be necessary to
      consider the extent to which any inconsistencies damage the
      appellant's credibility.  Having set that out, the FtT Judge failed to
      resolve that issue by considering whether any inconsistencies in the
      appellant's account do in fact undermine his credibility to the extent
      that the account, is properly rejected.  Similarly, at paragraph [41]
      when considering letters concerning financial donations said to have
      been made by the appellant's father to the Taliban in December 2013,
      the Judge notes that there is no way to judge the authenticity of the
      documents other than to view them in the round with the other
      evidence. Having said that, the Judge fails to address those documents
      in reaching his conclusions and does not identify whether, if at all,
      any weight is attached to the documents. Mr Ell submits that the Judge
      refers to the evidence relied upon by the appellant and identifies
      inconsistencies in some of that evidence, but in reaching his final
      conclusion at paragraph [45], the Judge does not explain why some
      parts of the account relied upon by the appellant are accepted and
      others are rejected. To the extent that there are adverse credibility
      findings made against the appellant, the Judge fails to consider all
      of the evidence holistically, and set out the evidence that he accepts
      and the evidence that he rejects, with reasons explaining why.


  10. The appellant challenges the  findings  made  by  the  Judge  and  the
      adequacy of his reasons for dismissing the appeal.  I remind myself of
      the observations made by Mr. Justice Hadon-Cave in Budhathoki (reasons
      for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary
         for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence
         and explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,  so  that  the
         parties can understand why they have won or lost."


  11. I have also had regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Shizad
      (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC where it was
      stated in the head note that:


         "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which the appeal is determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if the  decision  makes  sense,
         having regard to the material accepted by the judge."


  12. It is in that context that I have considered the grounds of appeal and
      the submissions that have been advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant.
      The core of the appellant's account was not particularly  complex.  It
      is set out at paragraphs [12] to [22]  of  the  decision  of  the  FtT
      Judge.


  13. I have carefully considered the  evidence  that  was  before  the  FtT
      Judge.  There were  several  facets  to  the  claim  advanced  by  the
      appellant.  First, the family  background  of  the  appellant  and  in
      particular the wealth of the appellant's father, his support  for  the
      Taliban and the events between 2004 and 2011, when  arrangements  were
      made for the appellant to come to study in the UK in order to keep him
      out of the hands of the Taliban.  Second, the events  of  2014  during
      which the appellant's three eldest sisters were taken by the  Taliban,
      and finally, the events between the appellant's return to  Afghanistan
      in January 2015 and his subsequent return to the UK in February 2015.


  14. I reject the claim that the FtT Judge failed to adopt a holistic
      approach to the evidence and consider the totality of the evidence
      before reaching a decision in relation to the credibility of the
      appellant's account.  It is clear from a careful reading of the
      decision that the Judge carefully considered all of the evidence
      before reaching his overall conclusions set out at paragraph [45] of
      the decision, identifying those aspects of the appellant's account
      that he accepts and those that even on the lower standard applicable,
      the Judge did not accept.


  15. At paragraphs [24] to [26] of the decision, the Judge identified the
      reasons given by the respondent for rejecting the appellant's account
      that his father was a wealthy landowner.  That formed the backdrop to
      the events that the appellant claimed had occurred between the
      appellant's return to Afghanistan in January 2015 and his subsequent
      return to the UK in February 2015.  The Judge identified the
      explanations provided by the appellant in his evidence before the
      Tribunal, and considered whether the appellant has provided
      satisfactory explanations to address the matters referred to by the
      respondent. At paragraph [27] the Judge stated ".. Before reaching any
      conclusion on these points there are further issues to be
      considered.".


  16. At paragraphs [28] to [44] of the decision, the Judge went on to
      address the account of events relied upon by the appellant.  The Judge
      refers to the reasons provided by the respondent for rejecting the
      claims made by the appellant, and carefully considered the evidence,
      identifying the material inconsistencies in the appellant's account of
      events. The Judge also carefully considered the documents relied upon
      by the appellant including police reports.  The Judge refers, at [33]
      to inconsistencies in the appellant's own evidence, and how that fits
      with the documents relied upon.  At paragraph [34], the Judge noted
      that it is possible that the appellant has simply become confused as
      to the exact chronology of stressful events and in the end, noted that
      it is necessary to assess the extent to which the inconsistencies
      damage the opponents credibility.


  17. At paragraphs [35] to [44], the Judge continues to address the account
      relied upon by the appellant of events in 2014, and of events between
      the appellant returning to Afghanistan in 2015 and his return to the
      UK in February 2015. The Judge carefully considered the account
      advanced by the appellant and whether the documents relied upon by
      him, lend support to that account.   In assessing the account relied
      upon by the appellant, the FtT Judge also carefully considered the
      matters relied upon by the respondent in the reasons for refusal
      letter.


  18. At paragraph [35], the Judge considered the difference in the account
      given by the appellant as to the threat made on 7th February 2015 when
      he was in Kabul, and the report dated 8th February 2015 recorded by
      the Kabul police.  At paragraph [36], the FtT Judge considered the
      appellant's explanation for the police reports bearing a rubber stamp
      impression of the Ministry of Finance, Kabul Tax Office.  The Judge
      considered at the explanation offered by the appellant to be a
      plausible one.


  19. At paragraph [41], the Judge refers to the two letters produced by the
      appellant concerning financial donations made by his father to the
      Taliban in December 2013.  At paragraph [42], the Judge referred to
      photographs relied upon by the appellant and at paragraph [43], the
      Judge considered a document relied upon by the appellant, and
      described as an arrest warrant. Again, the FtT Judge appears to have
      carefully considered how that document fits with the account of events
      relied upon by the appellant.


  20. The Judge had the opportunity of hearing the appellant give evidence
      and having that evidence tested, although it is clear that it was the
      content of the evidence rather than the way in which was given, that
      the Judge was concerned about.   The obligation on a Tribunal Judge is
      to give reasons in sufficient detail to show the principles on which
      the Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.
      Such reasons need not be elaborate, and do not need to address every
      argument or every factor which weighed in the decision.  It is
      sufficient that the critical reasons to the decision, are recorded.


  21. In my judgement, a careful reading of the decision of the FtT Judge
      demonstrates that the Judge considered all of the evidence before him
      holistically, before identifying those aspects of the appellant's
      account that he was prepared to accept, and those aspects of the
      appellant's account that he rejected.  The Judge did not consider
      irrelevant factors, and the weight that he attached to the evidence
      was a matter for him.  In my judgement the FtT Judge carefully
      considered at each stage whether there was evidence, independent of
      the appellants own evidence, that was capable of casting light upon
      the matters relied upon by the appellant. It is in that context that
      the Judge had regard to the documents.


  22. The assessment of risk upon return and credibility is always a highly
      fact sensitive task.  It is well established that the ingredients of
      the story, and the story as a whole, have to be considered by
      reference to the evidence available to the Tribunal.  In any
      assessment of the account relied upon by an appellant, factors such as
      consistency with what the appellant has said before, and with other
      evidence, including any documents relied upon are relevant.  In my
      judgement, a careful reading of the consideration by the Judge
      demonstrates that he had clearly in mind, the various facets to the
      appellant's claim. It was for the Tribunal to make its own findings on
      whether, and to what extent, the appellant's account is credible. In
      my judgement the FtT Judge carefully weighed up the evidence and
      reached a conclusion as to the evidence that is believed and that
      which is not.


  23. As Brooke LJ observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran) v The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982,
      "unjustified complaints" as to an alleged failure to give adequate
      reasons are all too frequent.  The obligation on a Tribunal is to give
      reasons in sufficient detail to show the principles on which the
      Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.
      Such reasons need not be elaborate, and do not need to address every
      argument or every factor which weighed in the decision.  If a Tribunal
      has not expressly addressed an argument, but if there are grounds on
      which the argument could properly have been rejected, it should be
      assumed that the Tribunal acted on such grounds.  It is sufficient
      that the critical reasons to the decision are recorded.


  24. The Court of Appeal held that a finding might only be set aside for
      error of law on the grounds of perversity if it was irrational or
      unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly
      unsupported by the evidence.  A finding that is "perverse" embraces
      findings that are irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,
      and findings of fact that are wholly unsupported by the evidence.


  25. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at first
      instance, unless it really cannot understand the original Judge's
      thought process when the Judge was making material findings.  In my
      judgement, it is clear that the findings summarised at paragraph [45]
      of the decision of the FtT Judge, flow from the careful consideration
      of the claim that is to be found at paragraphs [24] to [44] of the
      decision.  The Judge identified those aspects of the claim that he was
      able to accept and referred carefully, to the other aspects of the
      appellant's claim that were plagued with inconsistency, and not
      supported by the documents relied upon.  The Judge states, at [45],
      his reasons for rejecting the appellant's account of events when her
      returned to Afghanistan in January 2015.  The Judge states "..However,
      in the light of the inconsistencies concerning the incidents Balkh,
      and even more so, the inconsistencies concerning the incident in
      Kabul, I do not accept that...".  The FtT Judge had previously clearly
      identified the inconsistencies concerning the incidents, and the
      concerns that he had about the arrest warrant.


  26. In my judgement, the findings made by the FtT Judge were open to him
      and are sufficiently and adequately explained.  If follows that in my
      judgement, the decision of the FtT Judge is not infected by any
      material error of law and the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


  27. The decision of the FtT Judge does not contain any error of law, and
      the appeal is dismissed

  28. An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          7th November 2018


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


      There can be no fee award.




     Signed                                  Date         7th November 2018

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







