
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03646/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham             |Decision Promulgated            |
|on 28 November 2016             |On 16 December 2016             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                           THAYAHAYAN MUTHULINGAM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P J Lewis instructed by Binberg Peirce &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    ERROR OF LAW FINDSING AND DIRECTIONS


      1. In a decision dated 7 September 2016 the Upper Tribunal found that
         First-tier Tribunal Abebrese had erred in law in relation to the
         assessment of the human rights element of this appeal. That
         element of the First-tier Tribunals decision of the 18 July 2016
         was not set aside and the case was adjourned to todays date to
         enable the Upper Tribunal to consider if such error is material.
      2. The reason for  this  unorthodox  approach  was  that  the  appeal
         against the article 8 decision  had  been  made  in  time  by  the
         Secretary of State, and permission granted, but the  cross  appeal
         by the appellant against the rejection of  the  asylum  claim  had
         been filed in error  with  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  rejected  as
         invalid. At the September hearing  Mr  Lewis  confirmed  that  the
         cross appeal had now been lodged with the correct tribunal  but  a
         decision on the same was awaited.
      3. The materiality issue arises  for  if  the  appellant  is  granted
         permission to appeal the asylum claim and eventually  succeeds  on
         the same it is arguable the article 8 error is not material to the
         finding the claim must be allowed. If the asylum claim fails  then
         only the human rights claim remains in which  case  the  error  is
         material and the decision will have to be remade.
      4. On 14 October 2016 Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Peart extended time and granted permission to  appeal  the  asylum
         claim.
      5. The Upper Tribunal commenced todays hearing with  a  consideration
         of whether an error of law has been made by the Judge in  relation
         to the protection claim.


Error of law

      6. Mr Lewis relied upon his pleaded grounds of appeal. These claim:


              1. The Judge erred in his assessment under Devaseelan  because
                 he failed to have regard to reports obtained subsequent  to
                 the previous decision.
              2. The Judge relied upon the fact the  appellant  returned  to
                 Sri Lanka in 2011 as a further reason to reject his account
                 of the events that led to his asylum claim but  the  Judges
                 assessment did not take into account  that  the  appellants
                 return was some two years after the defeat of the LTTE  and
                 he failed to have regard  to  the  change  in  the  country
                 situation  when  determining   the   credibility   of   the
                 appellants claim.
              3. The Judge erred in making an adverse  credibility  findings
                 because  the  appellant   was   unable   to   provide   any
                 corroborative documentary evidence of the attempted  arrest
                 when the absence of such evidence was consistent  with  the
                 appellants account of the background material.
              4. The Judge erred in his assessment of the  appellants  claim
                 of  sur  place  activities  by  failing  to  consider  that
                 notwithstanding that the activities may have  been  engaged
                 in for opportunistic reasons, the appellant might still  be
                 at risk.


      7. Having heard the submissions I find Judge Aberese materially erred
         in law in the dismissal of the asylum claim too for the  following
         reasons:


              1. Whilst the Judge cannot be criticised  for  taking  as  his
                 starting point the decision of another judge  in  2002,  in
                 which adverse credibility findings had been  made,  it  was
                 incumbent upon the Judge to examine  all  the  evidence  to
                 ascertain if the earlier findings were still relevant or if
                 the evidence indicated a change in circumstances or  reason
                 for departing from the earlier findings. In this appeal two
                 expert reports had been commissioned that were  before  the
                 Judge yet there is no mention of the same in  the  credibly
                 assessment.  The  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  not
                 credible may have been within the range of findings open to
                 the  Judge  but  only  once  all  the  evidence  had   been
                 considered with the required degree of anxious scrutiny. It
                 is said that reports support the  claim  of  detention  and
                 torture and the credibility  of  the  account.  Failing  to
                 consider the  evidence  or  to  explain  how  it  has  been
                 factored into the  assessment  amounts  to  arguable  legal
                 error.
              2. When the Judge does finally refer to a  report  from  a  Dr
                 Smith it is in the following terms


                  "The Tribunal also considered the report  and  conclusions
                  of Dr Smith  and  find  that  the  Tribunal  after  having
                  carefully  assessed  the  subjective   evidence   of   the
                  appellant and having balanced very carefully to the  lower
                  standard of proof  that  the  appellant  has  consistently
                  provided an account of  the  events  in  both  his  asylum
                  claims which suggest that he is not a credible witness  in
                  relation the events in the  2002  claim  and  also  events
                  leading up to his claim in 2014/1/5.   In  light  of  this
                  finding the objective  evidence  of  Dr  Smith  cannot  be
                  relied upon in this instance. The Tribunal therefore makes
                  a finding  that  this  appellant  is  unlikely  to  be  of
                  intertest to  the authorities......"


              3. The Judge claims in the decision that there is no  evidence
                 of the appellants  experiences  when  he  returned  to  Sri
                 Lanka, yet there was the appellants own oral evidence.  The
                 Judge claims to have carefully  considered  the  appellants
                 evidence but more is arguably required. The Judge refers to
                 the report of Dr Smith in paragraph 42 yet makes no mention
                 of the reports of Dr Martin and Dr Dhumad. It also  appears
                 that  the  Judge  decided  not  to  accept  the  subjective
                 evidence and used this  as  the  basis  for  rejecting  the
                 objective material rather than considering all the evidence
                 in the round and then making any findings  in  relation  to
                 the credibility of the claim.
              4.  In M(DRC) [2003] UKIAT 00054 the Tribunal said that it was
                 wrong to make adverse findings  of  credibility  first  and
                 then dismiss the report. Similarly, in Ex  parte  Virjon  B
                 [2002] EWHC 1469, Forbes J found that  an  Adjudicator  had
                 been wrong to use adverse credibility findings as  a  basis
                 for rejecting medical evidence.  In HE  (2004)  UKIAT  0032
                 (Ouseley) the Tribunal  said  that  "where  the  report  is
                 specifically relied on as a factor relevant to credibility,
                 the adjudicator should deal with it as an integral part  of
                 the findings on credibility, rather than just as an add on,
                 which does not undermine the conclusions to which he  would
                 otherwise come".
              5. It is accepted an error only arises in his situation  where
                 it can be shown there has  been  an  artificial  separation
                 between the evidence. In this case it is made out that this
                 is what has occurred.
              6. The Judge makes a finding there was a lack of corroboration
                 of the appellant claimed experiences when  he  returned  to
                 Sri Lanka. In ST (Corroboration - Kasolo)  Ethiopia  [2004]
                 UKIAT 00119 the Tribunal said that it was a misdirection to
                 imply that  corroboration  was  necessary  for  a  positive
                 credibility finding. In TK (Burundi) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ
                 40   the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  where  there  were
                 circumstances   in   which   evidence   corroborating   the
                 appellant's evidence was easily  obtainable,  the  lack  of
                 such evidence must affect the assessment of the appellant's
                 credibility. It followed that where a  judge  in  assessing
                 credibility  relied  on  the  fact  that   there   was   no
                 independent supporting evidence where there should  be  and
                 there was no credible account for its absence, he committed
                 no error of law when he relied on that fact  for  rejecting
                 the account of the appellant. In this case it  is  asserted
                 the lack of such evidence was in accordance with  objective
                 evidence yet there is no indication in  the  decision  that
                 the Judge considered this element of the case.
              7. Even if the Judge was entitled to reject the credibility of
                 the events  in  Sri  Lanka,  once  the  evidence  has  been
                 properly  considered  and  adequate  reasons   given,   the
                 appellant also relied upon a sur  place  claim.  The  Judge
                 noted the claimed extent  of  the  same  at  [22]  and  the
                 relevant findings are set out at [39]. It does  not  appear
                 to be challenged that the  appellant  has  undertaken  some
                 activities as  claimed.  The  Judge  finds  that  all  such
                 activities have  been  entered  into  purely  in  order  to
                 bolster his claim for asylum. Even if this is so, the Judge
                 was required to consider risk from  the  viewpoint  of  the
                 potential persecutor. In this case  there  is  no  specific
                 finding, with adequate reasons, for why the activities  the
                 appellant has engaged in  will  not  come  to  the  adverse
                 attention of the Sri Lankan authorities in accordance  with
                 the country guidance case law or, if  they  did,  why  they
                 will not create  a  real  risk  to  the  appellant  of  ill
                 treatment on return.


      8. The Judge may have  thought  the  appellant  was  not  a  credible
         witness as the previous judge did in 2002 but it is arguable  that
         more was required than has been included  in  the  decision  under
         challenge which is infected by structural failing,  a  failure  to
         consider all the evidence provided, a failure to provide  adequate
         reasons on key issues, including risk on return on  the  basis  of
         the appellants sur place activities.
      9. I find the appellant is yet to have a hearing at which the all the
         merits of his claim are  considered  properly  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. If this occurs the appeal may  still  be  dismissed  but
         that is a matter for the Judge tasked with  rehearing  the  matter
         once all the material has been considered with the required degree
         of anxious scrutiny.
     10. I find the proper order in relation to the asylum  appeal  is  for
         the same to be set aside and the matter remitted to the First-tier
         tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be heard by a judge other than
         Judge Abebrese.
     11. In light of the finding of legal error in the human right  element
         of the claim earlier, and the decision now taken  in  relation  to
         the asylum claim, I find the legal error in relation to the  human
         right claim is material and remit this matter too, to  be  reheard
         with the asylum claim.


Decision

     12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
         the decision of the original Judge. The appeal shall be remitted
         to Taylor House for re-hearing.








    Anonymity.


     13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
         2005.


            I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
            Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 28 November 2016


