
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/03476/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Friday 17 May 2019                |On 27 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M C
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel instructed by Montague
                    Solicitors, LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However,
as the Appellant claims that he would be at risk in his home country  it  is
appropriate to make that direction.  Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   BACKGROUND

     1. By a decision promulgated on 18  March  2019  ("the  Decision"),  I
        found an error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
        N M Paul promulgated on 11 January 2019 dismissing the  Appellant's
        appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  23  January  201
        refusing his protection and human rights claims.  However, for  the
        reasons there given,  I  determined  that  the  error  of  law  was
        confined to the Judge's failure  to  have  regard  to  the  country
        guidance in IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG  [2004]  UKIAT
        00312 ("IK").  At [26] of the Decision,  I  therefore  directed  as
        follows in relation to re-making of Judge Paul's decision:

           "I accept therefore that the Appellant has established that  the
           Decision contains an error  of  law  arising  from  the  Judge's
           failure to have regard to IK.  However, for the reasons given, I
           do not accept that there is any error of law in relation to  the
           Judge's credibility findings as appear at [19] to  [25]  of  the
           Decision.  I therefore preserve those findings.  I set aside the
           remainder of the Decision and in particular [26] which  concerns
           the general risk to the Appellant as a Kurd.  That general  risk
           coupled with such risk factors as  still  arise  notwithstanding
           the adverse credibility findings will need to be reconsidered in
           light of the guidance in IK.  There was no  application  by  the
           Appellant to adduce any further evidence.  Accordingly,  I  have
           given a direction only  for  re-listing  of  the  appeal  for  a
           resumed hearing on the issue which remains."

        The Decision is annexed to this decision for ease of reference.

   APPLICATION TO AMEND GROUNDS

     2. At the start of this hearing, Ms Panagiotopoulou applied  to  amend
        the Appellant's grounds in relation to a  point  which  had  arisen
        only as a result of the Appellant's instructions on the morning  of
        the hearing before me.  The point concerned a referral to the Helen
        Bamber Foundation in 2016.  They  were  unable  to  assist  due  to
        resource pressures, but the Appellant was seen by Ms Jane Floyd,  a
        High Intensity CBT Therapist from an  organisation  called  "Talk".
        That organisation produced a letter  dated  5  October  2016  which
        confirms that the Appellant was receiving counselling for low  mood
        and depression.  That letter was not referred to  in  Judge  Paul's
        decision.

     3. Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that, as a result  of  that  evidence,
        Judge Paul ought to  have  considered  whether  the  Appellant  was
        vulnerable and taken any vulnerability into account when  assessing
        his credibility.  She accepted  that  the  Appellant's  grounds  of
        appeal had not raised this issue  and  also  accepted  that  I  had
        already found that there was no error of law  in  relation  to  the
        credibility findings which were before me but invited me to re-open
        the error of law decision and, if I  accepted  her  submission,  to
        remit the appeal for re-making as it would be necessary  for  fresh
        findings of fact to be made.

     4. Mr Jarvis, as I, observed that  Judge  Paul's  adverse  credibility
        findings were not based on, or not solely on, the evidence  of  the
        Appellant.  Mr Jarvis indicated that he was content to  proceed  on
        the basis that the Appellant had been detained as part  of  general
        round-ups of Kurds in his home area  as  that  was  not  apparently
        disputed by Judge Paul and  was  therefore  part  of  the  accepted
        background to the case when assessing risk on return.  The disputed
        part of the claim was based on  the  individual  targeting  of  the
        Appellant  and  his  family.   That  dispute   arose   because   of
        discrepancies  between  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  his
        brother, with particular focus on the  brother's  evidence  (as  is
        apparent from the credibility findings which I set out below).   Mr
        Jarvis accepted that Judge Paul had not made an express finding  in
        relation to the authorities' interest in the Appellant's father  at
        [21] of his decision.  There was a discrepancy in the  evidence  as
        to whether and when the Appellant's father was detained and whether
        the authorities had shown any interest in the  Appellant  since  he
        left Turkey.  The Appellant's brother said he continued to speak to
        their  father,  but  his  father  did  not  tell  him  whether  the
        authorities had visited the family since the  Appellant  left.   Mr
        Jarvis pointed out that there was no new evidence to undermine  the
        credibility findings.

     5. Having considered the letter from Talk on which Ms  Panagiotopoulou
        relied and Judge Paul's earlier decision, I refused her application
        to amend grounds. I set out my reasons as follows.

     6. Judge Paul was aware that the Appellant had been receiving  medical
        treatment in the past; he refers at [10] of  the  Decision  to  the
        Appellant's evidence that "he had received treatment for about  5-6
        months. He had also seen somebody in the UK, but was not given  any
        report or anything that  came  close  to  that."   The  Appellant's
        reliance on the letter from  Talk  now  has  to  be  read  in  that
        context.

     7. The letter itself is dated 5 October 2016 and  therefore  pre-dates
        the hearing by over two years.  It reads as follows:


           "I have now completed a short course of CBT with [MC].  Sessions
           focussed on:
           1. Understanding anxiety and low mood, including  teaching  [MC]
              some grounding techniques to use when he is experiencing high
              levels of anxiety/flashbacks
           2. Understanding how negative thoughts and inactivity can  cause
              moods to worsen
           3. Using "worry time" at a specified time  during  the  day,  to
              allow himself to think and plan  in  connection  with  things
              that are bothering him, and then distract himself so that the
              worries do not become overwhelming.
           [MC]'s mood has shown improvement over time  and  in  our  final
           session I invited his aunt and uncle to join us as  I  felt  the
           next step was for [MC] to gain some independence  and  knowledge
           of his local community and spend less time at home and I  wanted
           to enlist their help in this, as from [MC]'s descriptions,  they
           appeared very protective.  They agreed to  help  and  seemed  to
           take on board the importance of this for [MC]'s wellbeing.

           [There is then a table showing that the Appellant's PHQ9  scores
           were 20 on 11 January 2016 but had reduced to 5 by  8  September
           2016 and that in the same period his  GAD7  scores  had  reduced
           from 17 to 9]


           I have stressed to [MC] the importance of continuing to take his
           medication on a regular basis, as I feel this has had large part
           in his recovery so far, so I hope he will continue  to  keep  in
           contact with you in this regard.
           I have explained to [MC] that the next step is for him to  start
           building a life for himself, as  far  as  possible,  within  the
           restrictions of his refugee status and I enclose a copy  of  the
           letter I sent to him, listing community opportunities  that  may
           be helpful to him.
           I am now discharging him but he may be re-referred in future, as
           appropriate."

     8. In fairness to the Appellant I should also record  that  there  are
        two further "medical letters" dating back to 2016 on  file.  I  was
        not taken to those at the hearing, but I have considered them since
        to ensure that they do not affect my view  as  to  the  Appellant's
        vulnerability at the time of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.  If those letters had altered the view which I  expressed
        at the hearing, I would have called for  written  submissions  from
        the parties before determining the appeal. but  they  did  not  for
        reasons I explain below.

     9. The first of those letters is dated 21 July 2016, also  written  by
        Jane Floyd to the Appellant's GP.  She says as follows:


           "I have met with [MC] for sessions since  our  assessment  on  1
           June 2016.
           His PHQ and GAD Scores are currently 10 and 15.  There has  been
           some  improvement  in  his  mood,  largely,  I  think,  due   to
           antidepressant medication, so thank you for arranging this.
           He is still complaining about headaches and painful eyes.  If  I
           understand correctly, he has seen an optician who  has  examined
           his eyes and suggested he may have raised cholesterol.  I do not
           know if this is likely to cause eye pain, and weeping  eyes  but
           have suggested that he discuss this with you.  His  brother  [I]
           is planning to contact the surgery to arrange an appointment.
           There are a number of situations,  including  GP  consultations,
           that make him anxious to the point of him wanting to avoid them.
            He says they remind him of the traumatic police  interrogations
           he suffered in Turkey as a result of his Kurdish background.  It
           may be that there are some  matching  triggers  and  he  suffers
           flashbacks.
           When I asked what would help him, he reported that he finds some
           questions overwhelming particular those relating to  his  family
           and living circumstances and he says he would find it easier  if
           the questions obviously related to his physical ailments.
           I thought I would make  you  aware  of  this  so  that  you  can
           understand some of his anxious thoughts and  hopefully  aid  the
           effectiveness of your consultations with him."

    10. The second of those letters is a  recommendation  by  Ms  Floyd  in
        relation  to  organisations  which  the  Appellant  could  approach
        including the  Helen  Bamber  Organisation  but  also  the  Refugee
        Council and a learning centre to assist Turkish pupils of all  ages
        with mathematics and English.  That letter  is  dated  6  September
        2016 and it is apparent from the tone of the letter that this was a
        letter discharging the  Appellant  from  Ms  Floyd's  care  (as  is
        confirmed by the letter dated 5 October 2016).

    11. It is worthy of note that, although those letters were sent to  the
        Tribunal long after the dates  thereof  (on  24  April  2018),  the
        Appellant's solicitors did not send  the  letter  dated  5  October
        2016.  It appears that this latter letter was not thought  relevant
        and was produced, probably during the hearing before Judge Paul, as
        there is no covering letter.  I have already set out the content of
        that letter.  It does not take matters  very  far  particularly  in
        terms of the Appellant's situation at the time of  the  hearing  in
        December 2018.  Neither that nor the other two  letters  provide  a
        diagnosis of any current mental health condition nor indicate  that
        the Appellant was subject to ongoing treatment  for  mental  health
        concerns (certainly after 2016).

    12. The Appellant did not claim to suffer from any such problems at the
        time of his screening and asylum interviews  in  2014  although  it
        does appear that he was referred  to  Helen  Bamber  Foundation  in
        November 2014; they gave him an appointment  in  May  2016  so  any
        concerns about his mental health were clearly not all that  urgent.
        The Appellant mentions in his statement dated 19 April 2018 that he
        attended Helen Bamber Foundation but that, because  he  was  living
        outside London, he was referred to TALK plus.  He said he had  been
        going there for psychiatric treatment for two years and  was  given
        medication to deal with anxiety and depression  but  does  not  say
        when he started  that  treatment.   He  says  that  TALK  plus  had
        "finalised a report" and he had asked for a copy which may be  what
        prompted the production of the letters to which  I  have  referred.
        There is no report other than as contained  in  the  letters.   The
        Appellant was legally represented at the hearing before Judge Paul.
         His representative made no submissions or request that  he  should
        be treated as vulnerable.

    13. Moreover, as I have already observed,  the  Judge's  findings  turn
        largely on discrepancies between the Appellant's evidence and  that
        of his brother, with  particular  focus  on  the  evidence  of  the
        latter.  I set those credibility findings  out  below  but,  as  Mr
        Jarvis pointed out, the salient parts of the evidence on which  the
        adverse credibility findings turn is recorded at [12]  to  [14]  of
        the Decision as follows:


           "12.  He [the Appellant] was then  asked  about  the  continuing
           harassment of his father.  He was asked whether his  father  had
           been arrested, and then said he had been.  He was then asked why
           he had not mentioned this before.  The appellant said  that  his
           father had been arrested on several occasions,  but  nobody  had
           asked  him.  His  father  was  constantly  under  pressure,  and
           regularly visited - as often as every 2-3  months.   His  mother
           had a heart attack and died because of the pressure.  There were
           no documents available.
           13.   He was then asked about his screening  interview  and  the
           fact that he had made no reference to military service.  He then
           said that he was tortured at  school  and  during  his  military
           service.  The appellant was asked about his answer  at  B43,  at
           the conclusion of his asylum interview record,  and  to  provide
           any further matters.  He explained that he had come  to  the  UK
           because of the things he had experienced.  He said that  he  was
           always oppressed in school, military service and daily life.
           14.   The appellant's brother then gave evidence  and  confirmed
           that the appellant had  left  in  October  2014.   He  was  then
           questioned as to whether his father had experienced any problems
           since his arrest, and said he had no knowledge of  it.   He  was
           then asked about the alleged police visits, and said he  had  no
           knowledge.   This  witness  said  that  the  father  had   never
           mentioned any arrest or anything like that.  He was then  probed
           as to what  in  fact  had  happened  to  the  family  after  his
           departure from Turkey, and said that he did not know."

    14. Even if I had accepted that the further medical evidence  on  which
        the Appellant relied showed him to be vulnerable  at  the  date  of
        hearing or when his asylum interviews took place  which,  based  on
        the  evidence,  I  do  not,  the  amended  ground   on   which   Ms
        Panagiotopoulou seeks to rely could not make  any  difference.   If
        the Appellant were considered to be a vulnerable witness, he either
        would not give any evidence at all or that which he gave  would  be
        given little weight when it comes to credibility.   However,  there
        are no such concerns in relation to the Appellant's  brother.   His
        evidence is largely the reason why the Judge reached the finding he
        did about the Appellant's claim that his  family  continued  to  be
        targeted by the authorities on account of interest in  either  [IC]
        or the Appellant. [IC] said that he had not been told by his father
        of any visits by the authorities beyond the one which he  said  had
        followed immediately  from  his  own  departure  from  Turkey.   He
        maintains regular contact with his father. As Mr Jarvis has pointed
        out, the Judge did not disbelieve that the Appellant may have  been
        detained and ill-treated  by  the  authorities  in  the  course  of
        general round-ups. What he did not accept was  that  the  Appellant
        was individually targeted because of his own activities or those of
        his brother.

    15. For those reasons, I refused the application to amend  grounds  and
        the hearing proceeded as originally envisaged.

   PREVIOUS CREDIBILITY FINDINGS

    16. I set out first the credibility findings of  Judge  Paul  as  those
        form the backdrop to the assessment of the guidance in  IK.   Those
        are at [19] to [25] of Judge Paul's decision as follows:


           "19.  The burden is on  the  appellant  to  the  relatively  low
           standard, to show that there is a reasonable likelihood that  he
           will be persecuted if he is returned to  Turkey.   The  starting
           point has to be an assessment of  the  appellant's  credibility.
           In this case, I was helped by the second  respondent's  decision
           letter, issued on 17 May 2018, which  analysed  the  differences
           between the two accounts.  At first blush, if both the appellant
           and his brother were claiming that  they  were  the  victims  of
           persecution, then having regard to the fact that they came  from
           the same family and were living in the same area, one  would  be
           expect  there  to  be  an  overlap  between   their   respective
           experiences.
           20.   Alternatively,  if  the  brother  had  been  detained  and
           tortured in February 2013, that might have caused the  appellant
           to think carefully about whether it was safe for him  to  remain
           in Turkey either at  that  stage,  or  alternatively  after  his
           brother was detained again in September 2013.  As  was  observed
           in the decision letter, it is  clear  that  they  have  provided
           entirely  different  accounts.   The  second   arrest   of   the
           appellant's brother was on 18 September 2013,  and  he  made  no
           mention  of  his  brother  (the  appellant)   experiencing   any
           problems.  On this occasion, the  brother  was  detained  for  3
           days.  However, the appellant then claimed that a second  arrest
           occurred in March 2014 after distributing leaflets, which was 2-
           3 months later.  He was detained for a relatively  short  period
           of time, although he claims he was tortured.  By this time,  his
           brother had left Turkey.
           21.   Against that family background, of consistent torture  and
           harassment,  the  obvious  question  to  be  asked  is  why  the
           appellant did not, at that stage, feel  from  Turkey.  The  next
           point is that the brother claimed that  his  parents'  home  was
           raided on 25 September 2013, but no reference was made  to  this
           by the appellant/s in the course of his application.  Given  the
           trauma that this involved because of the subsequent departure of
           his brother, it is incredible that it did not form part  of  the
           appellant's case.
           22.    The  appellant's  brother's  evidence  in   relation   to
           continuing  interest  in  the  family,  was  both  evasive   and
           therefore fundamentally unreliable.  It is a striking feature of
           this case that the appellant claims that an arrest  warrant  has
           been issued for him, whereas no such warrant apparently was ever
           issued in relation to his brother when both left the country  as
           a result of continuing harassment from the authorities.
           23.   The appellant knew when he was coming to this country that
           he was going to claim asylum.  He knew from  his  brother  (with
           whom he had obviously been in contact) the manner in which  that
           would be done.  Yet, at the point at which he had his  screening
           interview, he made no reference  to  political  persecution  and
           simply referred to a land dispute and general ill-treatment   In
           my view, the appellant would have been well aware  of  what  was
           involved in making a claim for asylum, and for him to  say  that
           he was worried that he would  be  returned  if  he  referred  to
           political   considerations   at   that   stage,   is    entirely
           disingenuous.
           24.   It is important to have a holistic view of the appellant's
           case having regard to the unsubstantiated account in relation to
           his detention and torture.  This is a family that claims  to  be
           part of a society which is the subject of regular harassment and
           ill-treatment.   The  family   involvement   in   politics   was
           undoubtedly   developed   as   a   result   of   round-the-table
           discussions. The lack of overlap between the appellant's and his
           brother's activity simply is not credible.
           25.   Furthermore,  having  regard  to  the  very  serious  ill-
           treatment that the brother claimed to have received by September
           2013, it is hard to understand why the appellant  felt  that  he
           should remain in Turkey.  In  my  view,  the  incident  that  he
           relies on of September 2014 - by which time  he  was  forced  to
           become an informer - is in my view  not  credible.   The  simple
           reason for that is that the authorities' interest in this family
           went as far back as February 2012 and therefore the  family  (if
           their claim was genuine)  was  the  subject  of  obvious  police
           interest from the authorities.  Why would the  authorities  wait
           for over 2.5 years before requiring the appellant to  become  an
           informer?  In my view, that simply is not credible, and has been
           relied upon as an explanation for why it was that that  was  the
           breaking point.  In  my  view,  the  appellant's  account  lacks
           substance."

   GUIDANCE IN IK

    17. The error of law which I found by my Decision concerns the  Judge's
        failure to have regard to the guidance in IK.  That is not set  out
        in a headnote as would be the position now.   Instead  one  has  to
        draw on the general conclusions at [133] of the  decision  read  in
        the context of the remainder of the decision.  I set out below  the
        risk factors taken from IK as relied upon by the Appellant with the
        references to the part of the decision in IK from which  those  are
        taken:

           a) Family connections with a separatist organisation  ([14(f)]):
              The Appellant's brother [IC]  was  suspected  of  involvement
              with the PKK due to his association and support for  the  DTP
              and HDP (the successor parties to  HADEP/DEHAP  suspected  of
              organic links to the PKK).  It was accepted that he had  been
              detained and ill-treated by the authorities as a result. [IC]
              has been accorded refugee status in the UK as a result of his
              claim based on that suspected involvement.

           b) The Appellant's Kurdish ethnicity ([14(i)]

           c) The Appellant's lack of a Turkish passport ([14(k)])

           d) The Appellant is accepted to have been  detained  albeit  not
              targeted by the authorities in the past; the  Appellant  says
              that such detention would be recorded by the authorities  and
              would come to light during enquiries on return.

           e) The Appellant originates from an area in  the  south-east  of
              Turkey known for its support of the Kurdish cause.

    18. I set out below the relevant passages of  IK  as  identified  above
        alongside those other risk factors which may also be relevant to my
        consideration of the issues. I  have  left  out  of  account  those
        factors which are not relied upon or not relevant to  those  relied
        upon.  I also set out the general conclusions so far as potentially
        relevant. I deal with the other specific passages  relied  upon  by
        the parties in the section dealing  with  their  submissions  which
        follows.


           "[14] On this basis, the Tribunal in A (Turkey) identified the
           potential risk factors to be taken into account. It concluded as
           follows.
                 "46. The following are the factors which inexhaustively we
                 consider to be material in giving rise to potential
                 suspicion in the minds of the authorities concerning a
                 particular claimant.
                 a) The level if any of the appellant's known or suspected
                 involvement with a separatist organisation. Together with
                 this must be assessed the basis upon which it is contended
                 that the authorities knew of or might suspect such
                 involvement.
                 b) Whether the appellant has ever been arrested or detained
                 and if so in what circumstances. In this context it may be
                 relevant to note how long ago such arrests or detentions
                 took place, if it is the case that there appears to be no
                 causal connection between them and the claimant's departure
                 from Turkey, but otherwise it may be a factor of no
                 particular significance.
                 c) Whether the circumstances of the appellant's past
                 arrest(s) and detention(s) (if any) indicate that the
                 authorities did in fact view him or her as a suspected
                 separatist.
                 d) Whether the appellant was charged or placed on reporting
                 conditions or now faces charges.
                 e) The degree of ill treatment to which the appellant was
                 subjected in the past.
                 f) Whether the appellant has family connections with a
                 separatist organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.
                 g) How long a period elapsed between the appellant's last
                 arrest and detention and his or her departure from Turkey.
                 In this regard it may of course be relevant to consider the
                 evidence if any concerning what the appellant was in fact
                 doing between the time of the last arrest and detention and
                 departure from Turkey. It is a factor that is only likely
                 to be of any particular relevance if there is a reasonably
                 lengthy period between the two events without any ongoing
                 problems being experienced on the part of the appellant
                 from the authorities.
                 h) Whether in the period after the appellant's last arrest
                 there is any evidence that he or she was kept under
                 surveillance or monitored by the authorities.
                 i) Kurdish ethnicity.
                 j) ....
                 k) Lack of a current up-to-date Turkish passport.
                 l) Whether there is any evidence that the authorities have
                 been pursuing or otherwise expressing an interest in the
                 appellant since he or she left Turkey.
                 m) Whether the appellant became an informer or was asked to
                 become one.
                 n) .....
                 o) .....
                 47. We cannot emphasise too strongly the importance of
                 avoiding treating these factors as some kind of checklist.
                 Assessment of the claim must be in the round bearing in
                 mind the matters set out above as a consequence of a
                 careful scrutiny and assessment of the evidence. The
                 central issue as always is the question of the real risk on
                 return of ill treatment amounting to persecution or breach
                 of a person's Article 3 rights. The existing political and
                 human rights context overall is also a matter of
                 significance as will be seen from our assessment of the
                 particular appeals in our determinations of those below.
                 The particular circumstances that prevail today may not be
                 in existence in 6 months time for all we know."


           "Summary of Generic Conclusions
          133. The following is a summary of our main conclusions in this
               determination.
                 1. The evidence of Mr Aydin (paragraph 32) accurately
               describes the defined and limited ambit of the computerised
               GBT system. It comprises only outstanding arrest warrants,
               previous arrests, restrictions on travel abroad, possible
               draft evasion, refusal to perform military service and tax
               arrears. "Arrests" as comprised in the GBTS require some
               court intervention, and must be distinguished from
               "detentions" by the security forces followed by release
               without charge. The GBTS is fairly widely accessible and is
               in particular available to the border police at booths in
               Istanbul airport, and elsewhere in Turkey to the security
               forces.
               2. ...
               3. ...
               4. ...
               5. If a person is held for questioning either in the airport
               police station after arrival or subsequently elsewhere in
               Turkey and the situation justifies it, then some additional
               inquiry could be made of the authorities in his local area
               about him, where more extensive records may be kept either
               manually or on computer. Also, if the circumstances so
               justify, an enquiry could be made of the anti terror police
               or MIT to see if an individual is of material interest to
               them.
               6. If there is a material entry in the GBTS or in the border
               control information, or if a returnee is travelling on a one-
               way emergency travel document, then there is a reasonable
               likelihood that he will be identifiable as a failed asylum
               seeker and could be sent to the airport police station for
               further investigation.
               7. It will be for an Adjudicator in each case to assess what
               questions are likely to be asked during such investigation
               and how a returnee would respond without being required to
               lie. The ambit of the likely questioning depends upon the
               circumstances of each case.
               8. The escalation of the violence following the ending of
               the PKK ceasefire reinforces our view that the risk to a
               Kurdish returnee of ill treatment by the authorities may be
               greater if his home area is in an area of conflict in Turkey
               than it would be elsewhere, for the reasons described in
               paragraphs 90 and 116.
               9. The Turkish Government is taking action in legislative
               and structural terms to address the human rights problems
               that present a serious obstacle to its membership of the EU.
               It has made its zero tolerance policy towards torture clear.
               However the use of torture is long and deep-seated in the
               security forces and it will take time and continued and
               determined effort to bring it under control in practice. It
               is premature to conclude that the long established view of
               the Tribunal concerning the potential risk of torture in
               detention as per A (Turkey) requires material revision on
               the present evidence. However the situation will require
               review as further evidence becomes available. For the time
               being as in the past, each case must be assessed on its own
               merits from the individual's own history and the relevant
               risk factors as described in paragraph 46 of A (Turkey).
               10. Many of the individual risk factors described in A
               (Turkey) comprise in themselves a broad spectrum of variable
               potential risk that requires careful evaluation on the
               specific facts of each appeal as a whole. The factors
               described in A (Turkey) were not intended as a simplistic
               checklist and should not be used as such.
               11. A young, fit, unmarried person, leaving his home area
               and seeking unofficial employment in a big city, may not
               feel the need to register with the local Mukhtar, at least
               at the outset. Many do not. However, given the range of
               basic activities for which a certificate of residence is
               needed, and which depend upon such registration, we conclude
               that it would in most normal circumstances be unduly harsh
               to expect a person to live without appropriate registration
               for any material time, as a requirement for avoiding
               persecution. This does not necessarily preclude the
               viability of internal relocation for the reasons described
               in paragraph 133.13 below.
               12. The proper course in assessing the risk for a returnee
               is normally to decide first whether he has a well founded
               fear of persecution in his home area based upon a case
               sensitive assessment of the facts in the context of an
               analysis of the risk factors described in A (Turkey). If he
               does not then he is unlikely to be at any real risk anywhere
               in Turkey.
               13. The risk to a specific individual in most circumstances
               will be at its highest in his home area for a variety of
               reasons, and particularly if it is located in the areas of
               conflict in the south and east of Turkey. Conversely the
               differential nature of the risk outside that area may be
               sufficient to mean that the individual would not be at real
               risk of persecution by the state or its agencies elsewhere
               in Turkey, even if they were made aware of the thrust of the
               information maintained in his home area by telephone or fax
               enquiry from the airport police station or elsewhere, or by
               a transfer of at least some of the information to a new home
               area on registration with the local Mukhtar there. Internal
               relocation may well therefore be viable, notwithstanding the
               need for registration in the new area. The issue is whether
               any individual's material history would be reasonably likely
               to lead to persecution outside his home area."

   SUBMISSIONS AND OTHER BACKGROUND EVIDENCE

    19. Ms Panagiotopoulou relied on her skeleton argument and the extracts
        from IK which  I  have  set  out  above.   She  relies  also  on  a
        deterioration in the situation for Kurds in Turkey as  set  out  in
        the report of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada  entitled
        "Turkey: The situation and treatment of Kurds and Alevis after  the
        coup attempt in July 2016, including in the large cities (July 2016-
        January  2017)"  ("the  IRB  Report").   She  referred  me  to  the
        following extracts in particular:


           "According to the  Associate  Professor  at  the  University  of
           Binghampton, the decrees were  used  against  FETO  and  Kurdish
           political groups,  both  identified  as  a  threat  to  national
           security (16 Jan. 2017).  Similarly, in  its  2016  report,  the
           European Commission states "[t]he crackdown has continued  since
           [the attempted coup] and has been broadened to  pro-Kurdish  and
           other  opposition  voices"  (9  November  2016)  ...a   research
           associate at the  University  of  Coventry  ...whose  fields  of
           research include the Kurdish  issue,  stated  that  the  Kurdish
           population seems to suffer disproportionally  from  the  effects
           caused by the laws  and  decrees  associated  to  the  state  of
           emergency  ...The  Associate  Professor  at  the  University  of
           Birmingham stated the following  regarding  the  change  in  the
           treatment of Kurds since the coup attempt in 2016:
                 [T]he situation has worsened in Turkey  for  Kurds.   Under
                 the [state of emergency], the executive orders make it easy
                 to arrest Kurds and put them into jail without due process.
                  The prosecutors can keep arrested people  up  to  a  month
                 without a  lawyer.   Furthermore,  the  current  permissive
                 political environment increased intolerance  against  Kurds
                 in the country...The executive orders targeted Kurds;..."

        Her skeleton argument also contains references to other  background
        evidence which points to a deterioration in  the  conflict  between
        the Turkish authorities and the PKK following the breakdown of  the
        ceasefire  and  particularly  following  the  coup.  The  increased
        targeting of Kurds following the coup is also borne out by the Home
        Office's own Country Policy and Information Note entitled  "Turkey:
        Kurds" dated September 2018 (see in particular [2.4.4], [4.3.2] and
        [4.3.3], and [4.4.3] to [4.4.4]).

    20. Ms Panagiotopoulou also referred me to [126] of IK as follows:
           "126  In this appeal, there is a four year gap so far as the
           authorities are concerned in the Respondent's history, which
           they would logically seek to fill. He will be able to establish
           that he came to the UK in 2001 but the last official record of
           his residence will be in his village in Karamanmaris in 1997. We
           do not know how the military became aware of his presence in
           Istanbul but they knew his name when they came for him. By then
           he had been a draft evader for several years and one may
           reasonably presume that the military came for him approximately
           when they had knowledge of where he was. An obvious concern,
           when a young man disappears from a village in Karamanmaris in
           1997, without trace and for some years, is whether he had joined
           the PKK in that period. The airport police in 2004 would in our
           view ask questions of the Respondent to fill the time gap in his
           record following his leaving his village. In so doing we think
           it likely that they would make enquiries of the authorities in
           the last area where he was registered. At that point his
           recorded history there would be revealed. It is likely that this
           would include at least the October 1997 detention at the police
           station, some information about his family in the village, which
           would embrace the 2 cousins convicted with life sentences for
           their activities in the PKK, and the "problems" caused by the
           family's resistance to the order to evacuate the village,
           including his uncle's experiences. We doubt that the unofficial,
           intimidatory and plainly illegal detention in the mountains by
           the military of the young males of the village in December 1997
           would have been recorded, though we cannot say that the
           Adjudicator was necessarily in error in concluding that it
           would."

        Ms Panagiotopoulou submitted that in circumstances where there is a
        heightened interest in pro-Kurdish groups, the interest in "filling
        the time gap" would also be heightened.

    21. Ms Panagiotopoulou did not seek to suggest that  Kurdish  ethnicity
        alone would suffice to show a real risk on this basis  but  pointed
        to the cumulative factors in this case  as  being  the  Appellant's
        ethnicity, his area of origin, the profile of his brother  and  his
        brother's detention in 2012/13 because of his involvement with  the
        DTP/HDP at that time and  suspicion  of  PKK  involvement  and  the
        Appellant's own previous detentions.  She said that the Appellant's
        brother's detentions in particular would be recorded and would come
        to the authorities' interest during enquiries.

    22. The way the Appellant's case is put as to risk is that, on  return,
        he would be stopped at the airport as he is undocumented.  He would
        be asked why and would have  to  volunteer  information  about  his
        asylum claim.  The fact that this was not believed is not  relevant
        to the Turkish authorities.  It would be perceived  as  genuine  by
        the Turkish authorities because the Appellant is a Kurd and because
        of his brother's position.  He would then be  investigated  further
        and is likely to be detained for a long period and  transferred  to
        the terrorist police which gives risk  to  a  risk  of  persecution
        and/or treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

    23. Mr Jarvis accepted that there was what he  described  as  a  "loose
        end" in terms of a negative  credibility  finding  in  relation  to
        ongoing interest  in  the  Appellant's  family.   He  asked  me  to
        determine that against the Appellant.  If there were such interest,
        the  Appellant's  brother  would  surely  know  of  it  as  he  has
        maintained regular contact with  the  family.   The  Appellant  was
        disbelieved in relation to individual targeting  of  him  and  that
        rejection is maintained.

    24. Mr Jarvis accepted that the guidance in IK continues to  apply.  He
        accepted that the Appellant would be asked questions about  why  he
        was in possession of a travel document.  He could not  be  expected
        to lie.  If he told the truth that would be  that  he  had  claimed
        asylum on the basis that there was adverse interest in him  by  the
        authorities which claim had been rejected but that it was  accepted
        that he had been detained as part of general round-ups but released
        without charge.  Mr Jarvis relied in particular on the  possibility
        of internal relocation as set out at [116] to [119] of IK:


           "Is there an internal relocation option for a person who is at
           real risk of persecution by the authorities in his or her home
           area?
           116.  We have already touched upon this issue in some of our
               previous observations. We have indicated that the proper
               course in assessing risk on return is normally to decide
               first whether an individual has a well founded fear of
               persecution in his home area based upon a case sensitive
               assessment of the facts in the context of an analysis of the
               risk factors described in A (Turkey). It is however implicit
               in our conclusions so far that the risk to a specific
               individual in most circumstances will be at its highest in
               his home area for a variety of reasons, and particularly if
               it is located in the areas of conflict in the south and east
               of Turkey. Conversely the differential nature of the risk
               outside that area may be sufficient to mean that the
               individual would not be at real risk of persecution by the
               state or its agencies elsewhere in Turkey, even if they were
               made aware of the thrust of the information maintained in
               his home area by telephone or fax enquiry from the airport
               police station or elsewhere, or by a transfer of at least
               some of the information to a new home area on registration
               with the local Mukhtar there.
           117.  Some information about an individual is not reasonably
               likely to be apparent to anyone other than a few individuals
               in his home area. For example, a specific gendarme might
               have it in for an individual whom he considers to be a local
               "ne'er-do-well" but against whom there is no specific
               information. Also it is implausible, in the current climate
               of zero tolerance for torture that an official would wish to
               record or transfer information that could potentially lead
               to his prosecution for a criminal offence.
           118.  In general terms however we consider that one should
               proceed, when assessing the viability of internal
               relocation, on the basis that an individual's material
               history will in broad terms become known to the authorities
               at the airport and in his new area when he settles, either
               through registration with the local Mukhtar or if he comes
               to the attention for any reason of the police there. The
               issue is whether that record would be reasonably likely to
               lead to persecution outside his home area.
          119. We have already identified some examples of the
               circumstances in which a person may have experienced serious
               ill-treatment in the past in areas of Turkey where the PKK
               was or now is active, but would not necessarily be at
               similar risk of such treatment elsewhere in Turkey where it
               is not, and where a different view of his history could be
               taken. They include examples of general intimidation by the
               authorities of the Kurdish population to discourage support
               for the PKK, or to clear whole villages. The evidence is
               that anything between some hundreds of thousands to some
               millions (depending on whose figures one uses) may have been
               displaced within Turkey as a consequence of this. However
               outside the areas of PKK activity there will not be the same
               perceived need to undertake such intimidation or clearances
               and the authorities within the receiving areas will be aware
               of the tactics that led to this mass migration, and will be
               able to assess an individual's record in the light of it.
               Similarly, a person who was included on Mr Dil's list of
               local "ne'er-do-wells", against whom there was no evidence
               of PKK involvement, but who ran the risk of being detained
               for questioning whenever an PKK incident occurred in his
               vicinity, would not be at a similar risk in another area
               where the PKK was not active and where such incidents were
               much less likely to occur. These are just some examples of
               why differential risk can arise in different areas of
               Turkey."

    25. In relation to the differential risk, Ms Panagiotopoulou  submitted
        that [119] of IK has to be read  alongside  [120]  which  reads  as
        follows:


           "In saying this, we have full regard, as invited by Mr Grieves,
           to the current guidance of UNHCR, which, so far as we have been
           informed, does not appear to have changed since the publication
           of its last official general report in May 2001. Nothing we have
           said is in our view in any material contradiction to this
           guidance. It states
                 "Kurds and members of Christian minorities from the
                 southeast Turkey do have an internal flight alternative
                 outside the region....... unless the case in question is of
                 a prominent nature or is perceived by the authorities to
                 have real or alleged linked with the PKK or other main
                 Kurdish parties. UNHCR considers that the group most likely
                 to be exposed to harassment/prosecution/persecution are
                 Kurds suspected of being connected with or sympathisers of
                 the PKK....
                 In the context of internal flight "it is essential to find
                 out if Turkish asylum seekers if returned would be
                 suspected of connection to or sympathy with the PKK. In
                 this case they should not be considered as having been able
                 to avail themselves of an internal flight alternative"...
                 in the UNHCR's perspective, if persecution emanates from
                 state authorities then there is no internal flight
                 alternative or relocation. The situation may look different
                 with regard to village guards or people persecuted by non-
                 state agents."

        She submitted that, read in context, the differential  risk  arises
        only if a person has no risk factors other than previous detentions
        during round-ups.

    26. The Respondent accepts that IK is not out of date. Mr  Jarvis  also
        accepted that the IRB Report indicates a heightened interest in pro-
        Kurdish groups. However, what is there said still relies  on  there
        being a differential interest in the individual.  He accepts that a
        transfer to the terrorist police would be sufficient for  there  to
        be a real risk, but the question remains whether that is likely  to
        occur.  That would depend on PKK association or being at  the  high
        end  of  political  involvement.   The  Appellant  has   not   been
        individually targeted in the  past  and  although  there  would  be
        records of his previous detentions that would not be  enough,  even
        coupled with the Appellant's ethnicity, to  give  rise  to  a  real
        risk.

    27. Mr Jarvis drew my attention to the Home Office Country  Policy  and
        Information Note entitled "Turkey: Kurdish political parties" dated
        August 2018 ("the August 2018 CPIN").   At  [2.4.1]  the  following
        comment is made about HDP involvement:

           "The HDP and the PKK are separate organisations  with  different
           goals.  The HDP denies direct links with the PKK.  However, some
           members of the HDP have been accused by the  Turkish  government
           of links with  the  PKK.   There  are  reports  that  government
           treatment  of  HDP  supporters  tends  to  vary   according   to
           developments in the conflict with the PKK"

    28. The Respondent's general policy position concerning risk  based  on
        support of the HDP is set out at [2.4.14] as follows:

           "In general, the risk faced by a member or supporter of the  HDP
           will depend  on  the  person's  profile  and  activities.   When
           ordinary members of the HDP have come to the  adverse  attention
           of the authorities, this has generally been whilst participating
           in demonstrations and rallies;  an  ordinary  member  would  not
           generally attract the adverse attention of  the  authorities  on
           account of their political beliefs.  It will be up to  a  person
           to demonstrate that their  appearance  and  participation  at  a
           demonstration or rally will have brought  them  to  the  adverse
           attention of the authorities such  that  they  would  experience
           serious harm or persecution on return."

    29. Mr Jarvis pointed out that IK is not authority for the  proposition
        that family association alone is sufficient to make out a claim for
        protection.  He referred in particular to [129] of  IK  relying  on
        the factors in IK's own case which was stronger.  Paragraphs  [130]
        and [131] are also pertinent to the submission he makes:


           "129. We consider this to be a marginal case and it may be that
           we would have adopted a different conclusion ourselves. We
           however accept that the Adjudicator did, in the course of her
           determination, reach findings of fact that reveal a number of
           potential risk factors, and she reached her overall conclusion
           to allow the appeal in the context of those findings. She was
           assisted in her conclusions by hearing oral evidence both from
           the Respondent and from one of his relatives, which we have not.
           The relevant risk factors supporting the Adjudicator's
           conclusion in favour of the Respondent can be summarised as:
              1. He is an Alevi Kurd from Karamanmaris, within the area of
        conflict.
              2. He and his immediate family did provide food for the PKK.
              3. He experienced a detention, with others, in 1997, during
              which in a police station he suffered serious torture over
              several days and was questioned about involvement with the
              PKK.
              4. He was again detained, with others, in December 1997 and
              questioned about his uncle and was told to give information
              about his whereabouts.
              5. Two cousins from his village had received life sentences
              in 1995 as PKK fighters, which may have focused the
              authorities' adverse attention on the Respondent's family and
              village.
              6. Other family members in the village also experienced
              difficulties with the authorities. The village was subject to
              an order to evacuate which some villagers, including a number
              of members of the Respondent's family, resisted.
              7. His disappearance from the village without trace would
              raise questions about what he did thereafter, especially in
              the period between December 1997 and his coming to the UK in
              2001, and enhance suspicions of a PKK connection.
              8. He is a draft evader.
           130.  Having said that, we also note that the Respondent's only
           two detentions occurred within the ambit of a clearance decision
           in respect of his village. He was not personally specifically
           targeted for questioning but was taken along with all the
           males/young men in the village. The first detention was in a
           police station and he and the others were all questioned about
           PKK involvement and denied it. The second "detention" was
           unofficial in that it did not occur within a police station but
           in the mountains and was brief. It was intimidatory, especially
           within the context of the curfew being imposed on the village,
           as revealed by the press reports at the time. The Respondent was
           questioned about the whereabouts of his uncle. There is no
           evidence that the authorities had any specific information
           linking the Respondent personally to the PKK as a consequence of
           his own actions. There was no indication prior to the events of
           late 1997 that he personally suffered any material difficulties
           as a consequence of the arrest and conviction of his two
           cousins. The Respondent was then able, after leaving the
           village, to live in Istanbul for four years without difficulties
           albeit under a false name. No doubt some inquiries were made
           about him in his village when he first left, as they would have
           been made of any young man who left the village in southeast
           Turkey without registering elsewhere. However there is no
           evidence that he was actually sought by the authorities, other
           than as a draft evader. It was the military, who came for him in
           Istanbul and for conscription. It was not the police, seeking
           him for any other purpose, though by this time his identity and
           whereabouts were known to the authorities. He left Istanbul
           because he did not wish to be taken for conscription. He has had
           no political involvement in the UK. Any risk to him would be
           greater in his home area in Karamanmaris, where he and his
           family would be seen as troublemakers.
           131.  This alternative view of the evidence is why we consider
           this to be a marginal case. However we accept that the
           Adjudicator was entitled to take the view she did on the
           evidence and to conclude there would be a real risk on return of
           material ill-treatment, both in his home area and elsewhere,
           including the airport on arrival. The possibility that we might
           have taken a different view does not render her determination
           unsustainable within the terms of Subesh."

    30. Mr Jarvis submitted that the main factor on which this  case  turns
        is  the  position  of  the  Appellant's   brother.    The   Turkish
        authorities may be aware that  he  is  in  the  UK  as  a  refugee.
        However, there is an absence of targeting of the Appellant and  the
        evidence does not point to a targeting of the family  due  to  that
        association.  The Appellant had not therefore established  that  he
        would be of particular interest in Turkey outside his local area.

   THE CASE OF THE APPELLANT'S BROTHER

    31. In light of the importance which both parties  accept  arises  from
        the case of the Appellant's brother [IC], it is necessary to say  a
        little more about that case.  The Respondent was ordered  by  Judge
        Paul to provide the documentation relating to his position.

    32. As I have already noted, [IC] was  accorded  refugee  status.   His
        claim was accepted by the Respondent  and  therefore  there  is  no
        appeal decision making findings about his claim nor is  it  evident
        from the documents what of the claim was accepted in  granting  him
        asylum.  I therefore have regard to his case  as  set  out  in  his
        screening and asylum interviews.  However, following a direction by
        Judge Paul, the Respondent also  produced  a  supplementary  letter
        dated 16 May  2018  which  explains  the  differences  between  the
        Appellant's case and that of [IC] and therefore casts some light on
        why the Respondent granted him asylum.

    33. First, [IC]  says  that  he  was  mistreated  during  his  military
        service.  He claims to have been shot  by  his  commanding  officer
        because he was a Kurd. Although the Respondent says in the  16  May
        letter that the Appellant  does  not  claim  to  have  carried  out
        military service, this assertion is undermined  by  his  subsequent
        witness statement dated 25 September 2018.  He claims to have  been
        insulted, asked "to do all the dirty chores" and was beaten for  no
        reason but he does not claim that he was ill-treated  to  the  same
        extent as his brother.  In any event, [IC] said himself during  his
        asylum interview that he was not relying on this as  the  basis  of
        his fear of  return  as  it  was  small  in  comparison  with  what
        followed.

    34. Second, [IC] says that he was harassed by the  authorities  because
        of his political activities and views.  He did not admit  to  being
        involved with the PKK - he said he was against violence - but  says
        that the authorities nonetheless suspected him of PKK support.  His
        own activities were as a supporter of the parties with which he was
        involved, distributing leaflets and sticking up posters.  The  core
        of [IC]'s claim which was, according to the  letter  dated  16  May
        2018, apparently accepted, is that he was arrested and detained  on
        two occasions on this account during which time he was interrogated
        and tortured.  The first occasion was following a demonstration  on
        17 February 2012 to 18 February  2012.  The  second  time,  he  was
        detained  on  arrest  at  his  parents'  home   (in   other   words
        individually targeted) on 18 September  2013  and  released  on  20
        September 2013.  Following his release, he left the family home and
        went to stay with friends before coming to the UK.  He also claimed
        that, immediately following his departure from his  parents'  home,
        his father and brother were detained on 25 September  2013,  but  I
        have already observed that this was not accepted by Judge  Paul  as
        the Appellant had not mentioned this and [IC] was not present.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

    35. As indicated at [47] of IK, the risk factors in this case cannot be
        considered  as  a  checklist;  the   factors   must   be   assessed
        holistically.  Notwithstanding the deterioration in  the  situation
        for Kurds following the coup in Turkey, neither  Kurdish  ethnicity
        nor area of origin taken alone would be sufficient to  establish  a
        real risk of ill-treatment or discrimination reaching the threshold
        of persecution on return.

    36. Neither do I accept that the detentions of  the  Appellant  in  the
        past due to round-ups would be sufficient  either  taken  alone  or
        with his ethnicity and area of origin to  establish  such  a  risk.
        The Turkish authorities may well become aware of  those  detentions
        during enquiries which would be made on questioning  the  Appellant
        about his return on an emergency travel document.  However,  having
        adopted the findings of Judge Paul for the reasons I  have  already
        given, those detentions were not based on any individual  targeting
        of the Appellant for suspicion of his own activities.

    37. I accept Mr Jarvis' submission that I should find that there is  no
        suspected association of the family generally with  the  PKK  which
        would have led to any targeting of the Appellant.  I  have  already
        referred to  the  Appellant's  claims  that  his  father  has  been
        detained and questioned on a number of occasions.  I note that  the
        Appellant's father is Turkish.  The Kurdish  ethnicity  stems  from
        the Appellant's mother's side. That does not necessarily mean  that
        the Appellant's father would fall above suspicion.  He is after all
        married to a woman of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   However,  due  to  the
        discrepancies in the evidence about  the  interest  in  the  family
        since [IC]'s departure from Turkey, I do not accept  as  true  that
        the authorities in the Appellant's local  area  have  continued  to
        target the family either in search of [IC] or due to  any  interest
        in the Appellant or his father.

    38. However, I accept that the crux of this case  is  the  interest  in
        [IC] which might be shown once the Appellant's  link  with  him  is
        discovered.  I have not accepted that the  Appellant  was  targeted
        because of that link in his home area immediately following  [IC]'s
        departure.  However, the background evidence to which I  was  taken
        shows heightened interest  in  those  associated  with  pro-Kurdish
        groups and family association was one factor which might give  rise
        to a risk of increased interest on return even before the coup (see
        reference to [14:46(f)] of IK cited at [17] above).

    39. As I have already noted,  therefore,  it  is  likely  that,  during
        questioning  of  the  Appellant  at  the  airport  on  return,  the
        authorities would become aware of the Appellant's links with  [IC].
        Whilst [IC] himself says  that  he  was  not  a  PKK  supporter  or
        involved in its activities, it is nonetheless  the  case  that  the
        authorities believed that he was.  That  coupled  with  information
        which might well come to light about the previous detentions of the
        Appellant, even though those were not based on  any  individualised
        suspicion of PKK involvement, would be sufficient to  increase  the
        interest in the Appellant.  If he were asked about his asylum claim
        in the UK, I accept  that  he  would  say  that  it  had  not  been
        believed.  However, I also accept Ms  Panagiotopoulou's  submission
        that whether the UK  accepted  the  claim  is  unlikely  to  be  of
        relevance to the Turkish authorities.  Their  interest  is  in  the
        possible involvement of the Appellant with the PKK  or  other  pro-
        Kurdish groups not whether the UK has accepted he was. I accept  of
        course that the Appellant does not say he  was  involved  with  nor
        even supported the PKK, but the issue is how the  authorities  will
        perceive him.

    40. For those reasons, which arise  principally  from  the  Appellant's
        Kurdish ethnicity, coupled with the position in relation to [IC], I
        am persuaded by Ms Panagiotopoulou's submission that the  Appellant
        is likely to be transferred to the  terrorist  police  for  further
        investigation which, as Mr Jarvis accepted, is sufficient  to  give
        rise to a real risk of ill-treatment.

    41. For those reasons, I find that the  Appellant  has  a  well-founded
        fear of persecution on return to Turkey and that he is at real risk
        of ill-treatment contrary to  Article  3  ECHR.   Accordingly,  his
        appeal succeeds.

DECISION
The Appellant's appeal is allowed on protection and human rights grounds
Signed           [pic] Dated:  25 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/03476/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 12 March 2019             |                                     |
|                                     |.........18/03/2019....              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M C
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Scott, Counsel instructed by Montague
                    Solicitors, LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However,
as the Appellant claims that he would be at risk in his home country  it  is
appropriate to make that direction.  Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

BACKGROUND

     1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge N M Paul promulgated on  11  January  2019  ("the  Decision")
        dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
        dated 23 January 201  refusing  his  protection  and  human  rights
        claims.

     2. The Appellant is a national of Turkey of  Kurdish  background.   He
        claims to be at risk due to that background and both his own  links
        and those of his family with the PKK and HDP.  He  claims  to  have
        been detained and ill-treated  on  three  occasions  for  political
        reasons, on 2 January 2013, 25 March 2014 and  30  September  2014.
        He also claims that his family has been involved in a land  dispute
        with another, Turkish family.

     3. The Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK on 20  October  2014
        clandestinely and claimed asylum on 21 October 2014.  He says  that
        he left Turkey on 2 October 2014.   The other  relevant  factor  is
        the position of his brother, [IC], who came to the UK in  2013  and
        has since been recognised as a refugee.

     4. The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim as not credible.  The
        Respondent accepted that the  Appellant  is  Turkish  and  did  not
        reject the claim that he is of Kurdish background.   However,  none
        of  the  other  aspects  of  the  claim  were   accepted.    By   a
        supplementary  letter  dated  16  May  2018,  the  Respondent  also
        reconsidered the asylum claim following the grant of status to  the
        Appellant's  brother.  I will need to deal with that letter below.

     5. The Judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  case  as  not  credible.  He
        accepted  that  the  position  of  Kurds  in  Eastern  Turkey   was
        "particularly problematic".  He accepted  that  the  Appellant  may
        have faced discrimination for that reason.  He accepted that he may
        have been detained as part of a round-up but did not accept that he
        was specifically targeted.  He did not accept  that  the  Appellant
        should be recognised as a refugee based on his brother's status.

     6. There are effectively  two  main  grounds  of  appeal.   The  first
        concerns the position of [IC]  and  the  impact  of  the  grant  of
        refugee status to him on the Appellant's case.  The second concerns
        the Judge's failure to refer to extant country guidance relevant to
        the appeal, namely IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG  [2004]
        UKIAT 00312 ("IK"). There are  some  additional  subsidiary  issues
        raised which I deal with below.

     7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Parkes in the following terms so far as relevant:


           "..[2]      The Judge found  the  Appellant's  account  was  not
           credible for the reasons given in paragraphs 19  to  26  of  the
           decision.
           [3]   The grounds argue that the Judge did not engage  with  the
           facts of the Appellant's case and that  the  family's  political
           involvement was not considered and did  not  consider  that  the
           Appellant's home must have been under surveillance.   The  Judge
           did not refer to  IK  and  did  not  analyse  the  risk  factors
           involved.
           [4]   The Judge was entitled to have regard to events  that  the
           Appellant did not raise which might have been  expected  and  to
           have attached weight to  that  in  the  credibility  assessment.
           However the fact that the Appellant's brother has  been  granted
           refugee status is relevant and the failure to consider IK is  an
           issue.  The grounds are arguable.
           [5]    The  grounds  disclose  an  arguable  error  of  law  and
           permission to appeal is granted."

     8. The appeal comes before me to determine whether there is a material
        error of law in the Decision  and  if  so  either  to  re-make  the
        decision or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

     9. I begin with one short point arising from [6]  of  the  Appellant's
        grounds which Mr Scott submitted disclosed  a  fundamental  factual
        misunderstanding on the part of the Judge.  That concerns  what  is
        said at [22] of the Decision as follows:

           "[22]  The  appellant's  brother's  evidence  in   relation   to
           continuing  interest  in  the  family,  was  both  evasive   and
           therefore fundamentally unreliable.  It is a striking feature of
           this case that the appellant claims that an arrest  warrant  has
           been issued for him, whereas no such warrant apparently was ever
           issued in relation to his brother when both left the country  as
           a result of continuing harassment from the authorities."

    10. Mr Scott drew my attention  to  questions  [88]  and  [89]  of  the
        Appellant's asylum  interview  record  on  which  this  finding  is
        predicated.  Those read as follows:


           "[Q88]      Have they experienced any problems since he left?
           [A]   When I call them 3 days ago.  They came here.  They  asked
           for you.  They have a warrant for you.
           [Q89] Have you seen a copy of warrant?
           [A]   They did not leave any papers.  Just asked for me."

    11. Paragraph [6] of the grounds says that "[i]t was impressed upon the
        Tribunal that this was a further attempt by the Turkish authorities
        to intimidate the family and that no arrest warrant  existed.   The
        Appellant had consistently stated  that  the  authorities  did  not
        leave documents at the family house."

    12. First, I note that the way in which Mr Scott put the submission  to
        me was not based on the Judge having misunderstood the  Appellant's
        case because the warrant did not exist.  Even if,  as  the  grounds
        suggest, this was  the  way  in  which  the  Appellant's  case  was
        presented to Judge Oliver, it is not based on  what  the  Appellant
        said at interview.  He said that his family was told  there  was  a
        warrant. He did not say that the family did not believe that to  be
        the case.

    13. Second, the evidence of the Appellant is that a copy of the warrant
        was not left with his family.  However, that  is  not  inconsistent
        with the Judge's finding that there was a warrant and that it would
        be unusual if one were issued against the  Appellant  but  not  the
        Appellant's brother who was accepted to have been  of  interest  to
        the authorities.

    14. I turn then to the main complaint in this regard which concerns the
        Judge's  analysis  of  the  Appellant's  case  in  light   of   the
        recognition of his brother as a refugee.  I did not  understand  Mr
        Scott to submit that the Judge was bound to  allow  the  appeal  on
        this basis.  It is well-recognised that asylum claims turn on their
        own facts and have to be considered in that light.   Neither  party
        referred me to relevant case law on this issue, but  it  is  to  be
        found in the judgments of the Court of Appeal in Ocampo v Secretary
        of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1276  and  AA  and
        another v Secretary of State for the Home Department   [2007]  EWCA
        Civ 1040. Both judgments uphold the principle  that  two  different
        Tribunals may legitimately reach divergent views even  where  there
        is an overlap of facts between two cases.

    15. What is said in the grounds about the  impact  of  the  Appellant's
        brother's case is that the  Judge  erred  because  he  adopted  the
        Respondent's approach. That was to say that, because [IC] had  left
        Turkey earlier and the incidents leading him and the  Appellant  to
        depart did not overlap, it damaged the Appellant's  credibility  as
        to his  reasons  for  leaving.   The  Appellant  says  that  "[t]he
        difficulty in taking this approach is that both accounts differed".
        In other words, what the Appellant appears to say is that the facts
        leading to his brother's case were not relied upon as  giving  rise
        to the risk to him.  However, if that is so it is difficult to  see
        why the Appellant relied so heavily on his brother's case  and  why
        he relied on evidence from his brother to support his own case.

    16. Mr Scott submitted that the Judge  was  not  entitled  to  rely  on
        inconsistencies between  the  Appellant's  case  and  that  of  his
        brother because the Respondent had accepted that [IC]'s account did
        not undermine the Appellant's case.  He relied in  that  regard  on
        the Respondent's  supplementary  letter  dated  16  May  2018.   Mr
        Kandola was able to supply a copy  of  that  letter.   The  passage
        relied upon by Mr Scott is as follows:

           "Due to the significant differences in  their  accounts,  [IC]'s
           account does little to support [the Appellant's]  asylum  claim.
           As the two account are clearly different, it is not unreasonable
           to issue both brothers with contrasting  outcomes,  as  for  the
           reasons given above, it is not considered  that  [IC]'s  account
           undermines the account of his brother [MC]."

    17. As will be evident, it is in reality only the last part of the last
        sentence which could in any way support the Appellant's  case.   As
        Mr Kandola pointed out, that part of the sentence is badly  phrased
        particularly taken  in  the  context  of  the  first  part  of  the
        paragraph which refers  to  the  significant  differences  and  the
        remainder of the letter which focusses on the inconsistencies.   As
        Mr Kandola submits and I accept to be the case, the writer probably
        meant to refer to the parties the other way round; in  other  words
        to say that the Appellant's account did not undermine that  of  his
        brother.  Otherwise, as Mr Kandola submitted, the Respondent  would
        have to consider revoking [IC]'s refugee status on the  basis  that
        he was not entitled to it.  The way in which the Respondent put the
        case in this regard at the hearing as set out at [16] and  [17]  of
        the  Decision  is  consistent  with  that  interpretation  and   is
        obviously the way in which the Judge  understood  the  Respondent's
        case.

    18. The Judge considered the impact of the Appellant's  brother's  case
        on his own at [19] to [24] of the Decision.  I do not need  to  set
        those paragraphs out save to  observe  that  the  Judge's  starting
        point at [19] was that "if both the appellant and his brother  were
        claiming that they were victims of persecution then  having  regard
        to the fact that they came from the same family and were living  in
        the same area, one would expect there  to  be  an  overlap  between
        their respective experiences".   What  follows  is  not  simply  an
        analysis of where those accounts differed but also  a  reliance  on
        the Appellant's case having changed from his screening interview to
        the asylum interview and his failure  to  explain  inconsistencies.
        It was for that reason that the Judge said as he did at [24] of the
        Decision that he considered the development of the Appellant's case
        to be based on the Appellant's  opportunity  to  consult  with  his
        brother about his claim.  That is the subject of separate complaint
        in the grounds but is justified by the reasons given.

    19. For those reasons, I do not consider there is any error of law made
        by the Judge in considering the core of the Appellant's claim.   He
        was entitled to find the Appellant  not  to  be  credible  for  the
        reasons he gave.  Those findings have to  be  considered  alongside
        what the Judge records about the evidence at [9]  to  [14]  of  the
        Decision.

    20. I accept however as did Mr Kandola that there are some  unfortunate
        failings to make express findings on certain aspects of the  claim,
        for example, whether the Appellant was  detained  on  any  occasion
        even if not targeted as such.  That leads into the  second  of  the
        Appellant's main grounds concerning the Judge's failure to consider
        IK.  The passage of IK on which the Appellant relies is [14]  which
        itself cites from A (Turkey) at [46] and [47].  I do  not  set  out
        those paragraphs because the grounds appear to accept that not  all
        of the factors which form the guidance in  that  case  apply.   The
        Appellant says at [9] of his grounds that the Judge has  failed  to
        have regard to the following factors:


           "(i)  Family connections with the HDP and links to the PKK.
           (ii)  Kurdish ethnicity.
           (iii) Accepted that the Appellant was ill treated
           (iv)  Lack of a current Turkish passport.
           (v)   The family emanate from the south east of Turkey where the
           separatist conflict has generally been at its most acute.
           (vi)  Asked to become an informer.
           (vii) His brother being recognised as a refugee."

    21. I have already dealt with  (vii)  which  overlaps  with  the  first
        ground.  The Judge considered that issue.  I can also deal  shortly
        with (vi) because the Judge rejected the Appellant's claim in  that
        regard at [25] of the Decision.  There is no express  finding  that
        the Appellant's family have HDP and PKK links. Indeed, that is part
        of the claim which the Judge rejects as fabricated  by  discussions
        between the Appellant and his brother at [24] of the  Decision.   I
        also note that the Appellant's brother said he had no knowledge  of
        his father experiencing any problems  whereas  the  Appellant  said
        that their father was  arrested  several  times,  constantly  under
        pressure and regularly visited.

    22. The Judge deals with the more general aspects  of  the  Appellant's
        case at [26] of the Decision as follows:

           "I have regard to the fact that the position of Kurds in Eastern
           Turkey is particularly problematic. However, I have to analyse
           the evidence as carefully as I can, and in particular take into
           account that the appellant appeared to be originally saying and
           indeed he did also at the end of this asylum interview that
           there were a variety of factors that gave rise to his decision
           to leave. He undoubtedly did from time to time experience
           discrimination as a Kurd. He may have been detained and/or ill-
           treated by the authorities at some stage as part of a routine
           round-up which the Turkish authorities are clearly perfectly
           capable of. However, that is in some way short of having been
           targeted to the extent that he claimed by 2014 such that he was
           then compelled to leave in fear of his life. I reject that
           account."

    23. That paragraph considers the general position for Kurds coming from
        the area of Turkey from where the Appellant  emanates.   I  do  not
        read the finding that the Appellant "may" have been ill-treated  as
        being a particular risk factor in accordance with IK because,  even
        if that amounts to an acceptance of detention and ill-treatment, it
        is not an acceptance of individual targeting.

    24. I am however concerned about the failure to consider  risk  to  the
        Appellant due to his illegal departure and the fact  that  he  does
        not have a passport.  As Mr Scott submitted, he would therefore  be
        returned on an emergency travel document which would bring  him  to
        the attention of the authorities.   He  would  then  be  questioned
        about his background.  He could not be expected to lie.  Whilst his
        own claim has not been found to be credible  and  the  truth  would
        therefore be that he has no involvement of  his  own  in  political
        activities, he would have to disclose, if asked,  his  relationship
        with his  brother  and  where  his  brother  is  now.   That  might
        conceivably give rise to a risk.

    25. For that reason, I do not accept Mr Kandola's submission  that  the
        Judge's failure to have regard to IK (which  he  accepted  was  the
        position) was not material.

    26. I accept therefore that the  Appellant  has  established  that  the
        Decision contains an error of law arising from the Judge's  failure
        to have regard to IK.  However, for the reasons  given,  I  do  not
        accept that there is any error of law in relation  to  the  Judge's
        credibility findings as appear at [19] to [25] of the Decision.   I
        therefore preserve those findings.  I set aside  the  remainder  of
        the Decision and in particular [26] which concerns the general risk
        to the Appellant as a Kurd.  That general risk  coupled  with  such
        risk factors as still arise notwithstanding the adverse credibility
        findings will need to be reconsidered in light of the  guidance  in
        IK.  There was no  application  by  the  Appellant  to  adduce  any
        further evidence.  Accordingly, I have given a direction  only  for
        re-listing of the appeal for a resumed hearing on the  issue  which
        remains.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law at [26] of the Decision. I therefore  set  aside  the  First-
tier Tribunal Decision of Judge N M Paul promulgated  on  11  January  2019.
However, I preserve the findings made at [19] to [25] of  that  decision.  I
make the following directions for the re-making of the decision.


DIRECTIONS

The appeal is to be re-listed for hearing on the first available date  after
Monday 1 April 2019.  Time estimate is half a day.

Signed           [pic] Dated:  15 March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

