
 [pic]


The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA035272016





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd June 2017                             |On 6th July 2017              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                  MR.K.K.S.

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

     Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Brown, Bury Law Centre.
For the Respondent:  Mr A McVettey, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction.

   1. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted to the
      appellant against the decision of First tier Judge Austin dismissing
      his appeal on all grounds.


   2. The appellant is a national of Iraq who gave his date of birth as June
      1994. He was encountered by police in November 2015 and claimed
      protection. He claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom two days
      earlier. Initially he said he was Syrian.

   3. When he attended his screening and substantive interview he explained
      that he suffered from epilepsy and had run out of medication. However,
      he indicated he was fit and well to be interviewed.

   4. The basis of his claim is that he is at risk of an honour killing. He
      said he was of Kurdish ethnicity and from the age of 4 had been living
      in Erbil with his mother and siblings. He said in 2009, by which stage
      he would have been 15, he was attracted to a girl he saw as she was
      coming out of school. He made contact with her. They had a walk in the
      park and would telephone each other. They did not disclose this to her
      family.

   5. He claimed that her family subsequently checked her phone and
      discovered what had been happening. He said members of her family
      kidnapped him and beat him. However he was rescued by the police who
      gave him protection for two weeks until he left the area. One of her
      brothers was subsequently detained but released shortly afterwards. He
      said that her family were influential in the Peshmerga and the KDPI.
      Shortly after this his family moved to Makhmur. However he said that
      they received threats over the telephone and shots were fired at his
      home.

   6. In June 2015 ISIS entered Makhmur and his family moved to Sulimaniyah.
      He claimed in October 2015 he left his home country. He says that in
      addition to his fear of the girl's family he is also fearful of ISIS.

   7. The respondent had accepted he was an Iraqi Kurd.  However
      inconsistencies in his account were highlighted in the refusal letter.
      Consequently his claimed fear of a family was rejected.

   8. The respondent accepted that ISIS entered Makhmur in June 2015 as he
      claimed. However, the background information was that they were
      expelled subsequently by the Peshmerga. Consequently, there was no
      risk for him in returning to this area.

   9. The respondent also took the view that it would be reasonable to
      expect the appellant to relocate to another part of Iraq if he was in
      fear: for instance, to Sulimaniya. The Iraqi Kurdish region was
      considered to be virtually violence free from the troubles affecting
      the rest of the country.

The First tier Tribunal

  10. The parties were represented. The judge was provided with information
      about the appellant's medical condition in the appeal bundle and
      documentation about the giving of evidence in court and epilepsy. The
      judge records that the appellant was advised the court was aware he
      suffered from epilepsy and if he felt unwell during the hearing he
      should say so.


  11. The judge heard from the appellant and listened to submissions. The
      background to the claim was set out in the decision. The judge did not
      find the appellant had given a clear and credible account in relation
      to the claimed relationship and what happened subsequently.

  12. The judge acknowledged that the relationship described could cause
      great difficulty in the cultural context described. The judge rejected
      the respondent's contention that the contact was so innocuous that it
      would not constitute a relationship. Clearly the judge was aware of
      the cultural context. However the judge did not find the appellant at
      risk of an honour killing. His account at its highest was that he had
      had no problems since 2013 and his family continue to live in
      Sulimaniya.

  13. The judge concluded that there was sufficiency of protection for him
      and internal relocation to Sulimaniya was available. No risk from ISIS
      was identified.

The Upper Tribunal.

  14. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that the
      judge in assessing the claim failed to take into account the effect of
      the appellant's epilepsy. It was also arguable the judge failed to
      take into account relevant background material in relation to honour
      killings. Finally, it was argued the judge paid insufficient attention
      to the arguments about internal relocation.


  15. The respondent in a rule 24 response opposed the appeal. The
      appellant's epilepsy was referred to by the judge at paragraphs 17,
      18, 25 and 40 of the decision. In particular, at paragraph 40 and 41
      the judge acknowledged from the material provided that epilepsy can
      affect a person's memory and allowance should be made for this in
      considering the account. However the judge referred to the fact he had
      lied when first detected about being Syrian. Reference was again made
      to inconsistencies in his account.

  16. The respondent also contended that the judge did have proper regard to
      the background information about honour killings. Reference is made to
      paragraph 42 of the decision where the judge acknowledged that what to
      the West could be an innocent relationship could cause great
      difficulty in the cultural context of Kurdish Iraq. The judge had
      rejected the respondent's contention that this did not amount to a
      relationship. However, the judge concluded the appellant was not risk
      in the circumstance. The judge pointed out that on the claim there
      have been no problems since 2013 and that his family continue to live
      in Sulimaniyah relatively trouble-free.

  17. At hearing the appellant's representative relied upon the grounds for
      which permission to appeal was granted. I was referred to the fact
      that the appellant at his substantive interview pointed out he had
      been without his medication. Reference was also made to information in
      the appeal bundle about subsequent seizures and overnight admission to
      hospital. Reference was also made to the respondent's guidance about
      the stress of giving evidence in an appeal.

  18. His representative referred to information about honour killings and
      pointed out that the police protection afforded to the appellant was
      only temporary. It was submitted that there were no further incidents
      because the appellant was hiding. His family had not experienced
      problems because they were not the ones offending.

  19. The presenting officer acknowledged that seizure activity and
      medication could affect a sufferer's memory. However, it was contended
      there was no evidence of such mental impairment and that was no
      specific medical evidence to support this. Individuals are affected
      differently. It was pointed out the appellant at his screening
      interview said he was feeling all right and there was no reference to
      any fitting either shortly before the interview or subsequently.
      Whilst the condition might explain minor discrepancies it could not
      explain away the major features affecting the appellant's credibility:
      for instance, his claim to be Syrian at the outset and the absence of
      any reference to honour killing at screening. The appellant's
      representative had referred to the decision of Mibanga [2005] EWCA
      367.The-presenting officer contended this did prevent a judge from
      simply rejecting an account as lacking credibility. There was no
      medical evidence the appellant was incapable of giving evidence. The
      Presenting Officer pointed out that typically honour killings were
      directed towards the female rather than the male. On the appellant's
      account he had been given protection. The reasonableness of relocation
      was essentially a separate argument being advanced and it was
      contended the judge's conclusions were sustainable.




Consideration.


  20. I find this to be a very balanced decision. The judge repeatedly
      acknowledged in the decision that the appellant suffered from
      epilepsy. The judge had been given information about the condition and
      details of the appellant's medical history which were referred to. The
      judge indicated if the appellant required a break at any stage he
      should say so. The appellant was represented at the hearing and no
      representations were made that he was unfit to give evidence. No
      requests for adjustments were made. There was no medical evidence led
      specific to his ability to give evidence.


  21. Notably, at the substantive interview the interviewer was aware as
      evidence at question 3 that he suffered from epilepsy. The appellant
      confirmed he was in a position to proceed at question 5. He further
      confirmed at question 198 that he was content. In the subsequent
      statement two weeks after the interview there were no representations
      to the effect that epilepsy was any impairment to his performance at
      interview. The same applies to his statement of the 14th September
      2016. As the presenting officer sensibly points out, epilepsy would
      not explain the clear misrepresentation that the appellant was Syrian
      when first detected. I see nothing to suggest any unfairness in either
      the interviews; the conduct of the hearing; or in the appraisal of the
      evidence because of the appellant's epilepsy.


  22. Mibanga requires that medical evidence should be taken into account in
      the overall assessment of a claim rather than treated as an add-on
      after a conclusion had been reached. I find the decision clearly
      demonstrates the judge was fully aware throughout of the medical
      condition and its effect upon the appellant's ability to explain his
      condition. However, there was nothing before the judge to suggest it
      materially affected his performance either in the course of the
      hearing or earlier.

  23. The judge showed an appreciation of cultural differences by
      recognising that the very limited contact the appellant described
      could nevertheless be viewed as a serious infringement to a Kurdish
      Iraqi. However, the judge assessed the risk and reached conclusions
      which were open.

  24. I can see no error in the judges treatment of the issue of relocation
      which accords with the country guidance decision of AA[2015]. Relevant
      considerations were highlighted .The same can be said about
      sufficiency of protection.

  25. In summary, I do not find any merit in the arguments advanced on
      behalf of the appellant in this appeal. It amounts to an attempt to
      unpick the conclusion of the judge that the appellant was not at risk
      on return. The decision demonstrates that the judge properly
      understood the competing arguments advanced; properly analysed the
      evidence; and reached sound conclusions.

Decision

I find no material error of law established in the decision of First tier
Judge Austin. Consequently, that decision, dismissing the appellant's
appeal on all grounds shall stand.


Deputy Judge Farrelly

5th July 2017

