

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03729/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 October 2016                   |On 26 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 N S A SHAMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr G A Dewar, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Walker, promulgated on 26  August  2016,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against refusal of recognition as a refugee.

 2.  The appellant's grounds of appeal to the upper tribunal are set out in
    5 paragraphs. Ground 5 is a summary  of  what  goes  before.  Ground  4
    complains that the judge at three points referred to the wrong country.
    Mr Dewar acknowledged at the outset that ground 4 might add  something,
    but would not be enough on its own to set aside the decision.

 3. Ground 1 is that the judge  went  wrong  by  applying  Devaseelan,  the
    principles of which "do not apply to similar facts led by  a  different
    appellant"; and that in any event, the judge went wrong by  failing  to
    recognise that issues before him were not the same as those before  the
    previous judge, and failed to engage with the fresh materials.

 4. Mr Dewar expanded upon this ground  by  reference  to  Devaseelan.   He
    submitted that there was a lack of clarity as to whether the judge  was
    dealing with the same facts or with novel factors, and that  the  judge
    failed to engage with the fact that there was fresh evidence.

 5. Ground 2 focuses on paragraph 43, where the judge describes  the  fresh
    evidence  as  "self-serving".  Mr  Dewar  submitted   that   no   other
    explanation was given for disregarding  the  documents,  and  that  the
    description of them as self-serving was meaningless.

 6. Ground 3 criticises the judge at  paragraph  49  for  speculating  that
    authentication of original documents (which had not  been  returned  by
    the respondent  to  the  appellant  for  this  purpose)  would  not  be
    possible. Mr Dewar submitted that the judge  drifted  into  speculation
    and  it  was  not  for  him  to  hypothesise  what   the   outcome   of
    authentication  might  have  been.  He  said   that   the   appellant's
    representatives  made  three  written  requests  for  return   of   the
    documents, without reply.  An  expert  had  been  "lined  up"  but  the
    appellant was unable to take the matter further.

 7. Finally, Mr Dewar submitted that the errors in  sum  were  such  as  to
    require a remit to the first-tier tribunal.

 8. Mr Matthews acknowledged  that  letters  had  been  received  from  the
    appellant's solicitors dated 12th January and 20 April 2016  requesting
    the return of the documents, which letters had been placed on the file,
    but no reply sent. (Mr Dewar advised, on instructions, that  a  further
    request dated 11 July 2016 had also been sent.)

 9. On ground 1, Mr Matthews submitted that the judge correctly applied the
    principles of Devaseelan as developed in subsequent cases on claims  by
    family members based on the same alleged facts.  The  determination  in
    the case of the appellant husband's stood  unchallenged,  and  was  the
    correct starting point. There was  no  real  difference  in  the  facts
    alleged, only in the attempt to prove them further by the production of
    the documents. One of these was an  alleged  arrest  warrant,  and  the
    other two were official memoranda, one within  the  Libyan  government,
    and  the  other  a  communication  between  the  Libyan  and   Egyptian
    governments. The Libyan document on the face  of  it  was  a  curiously
    convenient narration of the claim for the appellant. The judge did  not
    deal with the documents only by describing  them  as  "self-serving  ",
    which Mr Matthews accepted was not a useful  description,  although  he
    said it was clear that the judge meant that  the  documents  had  "more
    than a whiff of contrivance", which would  have  been  justified.   The
    judge  noted  at  paragraph  39  that  the  appellant's   husband   had
    contradicted himself on the subject of an arrest warrant. The judge was
    careful to observe that the further evidence  post-dated  the  previous
    claim. At paragraph 44 he found  it  implausible  the  appellant  would
    obtain an internal memo from the Ministry of Defence or Libyan army, or
    that such a note would succinctly set out details of the asylum  claim.
    He noted at  paragraph  45  of  the  document  and  its  contents  were
    referring to events which had "already been adjudicated upon and  found
    to have been fabricated". He went on at paragraphs 46 and 47 to observe
    that the further document was on the face of it a private communication
    between the authorities in Libya and the authorities in Egypt, and that
    the appellant again offered no explanation of how she obtained  it.  He
    therefore concluded  at  paragraph  48  that  these  documents  had  no
    evidential weight. That showed the correct  approach  to  new  material
    advanced, and no error was shown.  The judge  had  been  alive  to  the
    question whether the new material made any difference, and  found  that
    it did not.  The submissions for the appellant in effect sought reasons
    upon reasons, and amounted only to disagreement.

10. It was accepted that it was unhelpful  that  requests  for  return  the
    documents authentication gone  without  response.  There  had  been  no
    presenting officer at the  hearing  in  the  first-tier  tribunal.  The
    appellant's submissions mentioned that an application  for  adjournment
    was refused, but there was no ground of appeal to the UT on that basis.
    The appellant might have asked the tribunal  to  make  a  direction  in
    respect of documents, but had not done  so.  No  ground  of  procedural
    unfairness was suggested.  The lack of response to the requests had  no
    eventual significance. In any event, it was difficult to  see  that  at
    best an expert might say any more than  that  such  documents  were  on
    their face apparently genuine, or that an expert could say anything  to
    explain away the unlikelihood of their appearance in the hands  of  the
    appellant, or the convenience of their narrating her asylum claim.

11. Mr Dewar  in  reply  said  that  there  had  been  an  application  for
    adjournment at the first-tier tribunal hearing, apparently  renewed  in
    the course of that hearing, which might be  sufficient  to  enable  the
    upper tribunal to form a view on an  issue  of  procedural  unfairness,
    even in the absence of a ground of appeal.

12. I reserved my decision.

13. It is right to take a prior  decision  as  a  starting  point  where  a
    relative relies on the same claim in a new appeal.

14. New material of course has to be evaluated.  That  is  what  the  judge
    did.  No legal error in that respect of his approach has been shown.

15. The expression "self-serving" is vague, unhelpful and  better  avoided;
    but the judge's reasons  for  rejecting  the  fresh  evidence  are  not
    confined to that phrase.  They are sensibly set out  in  the  following
    paragraphs.  The attack on that part of the decision was in my  view  a
    search for reasons upon reasons.

16. It would be speculative to say that an expert report on  the  documents
    could not possibly have helped the appellant, but she has  not  alleged
    that she was unfairly deprived of the opportunity to make her case, nor
    has she tried to show how her case might have been any better,  if  she
    did have the chance to show  originals  (rather  than  copies)  of  the
    documents to an expert.  She did not  advance  the  matter  by  timeous
    application for directions or for adjournment, or even belatedly by way
    of grounds of appeal to the UT.

17. The appellant's grounds  in  my  opinion  resolve  into  no  more  than
    reassertion and disagreement on the facts.  The FtT decision  comprises
    a legally adequate explanation to the appellant  of  why  she  did  not
    establish the case she put.  No error on any point of law is shown.

18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. Parties concurred that there was no need for an anonymity direction.


            [pic]


            26 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




