
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03807/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th December 2016                          |On 15th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     OA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Heidar, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant, with permission appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  13th
    September 2016  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse his claim for asylum and on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is set out in the  determination  at
    paragraphs [9] to [16].  The Appellant lives with his family members in
    Afghanistan and in August 2015, it is asserted that he  went  with  his
    family to his brother-in-law's house which is approximately one hour 50
    minutes away from his own home.  It is said that whilst he  was  there,
    the Taliban invaded the village and the Appellant was  stopped  by  the
    Taliban.  The Appellant was asked his name, which he provided  and  his
    identity card and he also informed the  Taliban  that  his  brother-in-
    law's house was  his  own  home.   He  was  also  chanting  with  other
    villagers "long live the Taliban" and gave the appearance of  being  on
    their side.  It is asserted by  the  Appellant  that  he  did  so  only
    because he was in fear.  It is further asserted that  the  Taliban  had
    taken a film of the Appellant in which he was  expressing  his  support
    for the Taliban.

 4. It is stated that as  the  Taliban  continued  their  advancement,  the
    Appellant left with his family and returned to his home village.

 5. On 13th August 2015 he said the authorities  came  to  the  Appellant's
    house and the authorities informed his wife that they had seen a  video
    of the Appellant and he was accused of spying on behalf of the  Taliban
    against the authorities.  The Appellant went to his friend's  home  and
    had told them what had happened; his friend  went  to  the  Appellant's
    house and saw police in civilian clothes and two police cars at the top
    of the Appellant's road.   As  a  result  of  what  had  happened,  the
    Appellant left his village and travelled to the UK.

 6. In a decision letter dated 1st April 2016 the Secretary  of  State  did
    not accept the account given by the Appellant as  a  credible  one  and
    gave reasons for reaching that view at paragraphs [16] to [22].

 7. The Appellant appealed that decision and it came before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge reached his conclusions at paragraphs [30] to [39]
    and concluded overall that the Appellant had failed to substantiate the
    factual issues in this case  and  he  rejected  his  account  that  the
    Taliban had filmed the Appellant or that he had  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities in Afghanistan on account of any perceived
    involvement with the Taliban.  Thus he dismissed his claim.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson on 8th November 2016.

 9. Thus the appeal came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   I  have  had  the
    opportunity of hearing the submissions of each of the parties  which  I
    have recorded in my Record  of  Proceedings  and  which  I  have  taken
    account of in reaching my overall decision.

10. Having heard those submissions, I am satisfied that the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal decision does demonstrate the making of an error on
    a point of  law.   I  shall  set  out  my  reasons  for  reaching  that
    conclusion.

11. The grounds challenge, in essence, the credibility findings made by the
    judge.   Those  findings  are  set  out  within  the  determination  at
    paragraph [30]-[39] and include a consideration of a document described
    as a "police letter".  This is in fact a document from the Ministry  of
    Interior of Afghanistan relating to the police command of a  particular
    province (see paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Appellant's bundle).

12. The judge considered that document at paragraphs [36] and [37]  of  the
    determination.  At paragraph [36], the judge rejected  the  Appellant's
    account that the authorities would send an important document  such  as
    this to another's home.  At paragraph [37]  the  judge  considered  the
    contents of the document and found that it contained an incorrect  name
    because it referred to a different name to that of the  Appellant.   He
    recorded the  Appellant's  explanation  that  the  name  was  correctly
    mentioned in the summons and if there had been any problems there was a
    problem with the translation, but the judge stated at paragraph [37] "I
    also do not accept that the  translation  company  would  make  such  a
    simple error.  For these reasons I cannot attach  any  weight  to  this
    document".

13. It is common ground between the parties that contrary to  the  findings
    set out at paragraph [37], the translation company have  accepted  that
    they had made an error in the translation which is what  the  Appellant
    had said in his evidence and recorded by the judge at  paragraph  [37].
    The letter from the translation company is dated 16th  September  20016
    which accompanied the Grounds of Appeal.   The  judge  did  not  attach
    weight to that document because he found that the incorrect name of the
    Appellant had been stated on the document when it had been  translated.
    However as set out above, it is now accepted that  there  had  been  an
    error in the translation.  The issue as Mr Melvin submitted is  whether
    the finding, which was made for no fault on  the  part  of  the  judge,
    which was in error whether it was material to the outcome when seen  in
    the light of the other findings of fact made.  Whilst Mr Melvin submits
    it is not material because the judge gave other  reasons  for  reaching
    the conclusion the Appellant had not provided  a  credible  account,  I
    cannot rule out that the error that is now agreed to be such an  error,
    led the judge to reach the conclusion that he could attach no weight to
    the document.

14. The judge also had before him an expert report from Dr Guistozzi  which
    expressly dealt with the issue of authenticity of the  police  document
    (see report at page 38).  It  is  unclear  from  the  finding  at  [39]
    whether the judge accepted the contents of the expert  report  in  this
    context.  As Ms Heidar submits, there is  no  analysis  of  the  expert
    report and the issue of its authenticity when considering  what  weight
    should be attributed to the document when assessing the credibility  of
    this claim as a whole.  The report at paragraph [47] sets out the steps
    taken in respect of the authentication of the document.  At  page  [48]
    it sets out the process that was undertaken to verify the document  and
    confirms at paragraph [6] that the signature had been confirmed as  had
    the stamp and the conclusion reached  that  it  is  consistent  with  a
    genuine document issued by the police.

15. When reaching a conclusion on the credibility of the claim as a  whole,
    the judge was also required to consider the reliability of  the  police
    statements not only in the context of the Appellant's  evidence  as  he
    did at paragraph [36], but also in the context of the expert report and
    in particular the contents of the report dealing with its authenticity.
     Thus I  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  as  this  has  not  been
    undertaken, it undermines the conclusions reached upon the document and
    must affect the credibility findings as  a  whole  because  this  is  a
    matter that relates to the core of the account that he would be at risk
    from the authorities.

16. Furthermore the refusal letter at paragraph [17] reached the view  that
    the objective evidence as there was did not confirm  whether  the  area
    the Appellant claimed the  events  had  occurred  in  was  involved  in
    conflict with the Taliban.  The expert  report  at  page  17  sets  out
    further objective evidence relating to that area and makes reference to
    conflict in April 2015 where the Taliban took over the area and that it
    kept on throughout 2015.  This covered potentially the  period  of  the
    events in which the Appellant asserted the filming had taken place.

17.  The Secretary of State also did not believe  that  the  Appellant  had
    been filmed.  However the expert report also  dealt  with  that  issue.
    There was also an email sent separately dated 30th August  2016  making
    reference to the conflict confirming that the  expert  could  not  find
    precise confirmation that the area was taken again in August 2015.

18.  There was no consideration  of  this  objective  material  within  the
    determination when looking at the overall  credibility  findings  along
    side the document which on the  face  of  the  evidence  had  been  the
    subject of authentication.  Whilst the  judge  made  other  credibility
    findings at paragraphs [32] to [35] which Mr Melvin  relies  upon,  and
    which demonstrate  that  the  Appellant  had  given  some  inconsistent
    evidence during the hearing, I am satisfied  that  the  error  made  in
    relation to the summons was material when seen  in  the  light  of  the
    expert evidence which was  not  considered  when  reaching  an  overall
    consideration of the credibility of the claim.

19. It is  not  possible  in  my  judgment  to  separate  the  findings  of
    credibility; which were open to the judge to make and those which  were
    made  but  did  not  include  consideration  of   all   the   evidence.
    Credibility findings need to be considered in the round and thus  I  am
    satisfied for the reasons I have given that the grounds are  made  out.
    As the findings relating to credibility did not take into  account  all
    of the evidence, it is not sufficient in my judgment to submit that the
    Appellant could not succeed on the objective material  because  as  the
    judge set out if the claim of being accused of being a Taliban spy  was
    substantiated, so the objective material did  support  the  Appellant's
    claim.

20. Both advocates are in agreement that if the credibility findings are to
    be set aside, the correct course is for  the  appeal  to  be  remitted.
    Therefore as  I  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  credibility
    findings were central to the overall issue  of  whether  the  Appellant
    would be at  risk  of  persecution  upon  return  to  Afghanistan,  the
    determination will be set aside and will be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to consider afresh.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law; the decision is set aside and is remitted to the  First-tier
Tribunal for a rehearing.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

