
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03644/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 September 2019                  |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                V A O (GHANA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik, Counsel instructed by City Wide
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Brewer sitting at Taylor House on 16 May  2019)  dismissing  her
    appeal against the refusal of her protection and human rights claims in
    which she maintained that she had a well-founded fear of persecution on
    return to Ghana at the hands of the in-laws of  her  deceased  husband,
    either because she would be forced to undertake degrading tribal burial
    rituals as his widow or because she was liable to be killed by her  in-
    laws who believed that she was  responsible  for  her  husband's  death
    through witchcraft.   Judge  Brewer  found  that  the  appellant  faced
    persecution in her former home area in Ghana (the village where she had
    lived with her  husband),  but  that  there  would  be  sufficiency  of
    protection for her elsewhere in Ghana, and that internal relocation was
    a reasonable option.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 7 July 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Caroline  Andrew  granted  the
    appellant to appeal for the following reasons:  "I  am  satisfied  that
    there is an arguable error of law in the decision in that the Judge may
    have come to incorrect conclusions as to the ability of  the  appellant
    to relocate safely given her name, being the name of her late  husband,
    and taking into account that she might have  to  take  part  in  burial
    rituals which may amount to persecution."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national  of  Ghana,  whose  date  of  birth  is  17
    December 1971.  She claims that she married her late husband, "CFO", in
    Ghana against the wishes of both  their  families  in  the  year  2000.
    During  their  marriage,  she  said  that  her  late  husband's  family
    mistreated her when she was living in their house.  Her husband  worked
    for Ghana Airways as a caterer,  and  he  brought  her  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2003 for a visit.  She went back with him  to  Ghana  for  a
    short period.  They then both returned as  visitors,  but  her  husband
    left her behind in the UK and returned to Ghana alone.

 4. As evidenced by a certified copy of a death certificate, the  death  of
    'CFO', a Ghanaian national aged 37 years, was registered on  8  January
    2007.  The informant was CFO's brother.  CFO was recorded  as  residing
    at OSU Accra, and his occupation was said to be that of a caterer.   He
    had  died  in  hospital  on  2  January  2007  due  to  a  large  bowel
    obstruction, as certified by a qualified medical practitioner.  He  was
    buried in OSU Cemetery, Accra.

 5. In her screening interview conducted on 7 June 2018, the appellant said
    that she had been born in Accra, and that her main language and dialect
    was Ada.  Her occupation in her home country was assisting her  husband
    who was a chef.  Her husband had brought her to  the  UK  because  both
    families were fighting the marriage.  She was asked to explain  briefly
    all the reasons why she could not return to her home country.  She said
    that when her husband died, his family said she  had  killed  him,  and
    they said that they would kill her if she went back.  They  would  also
    make her do some unlawful rituals because he was not supposed to  marry
    her and "he died in my house."   They  also  said  that  she  had  used
    witchcraft to kill him.

 6. On 20 November 2018  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  his  reasons  for
    refusing the appellant's protection and human rights  claims.   It  was
    accepted that she  had  produced  a  death  certificate  for  her  late
    husband, and that she was from the Ada tribe.  Her account of  her  and
    her late husband marrying against the wishes of his family, and of  her
    receiving threats from the family of her late husband, was not accepted
    due to various asserted internal discrepancies.  Despite the fact  that
    she said that his family were against the match, instead of  trying  to
    create a distance between them both, she also said that they had  hired
    her as a maid to work in their house.  Given the claimed views  of  her
    in-laws, it was inconsistent that  they  did  not  take  any  steps  to
    arrange a proxy marriage for their son to a different woman.  She  said
    that her late husband's family had power and influence  in  Ghana,  but
    she  also  said  that  her  husband  had  had  to  support  his  family
    financially.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Brewer.   The  Judge
    received  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  three   supporting
    witnesses.

 8. In his witness statement, which he adopted as his  evidence  in  chief,
    'DA' said that he had travelled back to Ghana to pay his respects a few
    days before CFO's funeral rites and burial.  The appellant's absence at
    the funeral was not taken  lightly.   Some  members  of  the  immediate
    family openly stated how she had caused CFO's  demise,  and  it  became
    clear that they wished to subject her  to  a  period  of  hardship  and
    deprivation.

 9. In her statement signed on  8  May  2019,  which  she  adopted  as  her
    evidence in chief, 'GH' said that she had gone to Ghana  for  a  Church
    conference and for  a  funeral  in  the  village  in  June  2018.   She
    overheard a discussion about a lady in London who  killed  her  husband
    and was hiding in the UK and running away from her punishment.  One  of
    the group then asked her whether she knew VAO.  She said that she  did,
    but refused to give VAO's telephone number to the man. On  her  return,
    she told the appellant about what she had overheard in the village  and
    she had since been providing her with counselling.

10. In his subsequent  decision,  Judge  Brewer  found  the  appellant  not
    credible in her account of the issues that she claimed  to  have  faced
    before she came to the UK. Of particular difficulty  was  her  evidence
    about the marriage.  On the appellant's account, her rich and  powerful
    family objected to their son marrying the appellant.  But despite this,
    they were in fact powerless to prevent it and  allowed  the  couple  to
    share their home: "This is at best self-contradictory."  The Judge went
    on to find that the appellant's evidence of what happened prior to  her
    husband's death was wholly  lacking  in  credibility,  particularly  in
    relation  to  the  rather  romanticised  account   of   their   marital
    relationship, given what occurred in 2004 - the  husband  returning  to
    Ghana alone and the couple never seeing each other again prior  to  his
    death in 2007.

11. However, the Judge accepted that there was  corroborative  evidence  in
    respect of the threats said to have been made following  the  husband's
    death.  At paragraph [35], he referred to the evidence of each  of  the
    three supporting witnesses.  It would seem that traditional beliefs  in
    witchcraft as a means to do harm remained strong  in  Ghana,  and  that
    this was what was believed to  account  for  the  early  death  of  the
    husband.  Thus, he accepted that for a number of years  the  family  of
    the appellant's late husband had been threatening to do her harm and to
    kill her, as they held her responsible for her husband's death.

12. At paragraph [39], the Judge turned to address the issue of relocation.
     The appellant feared that she would be found if she  was  returned  to
    Ghana, as her husband's family was rich and influential.   He  accepted
    that the family was wealthy and "locally influential".  However,  there
    was no evidence that the family  had  significant  influence  over  the
    country as a whole, which had a population of over  30  million  spread
    over a land area of over 92,000 square miles.  The Judge continued:

         "The witness GH said that the family name, which the appellant  has
         retained, is well known.  However, many  people  who  are  entirely
         unconnected with wealthy families share their name.  The sharing of
         a name does  not  connote  any  connection.   The  evidence  as  to
         influence was vague.  The appellant stated that the family are  the
         new members of the Armed Forces and  the  Police,  or  some  family
         members who are in the police - she was unclear  about  this.   The
         Ghanaian  state  has  a  fully  functioning  police  force.  It  is
         described in detail in the refusal letter and  I  do  not  need  to
         repeat that here.  Ms Delbourgo does not take issue with this.  She
         merely  relies  on  the  vague  references  to  the  family  having
         influence.  The objective evidence  suggests  that  the  police  do
         offer sufficient protection."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

13. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Karnik, who did not appear below, developed the two grounds  of
    appeal which he had pleaded in the permission application.   In  reply,
    Ms Jones submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  directed
    himself appropriately, and no error of law was made out.

Discussion

14. Ground 1 relates to the Judge's findings at paragraph  [39].   Firstly,
    Mr Karnik submits that the Judge engaged in  impermissible  speculation
    in holding that  the  sharing  of  a  name  that  does  not  connote  a
    connection.  Secondly - and in the alternative - he  submits  that  the
    fresh evidence attached to the permission application  shows  that  all
    persons bearing the "O" surname belong to "the same family  or  tribe";
    and the name system makes it easier for the "O" chief to remember  "the
    family relations".  On this basis, he submits that  the  Judge  made  a
    material mistake of fact which had a material bearing on the outcome.

15. The fresh evidence adduced by way of  appeal  shows  that  over  27,000
    people in Ghana share the "O" surname.  So, I do not consider the fresh
    evidence demonstrates a material error of  fact  on  the  part  of  the
    Judge.

16. It was not part of the appellant's case in the evidence  assembled  for
    the hearing that the retention of her married surname was going to make
    it easier for the in-laws to locate her wherever she went in Ghana.  As
    indicated by the Judge at paragraph [39], he  was  responding  to  GH's
    oral evidence that the appellant's family name was well  known.   There
    is a crucial difference between having a rare name which is well  known
    and having a common name which is well known.   The  Judge  appears  to
    have understood GH to be saying that GH's name  fell  into  the  latter
    category, not the former one.  It has not been shown that  the  Judge's
    understanding was wrong.  It was open to the Judge  to  find  that  the
    mere fact that the appellant shared the same family name as her in-laws
    would not of itself  denote  a  specific  connection  between  them  as
    opposed to her having a potential connection with anyone in  Ghana  who
    bore the same family name.

17. The third way in which Mr Karnik puts the case under Ground 1  is  that
    the Judge failed to have regard to the evidence of GH, and in effect he
    ought to have accepted her evidence as to the ability of the in-laws to
    find the appellant wherever she went  in  Ghana.   However,  while  the
    Judge found GH credible in  her  account  of  what  happened  when  she
    visited the appellant's home village in 2018, it does not  follow  that
    the Judge was bound  to  accept  her  evidence  on  the  issue  of  the
    viability of internal  relocation.   GH  was  not  a  disinterested  or
    independent witness.  She was not giving evidence as a country  expert.
    There was nothing in her witness statement to indicate that she had the
    requisite knowledge to give an objective opinion as to  the  extent  of
    the in-laws' influence.  She  expressly  put  herself  forward  in  her
    witness statement as someone  who  was  providing  the  appellant  with
    counselling.  She was an advocate for the appellant, not  an  impartial
    county expert.

18. GH said that she had known the appellant for about five years since she
    had started visiting and worshipping at a church in  London  where  she
    was a Pastor.  She had found out that the appellant came from the  same
    area as her in Ghana, which was Ada.  GH's witness  statement  gave  no
    information as to how long she had been habitually residing in the  UK,
    or how frequently she had  returned  to  the  village  in  Ghana  since
    settling in the UK.

19. For the above reasons, it was fully open to the Judge  to  reject  GH's
    opinion as to the appellant's ability to safely relocate  elsewhere  in
    Ghana.

20. The fourth way in which Mr Karnik puts the case under Ground 1 is  that
    the Judge had made  an  irrelevant  finding  that  Ghana  had  a  fully
    functioning  police  force  when  the  police  were  either  unable  or
    unwilling to provide protection in the appellant's home area.  I do not
    consider that the Judge's reasoning was illogical.   He  accepted  that
    the in-laws had local influence in their home  area.   Accordingly,  if
    the appellant returned to  the  village,  there  was  a  risk  of  ill-
    treatment at the in-laws' hands before the police had  the  opportunity
    to intervene and/or because the local police would allow the in-laws to
    force the appellant to undergo a period  of  hardship  and  deprivation
    and/or a degrading tribal burial ritual. Conversely, where the  in-laws
    did not have influence - which was in the rest of Ghana - it  was  open
    to the Judge to find  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  access
    sufficiency of protection from the police in the locality where she was
    residing.

21. Ground 2 relates to the Judge's finding at paragraph  [48]  that  there
    are not significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  reintegration  into
    Ghana in the light of his findings on the protection claim.  Mr  Karnik
    submits that the Judge erred in law in treating Rule  276ADE(1)(vi)  as
    coterminous  with  the  test  for  the   reasonableness   of   internal
    relocation.  Citing Kamara -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  813,  he  submits
    that the question of integration requires a broader evaluative judgment
    of whether the appellant would be able to operate on a day-to-day basis
    in society and to build up within a reasonable time a variety of  human
    relationships to give substance to her private or family life.

22. I consider that the findings of fact made by the  Judge  at  paragraphs
    [40] and [41] are sufficient to show that the Kamara test is  met,  and
    that no error of law is made out.  The Judge did not find the appellant
    credible in her evidence that she was not working in the UK as a  Cook.
    He found that the appellant would be able to support herself  in  Ghana
    through gainful employment.  He also found  that  the  appellant  could
    "easily relocate to Ghana in the same way  that  she  had  successfully
    relocated to the UK".  There were no language or cultural difficulties,
    and he noted that, under the law of  Ghana,  women  had  equal  rights,
    including freedom of movement.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

