
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03707/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2016                  |On 23 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     TH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sher, Counsel instructed by Ashfield LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 19 October 1981 whose
   application for asylum was refused. His ensuing appeal to the First-tier
   Tribunal was heard by Judge Somal. In a decision promulgated on 25 July
   2016, the judge dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals that
   decision.

2. The appellant's case, in summary, is that he is of Bihari ethnicity and
   faces risk on return to Bangladesh as a consequence. He has given an
   account of suffering attacks, torture and discrimination (as well as his
   father being killed) as a result of being Bihari.

3. Judge Somal did not find the appellant credible and rejected his
   account. However, she accepted that he is Bihari.

4. At paragraph 47 she considered the risk faced by Biharis and concluded
   that

      "it is clear from the objective evidence that Biharis are citizens of
      Bangladesh and can safely return there."


5. At paragraph 47, the judge also stated:

      "I have considered the objective evidence, the Country of Origin
      Information Report and the UN High Commissioner for Refugee's note on
      the nationality and status of the Urdu speaking community in
      Bangladesh 17 December 2009 which states:

           "Members of the Urdu speaking community are entitled to apply
           for administrative and judicial remedies in accordance with the
           laws of Bangladesh in the same manner as any other Bangladeshi
           citizen. They also have the right to be issued with passports.
           Hence the relevant Bangladeshi diplomatic or consular
           representation should be contacted in cases where members of the
           Urdu speaking community outside the country require travel
           documents including for the purposes of return to Bangladesh".

Grounds of appeal and submissions

6. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred by failing to take
   into consideration the objective evidence adduced by the appellant. The
   grounds assert that this evidence demonstrates that Biharis are not
   accepted as citizens and are subjected to discrimination which amounts to
   persecution.

7. Ms Sher elaborated on the grounds, arguing that the judge's decision was
   not balanced as she had only referred to and relied upon the Secretary of
   State's objective evidence. If the judge decided to not give weight to
   the appellant's objective evidence, she ought to have explained her
   reasons.

8. Mr Singh argued that the judge correctly set out the evidence to show
   the appellant was a Bangladeshi national and that it is apparent from
   paragraph 47 of the decision that the objective evidence was considered.
   Mr Singh submitted that the judge was not required to set out all the
   documents before her and she has addressed the relevant matters.

Consideration

9. The judge has not made any reference to the objective evidence submitted
   by the appellant. Nor has she explained what weight, if any, she gave to
   this evidence. The only objective evidence referred to in the decision is
   a Country of Origin Information Report and the UN High Commissioner for
   Refugee's note on the nationality and status of the Urdu speaking
   community in Bangladesh, both of which are documents relied on by the
   Secretary of State in the refusal decision dated 2 December 2015.

10. I agree with Ms Sher that the judge ought to have referred to, and
   explained her reasoning in respect of, the objective evidence adduced by
   the appellant and that her failure to do so amounts to an error of law.

11. At the error of law hearing I asked Ms Sher to show me the objective
   evidence that, in her view, should have been taken into consideration by
   the judge.

12. One of the documents Ms Sher highlighted was an undated article by
   Khalid Hussain who is described as the President of the Association of
   Young Generation of Urdu Speaking Community. It is unclear where this
   article was published. A footnote to the article mentions another article
   dated January 2009 so I accept the article is more recent than that date.
   The article describes the plight of Biharis, saying, inter alia, that
   they face discrimination in the job market, live in slum conditions and
   have a lack of education and health care facilities. It also suggests
   Biharis are being denied access to a passport.

13. Another article is taken from "the Milli Gazette" which describes
   itself as Indian Muslim's leading newspaper. The article, dated 24
   January 2013, mentions the poverty faced by Biharis but also states that
   second generation Biharis have been granted a right of Bangladeshi
   citizenship and that between 70% and 80% have registered and received
   national identify documents.

14. Ms Sher also drew my attention to a 2011 report by the World Council of
   Churches. The report states that in 2008 the nationality rights of
   Biharis in Bangladesh were recognised but that many of them are not able
   to obtain proper documents, jobs, passports or compensation for their
   property confiscated during the war.

15. The information adduced by the appellant (all of which I have carefully
   reviewed) is very limited. It consists, for the most part, of short
   newspaper articles about Biharis from publications located in the region
   as well as a five year old report by the World Council of Churches which
   is mostly about issues other than Biharis. Taken together, this evidence,
   whilst indicating that Biharis face difficult circumstances, falls a long
   way short of showing persecution under the Refugee Convention. Indeed,
   the article from the Milli Gazette referred to above and which was
   highlighted by Ms Sher as supporting the appellant's case indicates that,
   contrary to Ms Sher's claim, most Biharis have in fact received national
   identity documents.

16. The objective evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal does not
   support a finding that the appellant would be at risk of persecution on
   return to Bangladesh on account of his Bihari ethnicity. Accordingly,
   even though I have found that the judge made an error by not referring to
   or making a finding in respect of the objective evidence adduced by the
   appellant, I am satisfied that the error was not material.


Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
   material error of law and shall stand.

18. The appeal is dismissed.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 22 November 2016              |

