
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03535/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 April 2017                       |On 11 May 2017                       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                   Mr E E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, Counsel instructed by Lei Dat & Baig
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant challenges the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge C M Bell dismissing his appeal against the decision made  by  the
    respondent to refuse to grant him asylum.  The basis of the appellant's
    claim was that he was an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait who  had  come
    to the attention of the authorities as a  result  of  attendance  at  a
    demonstration held in support of Bidoon in Kuwait.

2.   It is unnecessary for me to set  out  the  grounds  of  appeal  in  any
    detail as both parties were in agreement with me  that  the  FtT  Judge
    fell into material error in his treatment of the witness evidence.  The
    appellant called several witnesses including a Mr [MA].  This gentleman
    had been granted leave to remain as a  refugee  in  the  UK  after  his
    appeal had been allowed by Judge  Taylor  on  25  August  2016.   Judge
    Taylor's findings included acceptance that  [MA]  was  an  undocumented
    Bidoon from Kuwait.  [MA] signed a  witness  statement  and  also  gave
    evidence before Judge Taylor.  The essence of his evidence was:

    (1)  that he was friends with the appellant and  had  worked  with  him
         when they were both employed in stables in Iran; and

    (2)  that in February 2014 he had attended the  same  demonstration  as
         the appellant.


    At paragraphs 38 and 41 the judge said the following about [MA]:

         "38. I have a copy of the  appeal  determination  by  Judge  Taylor
             dated 31.8.16 which was allowed in his favour.   I  note  that
             the judge accepted that  the  appellant  was  an  undocumented
             Bidoon.  This appears to have been largely because his brother
             had already been granted refugee  status  as  an  undocumented
             Bidoon.  The tribunal judge accepted that the appellant was an
             undocumented Bidoon and accepted that the core of his  account
             was true.  However it is not clear from the determination that
             all aspects of his account were accepted.  The tribunal  judge
             did not make a clear finding that the appellant  had  attended
             demonstrations as claimed.

         ...

         41.   The  appellant  made  no  mention  of  either  of  these  two
             individuals in his asylum interview or his  witness  statement
             dated 7.9.16.  However he now states that he met them both  on
             separate  occasions,  completely  by  chance,  in  March   and
             April/May 2016 which was just after  the  appellant  had  been
             refused asylum.  He does not claim to have  them  met  through
             the Bidoon community but by chance at a shopping centre and at
             a bus station.  I find it most  unlikely  that  the  appellant
             could by chance have bumped into two  unconnected  people  who
             happen to have attended the same  fairly  small  demonstration
             that he says he  attended  on  18  February  2014  in  Kuwait.
             Furthermore it is unclear why either witness  would  be  in  a
             position to confirm that the  appellant  was  an  undocumented
             Bidoon.  He does not claim to have known Mr [A] well  when  in
             Kuwait and he had not met Mr [E] before apparently meeting him
             at the demonstration".


2.   There are two main difficulties with  the  judge's  treatment  of  this
    evidence.  First of all, the judge does not appear to have treated  the
    findings of fact made by Judge Taylor about [MA] regarding  his  status
    as an undocumented Bidoon as a starting-point;  the  judge  appears  to
    have focused only on what Judge Taylor found (or rather did  not  find)
    about [MA]'s attendance at the 2014 demonstration.  Whether or not,  as
    the judge found, the meeting between the appellant  and  [MA]  in  this
    country was too much of a coincidence, that did not in  itself  explain
    why [MA]'s evidence about  knowing  the  appellant  through  employment
    together stood to be rejected.  Second, in the absence of  any  reasons
    for not accepting [MA]'s evidence that he knew the appellant to  be  an
    undocumented  Bidoon,  it  was  quite  insufficient  as  a  reason  for
    discounting his evidence to state that the appellant did not appear  to
    know [MA] well.  If [MA] and the appellant had in fact worked together,
    it was reasonable to suppose they would each know about their status in
    terms of documentation or lack of it.

3.   In my judgment, the judge's treatment of [MA]'s evidence amounted to  a
    material error of law.

4.   I have not addressed the judge's  treatment  of  the  evidence  of  the
    other witnesses but I do note that the grounds challenging the  judge's
    treatment of their evidence appear to have at least arguable merit.  In
    any event, the judge's error in relation to [MA]'s evidence suffices in
    my view to necessitate that I set aside the decision and  remit  it  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.  It  goes  without  saying
    that the judge who deals with the remitted appeal will need to take the
    findings of fact made by Judge Taylor as a  starting-point.   That,  of
    course, does not necessarily mean that the judge must treat them  as  a
    finishing point.

5.   For the above reasons:

    The FtT judge materially erred in law and his decision is set aside.


    The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 8 May 2017
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


