
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03102/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester                         Decisions & Reasons Promulgated
On 23rd August 2018                                                    On
25th September 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    [M N]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Wood of Immigration Advice Services
For the respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo, born
      on 15 July 1982.


   2. She was questioned at Heathrow airport on arrival on 11 October
      2017.Her passport contained a ten-day visit Visa to attend an
      international teachers conference. She was asked about the conference
      and could give no details. She then made a claim for protection.

   3. She said she was a medical doctor and a visa had been arranged so she
      could get out of the country. She said she had been working in a
      hospital in Kinshasa on 7 August 2017 when a number of injured were
      admitted to the hospital following fighting between the authorities
      and members of a political party. After the incident, the authorities
      played down the number killed. The respondent felt obliged to correct
      this when a radio station crew came to the hospital. In the course of
      the interview she criticised Pres. Kabila and indicated support for
      doctors who were on strike.


   4. Because of this she was suspended from work. Then, on 9 August 2017
      two men from the State Intelligence came to her home with summonses
      which they left with her mother. On 12 August 2017 eight men came to
      her home looking for her but she was at work. When she heard of this
      she decided not to return home and went into hiding. She managed to
      get support from a family friend, Mr. SM who was a DRC Member of
      Parliament. He arranged with officials at the airport so she could
      pass through unhindered.


   5. The respondent refused the claim on 19 February 2018. The respondent
      did not accept she was a doctor which fundamentally undermined the
      chain of events described. She had claimed that she did not realise
      speaking on the radio could get her into trouble. This was not
      considered credible.

The First tier Tribunal

   6. Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lloyd- Smith
      on 5 April 2018. In a decision promulgated on 17 April 2018 it was
      dismissed. The judge did not find the appellant to be credible.
      Reference was made to differences within her account. At screening she
      had not mentioned speaking to a local radio station or of a summons
      having been issued. In her substantive interview she refers to
      speaking on the media and being critical of the regime. If this were
      the root of her problems the judge expected this would have been
      mentioned at the earliest opportunity.


   7. At screening she said she had received a general diploma/certificate
      in surgery and childbirth and the judge concluded this was not the
      qualification expected for a doctor. The appellant was asked at
      hearing about this and she said she had a diploma in general medicine
      but when she graduated her certificate also referred to her being a
      midwife and the surgeon. The judge did not find this convincing and
      included she most likely was a midwife.

   8. The judge also commented on the fact that whilst the appellant said
      she was afraid to return to work at the hospital after the summons
      arrived she continued working in another private hospital only 40 min
      drive away.

   9. The judge also found it incredible that she would go to the Embassy
      about her Visa if she had been living in fear and hiding. The judge
      did not accept she was of any interest to the authorities, pointing
      out she was able to obtain the Visa and then leave the country through
      the airport.

  10. At paragraph 16 (d) the judge commented on an identification card
      produced in the appellant's bundle and at paragraph 17 states that it
      and the other documents were only submitted the day before the
      hearing, thus offering no opportunity for the respondent to follow up
      with any enquiries. The photographs produced did not identify her as a
      doctor. One photograph showed her sitting behind a desk with a
      stethoscope around her neck. Another picture was of a baby being born
      by Caesarean section. The photographs showed gloved hands delivering
      the baby and did not identify the appellant.

The Upper Tribunal

  11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis
      the judge was mistaken in concluding supporting documents was only
      produced the day before the hearing. This was relevant to the weight
      the judge attached to the documentation and the respondent's ability
      to carry out checks. The grounds of appeal contended the documentation
      except the photographs was given to the respondent staff at the
      airport when she arrived. One of the documents was still retained by
      the respondent. It was pointed out that the respondent had not
      objected to the admission of the documentation nor was an adjournment
      sought in order to carry out verification tests. It was also argued
      the judge failed to properly consider the e-mail sent from a Congolese
      MP.


  12. It is not disputed that the judge has accurately set out the
      appellant's claim. The thrust of the challenge is really quite narrow
      and relates to the judge commenting that the documentary evidence was
      produced the day before the hearing and consequently the respondent
      was disadvantaged in carrying out checks. It is of note however that
      the judge gives many more reasons for rejecting the claim.

  13. It is accepted on behalf of the appellant that the appellant's bundle
      containing the documentation was only given the day before the
      hearing. It is contended however that the documents were before
      immigration officials at the airport and so the respondent was not
      disadvantaged. However, there is no correspondence in relation to
      this. She also claims that one item has still been retained yet there
      is no correspondence to support this.

  14. I have considered the case history. A Notice of Appeal dated 5 March
      2018 was filed by Immigration Advice Service. Directions issued on 7
      March 2018 required her representatives to provide a paginated indexed
      bundle of all documents relied upon. A prehearing review was to take
      place on 22 March 2018. This notice indicated that the full hearing
      was listed for 5 April 2018. A reply notice was returned to the
      Tribunal by her representatives indicating that a full appeal bundle
      was being prepared. The prehearing took place on 22 March 2018 by way
      of the papers and standard directions were issued.

  15. A notice of hearing was issued on 23 March 2018 advising the appellant
      and her representatives that the hearing was fixed for 5 April 2018. A
      letter was then received from her representatives dated 3 April 2018
      advising the Directions could not be met. Reference was made to
      difficulties arranging a meeting with the appellant including illness;
      adverse weather and problems obtaining an interpreter. There was also
      reference to some documents awaiting translation. An appeal bundle was
      received from the appellant's representatives under cover of a fax
      dated 4 April, being the day before the hearing. There was an index to
      the bundle which included a document said to confirm her employment as
      a doctor; photographs showing her at work and of the MP whom she said
      helped her along with an e-mail said to be from the same MP.


  16. The appellant arrived in the country on 11 October 2017. Her appeal
      was listed for 5 April 2018, almost 6 months later. Her
      representatives indicated they were having problems complying with the
      Directions. However there was no reference to earlier production of
      original documentation or of documentation being retained by
      immigration officials when the appellant arrived. As it turned out the
      documentation was not particularly voluminous.

  17. I have considered the information that was placed before the judge.
      2.6 of the screening asked the appellant what her level of education
      was. The reply was a general diploma/certificate in surgery and giving
      birth from the University. A 13 of the respondent's bundle contains a
      risk assessment when she arrived at Heathrow. There is a section which
      is ticked indicating documents were retained but these are not
      identified. At question 25 of the appellant's substantive interview
      she refers to having a degree rather than the diploma or certificate.
      She gave some details about working in a hospital and referred to the
      Hippocratic Oath. C1 and 2 are documents in French from the Faculty of
      Medicine in Kinshasa. These are referred to in the refusal letter at
      paragraph 19.

  18. In the decision at paragraph 9 the judge refers to having received
      inter alia a copy of the appellant's service card as a doctor. The
      judge also refers to photographs of the appellant working. Before me
      Mr Wood indicated the former was a copy subsequently sent to her by
      her sister. At paragraph 10 the judge then refers to the principal in
      Tanveer Ahmed.

  19. At paragraph 13 onwards the judge sets out why she concludes the
      appellant is not credible. The judge mentions her reference to a
      diploma/certificate at screening and then to having a degree in her
      substantive interview. The judge evaluated the appellant's explanation
      and did not find it convincing. This was a matter for the judge.

  20. At paragraph 16 onwards the judge deals with the appellant's claim to
      be a doctor. The judge comments on the photographs. I can find no
      fault with the comments made. In themselves the photographs do not
      confirm that she is a doctor but would suggest she is working in a
      hospital, possibly as a nurse as the judge concluded. There is also a
      photograph of a baby being delivered. Again the same logic applies.

  21. The identification card was produced at a late stage. There is no
      evidence to suggest the respondent had this earlier and the judge
      makes a fair comment that if it were produced late then the respondent
      would not had an opportunity to seek verification. It is not
      sufficient to suggest an adjournment should have been sought. It is up
      to the appellant's representative to comply with the Directions.

  22. The judge makes a similar comment about the letter from the MP and
      deals with the document at paragraph 17.

  23. Ultimately, it is my conclusion the appellant's representatives have
      focused upon a very narrow point. It has not been established the
      documentation was before the respondent in time for checks to be
      carried out. In any event the judge clearly only refers to this as one
      aspect of the claim. The judge gives numerous reasons for finding the
      claim is not credible. Given the evidence provided it was reasonable
      for the judge to find that the appellant had some association with a
      hospital most likely as a midwife as her qualifications suggested. In
      summary I can find no material error of law established when the
      decision is looked at in its entirety.

  Decision
  No material error in the decision of First-tier Judge Lloyd-Smith has
been established. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appellant's
appeal shall stand.
Francis J Farrelly
 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                             Date: 22 September
2018

