
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/03340/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Edinburgh                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 12 March 2020                     |on 19 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                                  HUNG [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, of A J Bradley & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Gillespie dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 September 2019.

 2. The appellant applied to the FtT on 27 September 2019 for permission to
    appeal to the UT.  His grounds were (1) assessing credibility prior  to
    considering the expert report and (2) inadequacy of reasoning.  The FtT
    refused permission on 30 October 2019.

 3. The appellant applied to the UT on 28  November  2019,  presenting  the
    same grounds, adding on  (1)  that  the  decision  does  not  bear  the
    interpretation that the evidence was treated holistically, and  on  (2)
    that in the sur place claim the FtT erred  on  whether  the  Vietnamese
    authorities distinguish between genuine opponents and hangers-on.

 4. UT Judge Pickup granted permission on 5 December 2019, on the view that
    the drafting of the decision rendered it arguable that the judge failed
    to consider the evidence as a whole before reaching his conclusion.

 5. Mr Bradley submitted along the lines of the grounds. He added that  the
    expert  report  confirmed  that  the  Vietnamese  authorities  deployed
    unidentifiable  thugs,  in  a  way  which  was  consistent   with   the
    appellant's account, and which enhanced plausibility  and  credibility.
    The judge made no reference to that  when  rejecting  the  claim  about
    incidents in 2013.  He also submitted that the FtT overlooked case  law
    and background evidence about the repressive and irrational  nature  of
    the authorities when concluding that they  would  target  only  genuine
    activists and not hangers-on in sur place activities.

 6. Mr Govan submitted that the  decision  gave  ample  clear  reasons  for
    finding against the appellant, and that [26]  should  not  be  read  as
    reaching a final conclusion on credibility before turning to the expert
    report.

 7. I found that the decision was not sustainable.

 8. Judges should not be criticised too readily for  dealing  with  matters
    point by point, as they have to adopt some order of treatment;  but  it
    has to be clear that they have  made  their  final  assessment  in  the
    round.  This decision can only sensibly be read as having  rejected  at
    [26] the appellant's account of events in Vietnam before turning to the
    rest of the evidence, including the expert report.  That report is then
    discussed with reference to events  outside  the  Embassy  in  the  UK,
    without noticing  the  significance  it  might  have  about  events  in
    Vietnam.

 9. Quite a number of the findings stated by the judge (although  not  all)
    express that the appellant's allegations are not credible, but  without
    attaching a reason.  In some instances,  an  obvious  reason  might  be
    implied, but not in all; and reasons should be explicit.

10. The judge was not helped by the  inclusion  in  the  expert  report  of
    statements about the risk to the appellant on account of his  religious
    conviction and practice in Vietnam, dealt with at [27].  The  appellant
    never made any claim based on religion.

11. The judge was also hindered by the state of the papers produced for the
    appellant.  The decision describes this at [22] as  "rather  haphazard"
    but might have gone further.  The papers are piecemeal and chaotic.

12. Making allowances for these matters, and for those reasons in which  no
    error has been alleged, the error committed at [26] is such a clear one
    that the decision cannot safely stand.  Parties  agreed  that  on  that
    view, the outcome should be as follows.

13. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  It is appropriate under  section  12  of
    the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for
    an entirely fresh hearing.

14. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Gillespie.

15. The appellant must provide a fresh, clear and comprehensive bundle  for
    the rehearing.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]
      12 March 2020
      Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
