

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/03169/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                  |Decision and reasons           |
|on: 28 September 2017                  |Promulgated On: 16 October 2017|
|                                       |                               |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                             MR BILAL BOUMEDIENE
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr D Bazini of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins, Senior Presenting Officer


                                                    DECSION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on  11  November  1994.  He
      appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 30 April 2008 to
      refuse to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection in  the  United
      Kingdom although he was granted discretionary leave until 19 May  2011
      as he was a minor. The appellant appealed on 5 June 2008 which  appeal
      was withdrawn on 20 June 2008. The appellant made an  application  for
      further leave to remain on 6 May 2011 and his application was  refused
      and it was decided that the appellant was now an adult and  no  longer
      an unaccompanied child asylum seeker. The respondent issued a  further
      refusal decision of 8 March 2016 which made reference to  the  earlier
      decision of 30 April 2008 refusing his asylum claim.


   2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne gave  the  appellant  permission  to
      appeal on 3 July 2017. The permission Judge gave full consideration to
      the  allegation  that  there  had  been  an   inadvertent   procedural
      unfairness to the appellant  because  the  fax  that  the  appellant's
      representatives sent to the Tribunal on 2 March 2017,  requesting  for
      an adjournment a day before the hearing, was not  placed  before  him.
      The fax was marked urgent and sent asking that a new hearing  date  to
      be listed because the appellant cannot attend the hearing for  medical
      reasons. The Judge found that it is arguable there had been procedural
      unfairness even if blame cannot  be  attributable  to  the  Judge  for
      proceeding to prepare and produce the decision.


   3. Thus, the appeal came before me.


   4. It was agreed on behalf of the appellant at the hearing that the Judge
      cannot be criticised because their letter requesting that  the  appeal
      be listed for another day due to the appellant's unavailability due to
      medical reasons was not placed before him.


   5. The senior presenting officer said that the appellant did not have  to
      attend the hospital on the day of the hearing because the letter  from
      the hospital merely requested the appellant  make  an  appointment  to
      have a heart monitor fitted and he could have made on  an  appointment
      another day as there was no suggestion that it was urgent.  Mr  Bazini
      on behalf of the appellant argued that the appellant had  an  accident
      on 26 February 2017 which had  led  him  to  being  hospitalised.  The
      appellant social worker sent an email to the legal  representative  to
      request that they contact the Tribunal to ask for a different  hearing
      date. The appellant's legal  representatives  faxed  a  letter  marked
      urgent and faxed it to the Tribunal.


   6. I accept that the Judge did not receive the fax which was evident from
      his decision because he made  no  reference  to  this  letter  of  the
      appellant's representatives requesting an adjournment.  In  fact,  the
      Judge stated that the appellant may not even be in the United  Kingdom
      which is contradictory to the fax by the appellant's representative on
      the morning of the hearing that the appellant has had an accident  and
      cannot attend.


   7. Whatever led to the Judge not receiving the fax on the morning of  the
      hearing was, I believe due to administrative error as the fax was sent
      only a day before the hearing date. It was argued  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant that failure by  the  Judge  to  grant  him  an  adjournment
      deprived him of a fair hearing.  It is not inconceivable that in  this
      busy Tribunal, external communication  does  not  reach  the  relevant
      files or parties immediately.


   8. As stated the Judge cannot be criticised because all he  knew  at  the
      hearing was that there had been no attendance by the appellant or  his
      legal representatives, although  hearing  notices  had  been  properly
      sent. The Judge was therefore  perfectly  within  his  rights  not  to
      adjourn the appeal and/or set a new date. Therefore, the  question  is
      whether the Tribunal's administrative oversight deprived the appellant
      of his right to a fair hearing.


   9. In SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2011] EWCA Civ 1284. In R(on the application of AM (Cameroon)  v  AIT
      2007 EWCA Civ 131 the Court of Appeal said that  unfair  decisions  on
      interlocutory matters,  such  as  adjournments  or  the  admission  of
      evidence, can amount to errors of law.  Such decisions will have to be
      grounds for arguing that they display gross procedural unfairness or a
      complete denial of natural justice.


  10. In the instant case that the adjournment request was on the basis that
      the appellant was unable to attend the hearing because he had a  prior
      hospital appointment to fit a heart monitor on his heart which fax was
      not placed before the Judge. I find that wherever the fault lies,  the
      purport of it remains that  the  appellant  was  deprived  of  a  fair
      hearing which is his fundamental right.


  11. I therefore set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
      direct that the appeal be placed before  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to be heard afresh. I also direct  Article  8  be  considered
      adequately.


   Decision


   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


   I make no anonymity order
   I make no fee order




Signed by

A Deputy Judge of  the  upper  Tribunal                 Dated  11th  day  of
   October 2017
Mrs S Chana








