
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03522/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 October 2018                           |On 21 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     s r
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Tobin of Counsel instructed by Tamil Welfare
Association
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Obhi promulgated on 20 August 2018 dismissing the Appellant's appeal on
    protection grounds against a decision of the Respondent dated  9  March
    2018 to refuse her asylum in the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  Her personal  details  are  a
    matter of record on file and are not reproduced here  in  keeping  with
    the anonymity direction that has been made  in  these  proceedings  and
    which I continue.


3.   In  circumstances  where  ultimately  I  have  determined  that  it  is
    appropriate for this appeal to be returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to remake the decision in the appeal with all issues at large, I do not
    propose to rehearse in full detail the Appellant's immigration history,
    or all of the claimed facts and circumstances relevant  to  her  asylum
    claim.  Suffice to say for present purposes: the Appellant  claimed  to
    have undergone LTTE training and to  have  provided  help  for  injured
    soldiers and given them food in  or  about  2007  (First-tier  Tribunal
    decision at paragraph 5); she claimed  that  in  consequence  of  these
    activities she was the subject of adverse attention on the part of  the
    authorities and was detained on two occasions.


4.   These key matters are conveniently summarised at paragraphs 3 and 4  of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

         "3.  During her  interview  the  Appellant  said  that  she  feared
             returning to Sri Lanka because  of  the  authorities  who  had
             arrested her on two occasions for supporting the Tamil Tigers.
              She said that the first arrest occurred on the 18 August 2009
             and that she was detained for 6 months at that time  and  that
             she was taken to court on a charge of being a  Member  of  the
             LTTE.  The second arrest occurred on the 22 January 2016.  She
             said that she was told to go to Killinochi police station, she
             was bailed and told that she would  have  to  return  whenever
             required, but she left the country and came to the UK.


         4.   She claims that after she  had  left  they  visited  her  home
             address and spoke to her father who told  them  that  she  had
             left the country.  Her father died shortly thereafter  from  a
             heart attack.  She claims that following the first arrest  she
             was released on bail but not the second  occasion  her  father
             intervened and got an MP involved.  The  Appellant  said  that
             she has not spoken out against the government whilst  she  was
             in Sri Lanka.  However she had actively shown support for  the
             LTTE."


5.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused  by  the  Respondent
    for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated  9
    March 2018.


6.   In turn her appeal to the IAC was dismissed for reasons set out in  the
    Decision and Reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi.


7.   It is to be noted that it appears that the Respondent's  representative
    before the First-tier Tribunal acknowledged that "the  case  turned  on
    credibility" (see paragraph 37).


8.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  whilst  accepting  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's  history,  rejected  her  account   of   the   nature   and
    circumstances of the detention in 2009 and the detention in 2016:

         "I do not believe that it is reasonably likely that  the  Appellant
         was arrested as she claims in 2009 and in 2016.  I find that it  is
         reasonably likely that she was involved in training with  the  LTTE
         and that she was caught up in the events which followed the  defeat
         of the LTTE in 2009, and that she was detained at a camp by the Sri
         Lankan government, but the level of her involvement was of  a  very
         low level, there is no evidence that she is of any current interest
         to the authorities.  She has not engaged  in  any  anti-Sri  Lankan
         activities outside of Sri Lanka.  Whilst she has  scarring  on  her
         body there are other explanations for it.  Whilst I accept that  as
         a vulnerable witness she was unlikely to have detailed  her  claims
         of  physical  and  sexual  abuse  unless  she  needed  to,  it   is
         significant that when she underwent her screening interview she did
         not mention any involvement with the LTTE.  I accept that  she  has
         been the victim of domestic abuse and that her marriage has come to
         an end.  The timing of that and the making of the asylum claim  are
         significant." (paragraph 56).


9.   I pause to note  that  although  the  Judge  states  therein  that  the
    Appellant did not refer to any  "involvement"  with  the  LTTE  at  the
    screening interview, she nonetheless asserted at 5.3 "In  Sri  Lanka  I
    was arrested and suspected of being an LTTE member" and at 5.4  "I  was
    detained in Sri Lanka for being accused of being a member of the LTTE".
    Of course in stating that she was accused of involvement, the Appellant
    was not expressly stating that she was involved. However, the  argument
    raised by the Respondent was not simply that she had not mentioned  any
    involvement  at  the  screening  interview  but  that  she  had  denied
    involvement - and therefore her claim made at the substantive interview
    to have been involved was  subject  to  attack  not  on  the  basis  of
    omission but on the basis of discrepancy: see RFRL at paragraph 40. The
    Respondent relied on  the  answer  to  section  5.5  of  the  screening
    interview where it is recorded that the Appellant had responded "NO" to
    the question:

         "Have you ever been involved with, or  accused  of  being  involved
         with any


          - pro-government groups
          - political organisation
          - religious organisation
          - armed or violent organisation, group or party?"


10.  It may readily be seen that the answer  "No"  to  such  a  conglomerate
    question is not reconcilable with  the  immediately  preceding  answers
    that the Appellant had given on the screening interview at section  5.3
    and 5.4 that she had been accused of being a member of the  LTTE.  This
    suggest a degree of misunderstanding.  In the circumstances it seems to
    me that the answer recorded at section 5.5 is not a reliable foundation
    for concluding the Appellant denied involvement with the  LTTE  in  the
    screening  interview.   In  any  event  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been involved in the LTTE, so it is difficult to see  why
    the Judge thought it was adverse that there was no express  mention  of
    such involvement in the screening interview. Be  that  as  it  may,  in
    overall consideration of the grounds of challenge before  me,  this  is
    very much a subsidiary point.


11.  The primary focus of  challenge  relates  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's treatment of certain items of supporting documentary  evidence.
    Paragraphs 53 and 54 of the decision are in these terms:

         "53. I have considered the  additional  evidence  provided  by  the
             Appellant, in the form of a letter from the MP  which  appears
             at page 38 of the Appellant's bundle and is dated the 6  April
             2018 (or the 4 June 2018 -  it  is  not  clear)  in  which  he
             recites what he has been told by the Appellant's  mother.   He
             states that on the 5 March 2018 two CID members  went  to  her
             house and accused the Appellant of 'reorganising the  LTTE  in
             the UK'.  I have not been able to read  the  letter  from  the
             attorney as it is in Tamil nor the letter from the Appellant's
             mother.


         54.  I place limited weight on this letter as it is almost entirely
             a statement of what the MP has been told  by  the  Appellant's
             mother."


12.  The MP's  letter  does  indeed  in  part  set  out  matters  that  were
    seemingly reported to him  by  the  Appellant's  mother  concerning  an
    incident in March 2018.  Having done so, the letter continues in  these
    terms:

     "It is worth mentioning here that Mrs [I]'s daughter, [the  Appellant],
         was an ex-LTTE member and she was arrested, detained  and  tortured
         by the TID and the state forces on two occasions  in  2009  and  in
         2016.
         In 2016 I was informed  by  late  Mr  [I]  that  her  daughter  was
         arrested and sought assistance from me in order to be released from
         the detention.  I have attended Killinochi police station  together
         with late Mr [I] and we paid a lump sum to the Chief Police and she
         was released".

     The letter then goes on to relate the 2009 arrest, although nothing  in
    the paragraph so doing identifies that the author of the letter had any
    direct involvement or knowledge in matters at that time.


13.  It is absolutely clear that in part the MP's letter provides  testimony
    purporting  to  place  him  at  Killinochi  Police  Station  with   the
    Appellant's father at a time  when  the  Appellant  was  detained,  and
    describing his  being  instrumental  in  securing  her  release.   This
    necessarily  therefore  is  testimony  that  purports  to   corroborate
    directly from first-hand experience the account of the  Appellant.   It
    may be recalled from the recitation at paragraph 4  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision (set out above) that it was part of the Appellant's
    case that "her father intervened and got an MP involved" in the context
    of the second arrest.


14.  Irrespective of the validity of the Judge's observation  that  part  of
    the MP's letter was a recitation of what had been reported to him, such
    a circumstance does not in itself undermine the  pertinent  aspects  of
    the letter that are based on the writer's claimed direct experience and
    observations.  This key passage of the letter is not addressed  at  all
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, notwithstanding  its  pertinence  and
    its potential to be directly corroborative of the  Appellant's  account
    of her arrest and detention in  2016.   The  failure  to  address  this
    aspect of the letter is not justified by the observations made  by  the
    Judge at paragraph 54.  In my judgement this  is  a  critical  material
    error of law.


15.  As regards the other documents referenced at paragraph 53  -  a  letter
    from an attorney  and  a  letter  from  the  Appellant's  mother  -  it
    transpires that translations were before the Judge in respect  of  both
    documents.


16.  The materials from  the  attorney  are  particularly  pertinent.   They
    comprise two letters.  The first, dated 22 January 2010,  is  from  the
    attorney to the Registrar at the Chief Magistrates  Court  in  Colombo,
    cites a case number and requests  a  certified  copy  of  the  complete
    record of proceedings in the case to be issued to the  Appellant.   The
    second is a document signed from Welikada Prison which  refers  to  the
    subject  of  the  letter  having  been  released  from  remand  custody
    following an order of the court on 22 January 2010, having been held in
    remand custody at the women's wing, Welikada  Prison  from  3  December
    2009 to 22  January  2010.   Both  documents  purport  to  support  the
    Appellant's claim to have been arrested and detained in 2009.


17.  Ms Isherwood in the course of her submissions  identified  some  issues
    and concerns relating to these documents which  might  undermine  their
    probative value.  I discuss  these  matters  further  below.   However,
    notwithstanding Ms Isherwood's observations, it seems  to  me  that  it
    cannot be said that these documents were not  material  to  an  overall
    consideration of  the  Appellant's  case.   In  the  circumstances  the
    Judge's apparent oversight in not  identifying  the  translations  that
    were before the  Tribunal  amounts  to  a  fundamental  error  of  fact
    constituting an  error  of  law.   This  -  both  on  its  own  and  in
    combination with the error in respect of  the  MP's  letter  -  further
    renders the decision of the First-tier Tribunal unsafe.


18.  Accordingly I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    error of law.


19.  I have had a helpful discussion with the representatives as to  whether
    the decision in the appeal should be remade before the  Upper  Tribunal
    or before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  is  to  be  noted  that  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal were by way  of  submissions
    only, a decision having been taken that the Appellant  would  not  give
    live evidence because of her medical and mental  health  circumstances.
    In this regard it is to be noted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    acknowledged that the Appellant was a vulnerable  individual.   Had  it
    not been for the identification of issues in relation to the  materials
    from  the  attorney,  I  might  have  been  minded  to  proceed  to   a
    consideration of remaking  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  submissions
    forthwith.  However, issues have now been raised in relation  to  those
    documents and in all of the circumstances  it  seems  to  me  that  the
    Appellant should now be afforded an opportunity to provide some further
    evidence as to provenance, and/or possibly to clarify any confusion  or
    discrepancy that might be apparent on their  face.   On  balance  I  am
    persuaded that the most appropriate forum for  reconsideration  of  the
    appeal is the First-tier Tribunal with all issues at large.


20.  One of the issues raised in relation to the documents that are said  to
    have been sourced  via  the  Appellant's  attorney  is  that  the  case
    reference number that appears on the attorney's enquiry letter does not
    match the case reference number that appears on  the  prison  document.
    Ms  Isherwood  has  also  identified  that  the  formulation   of   the
    Appellant's name is not identical as between the documents - the extent
    to which this may be down to legibility or the  attempt  to  transcribe
    phonetically a Tamil script name into  English  is  unclear.   In  this
    latter regard the scope for variation is perhaps undermined by the fact
    that it appears to be the same translator in both documents.   Be  that
    as it may, it seems to me that  there  may  need  to  be  some  careful
    scrutiny of both of the originals with a view to clarifying this issue.




21.  So far as the case number is concerned, this is a matter to  which  the
    Appellant and her  advisors  will  need  to  give  some  consideration.
    Submissions before me proceeded on the  apparent  assumption  that  the
    second document was a response  to  the  first  document;  however,  on
    closer scrutiny it seems to me that that is not  inevitably  the  case.
    As noted above, the first document is addressed to the Registrar at the
    Magistrates' Court and is asking for a record of  proceedings,  whereas
    the second document is simply a  confirmation  of  detention  from  the
    prison issued upon request of the Appellant - it may not be a  document
    that is a response to the enquiry raised by the lawyer. The  extent  to
    which this offers any explanation for the different  case  numbers  may
    yet need to be explored.


22.  It may also be noted that the specified period of detention is  from  3
    December 2009 to 22 January 2010 (approximately six weeks), whereas the
    Appellant claims to have been detained for six months. Again  this  may
    need careful consideration and explanation.


23.  Ms Tobin indicated that it was  presently  likely  that  the  Appellant
    would again not wish to give evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In the circumstances the earlier requirement for an all-female Tribunal
    no longer  pertains.   If  however  circumstances  change,  whether  by
    reference to the Appellant's wish to  give  evidence  because  of  some
    improvement in  her  underlying  mental  health  or  her  circumstances
    perhaps deteriorate such that she would not even be content  to  remain
    in the same hearing room as a Tribunal involving male  members,  it  is
    open to the Appellant's representatives to seek to make an  appropriate
    application to the Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

24.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


25.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Obhi  with
    all issue at large.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 19 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

