
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03955/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2016                   |On 9 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     WA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, counsel instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M R
    Oliver, promulgated on 15 August 2016. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt on 7 October 2016.



Anonymity

   2. A direction has been made previously, and this is maintained.



Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 14 December 2004 with leave
    to enter as a visitor. Nothing further was  heard  from  the  appellant
    until 24 March 2012 when he was encountered during an immigration  raid
    and arrested  as  an  overstayer.  On  28  March  2012,  the  appellant
    unsuccessfully applied to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of
    his Article 8 rights. A further application made on the same basis  was
    refused on 22 August 2013. It would appear that the appellant absconded
    and he next came to light on 24  July  2015  when  he  was  encountered
    during a second immigration  raid.  On  30  July  2015,  the  appellant
    applied for asylum.

 4. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim stems from an argument he had
    in a village mosque with a mullah in 2003. Following  that  event,  the
    appellant was wanted for blasphemy owing to his comments to the Mullah;
    his cousins were shot and his uncle killed. Two  of  those  responsible
    were arrested and sentenced to imprisonment.  Upon  one  of  those  men
    being released on bail, the appellant pursued him and shot him  in  the
    neck, killing him. The appellant left Pakistan some  considerable  time
    later, his  departure  being  delayed  by  the  refusal  of  his  first
    application for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a visitor.

 5. The Secretary of State concluded that there was no  Refugee  Convention
    reason apparent from the facts of the appellant's case. The  respondent
    rejected the appellant's claim owing  to  inconsistencies  between  and
    within his accounts, his ability to leave Pakistan in his own  identity
    and his delay in seeking asylum despite having the opportunity to do so
    on two occasions. Even if his claim were accepted, the  respondent  was
    of the view that the appellant feared prosecution for  a  non-political
    crime rather than persecution and as such he fell to be  excluded  from
    protection  under  the  refugee  convention  and  from   a   grant   of
    humanitarian protection. It was not accepted that prison conditions  in
    Pakistan were persecutory or  amounted  to  serious  harm  contrary  to
    Article 3 ECHR.



The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  denied
    that he had killed one of the individuals who had been jailed  for  the
    claimed attack on his relatives. He explained that he had been  wrongly
    accused. He called two witnesses who confirmed that the  appellant  was
    wanted in his home area in Pakistan for murder.  The  judge  noted  the
    "twists and turns" to the  appellant's  story,  his  delay  in  seeking
    asylum and the unmeritorious Article 8 applications and  dismissed  his
    appeal on all grounds.



The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal in support of the application argue, essentially,
    that the judge was not entitled to express his opinion on  the  meaning
    of blasphemy in Pakistan;  that  the  judge  failed  to  refer  to  the
    totality of the evidence before him and make findings  on  it  and  the
    judge failed to make findings of fact on the substance of the claim.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought, on all grounds.

 9. The respondent's  Rule  24  response,  received  on  20  October  2016,
    indicated that the Secretary of State was unable to  agree  that  there
    was an error of law because she had not received the grounds of appeal.
    Complaint was made regarding this omission  and  it  was  said  that  a
    timely response to a grant of permission could only be  provided  under
    circumstances in which both the grounds of appeal and the determination
    were available to the respondent.



The hearing

10. As indicated above, Ms Isherwood had not had sight of  the  grounds  of
    appeal. I therefore provided a spare copy of the same which was on  the
    case file and gave her time to consider them. There was some discussion
    as to what objective evidence was before the judge.  I  indicated  that
    there was a 37-page bundle on the file, whereas neither  representative
    had any such item. From the outset, Ms  Isherwood  indicated  that  the
    respondent was in difficulty with regard to [28] of the decision  owing
    to the fact  that  the  judge  found  the  appellant's  claim  to  fear
    persecution because of suggesting that the prophet Mohammed died, to be
    implausible, while  making  no  reference  to  the  objective  evidence
    regarding blasphemy which was before him.

11. Mr Balroop  needed  to  say  nothing  further  regarding  [28]  of  the
    decision. He continued to rely on the grounds  and  submitted  that  at
    [29] the judge had referred to a single FIR in relation  to  subjective
    evidence, however there were a number of  documents  before  the  judge
    including more than one FIR, as well as an arrest warrant. Thirdly,  Mr
    Balroop argued that the judge's finding, that the  appellant  had  only
    complained of misinterpretation during the hearing, was unfair in  view
    of the evidence  before  the  judge  regarding  the  complaint  of  the
    appellant's solicitors that the  interview  record  was  illegible.  He
    submitted that the combination of these errors amounted to  a  material
    errors of law.

12. In reply, Ms Isherwood highlighted one or two credibility issues  which
    she indicated were sustainable, however she accepted that the judge had
    referred to just one of the FIR's.

13. In closing, Mr Balroop asked me to note that the witness had mentioned,
    in his statement, that the appellant was  suspected  of  blasphemy  and
    thus the judge was wrong to rely on  only  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    witness.



Decision on error of law

14. At the end of the hearing, I announced  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made material errors of law in this matter. My reasons are as follows.

15. The judge considered it implausible that the  appellant  would  face  a
    charge of blasphemy owing to his claimed views on the prophet.  Indeed,
    at [28] the judge states, "The suggestion that the prophet died and  is
    therefore not alive is hardly novel."  The  judge's  views  of  Islamic
    doctrine were not supported by reference to any material before him. By
    contrast, the appellant sought to rely on a 37-page bundle which  began
    with an article on Pakistan's blasphemy  laws  as  well  as  mainstream
    international press articles on the plight of other individuals alleged
    to have been blasphemous. There was no mention of, let alone engagement
    with this material. This error, by itself, would not have  amounted  to
    sufficient reasons to justify setting aside the decision in view of the
    judge's adverse credibility findings.

16. The judge further erred in failing to have regard  to  the  appellant's
    subjective material.  The  only  document  referred  to  by  the  judge
    appeared at [29], when he refers to "what his uncle stated in the FIR."
    Between pages 20-69 of the appellant's bundle  were  photocopies  of  a
    number of documents together with translations. While it is fair to say
    that there is no indexation of these items, which  appear  towards  the
    rear of the appellant's bundle of evidence, a  cursory  glance  reveals
    more than one FIR, more than one post-mortem report  and  a  number  of
    arrest  warrants.  Regardless  of  the  view  that  was  taken  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's claims, he  was  entitled  to  have  the
    evidence  he  submitted  assessed  and   considered   in   the   round.
    Accordingly,  the  judge's  failure  to  take  into  consideration  the
    subjective and objective material before him,  amounts  to  a  material
    error of law.

17. It is necessary for the judge's findings  to  be  set  aside  in  their
    entirety because the negative credibility findings, in particular, were
    reached without consideration  of  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 4 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

