
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03231/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Thursday 21 November 2019         |On Thursday 28 November 2019         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                 SALMAN AMIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini, Counsel, instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bird promulgated on 2  August  2019  ("the  Decision")  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  dated  22  March
    2019 refusing his human rights claim.  The  Respondent's  decision  was
    made in the context of a  decision  refusing  to  grant  the  Appellant
    indefinite leave to remain and that is the  focus  of  the  Appellant's
    grounds of appeal both before the First-tier Tribunal and before us.

 2. The Appellant asserts that he has been lawfully resident in the UK  for
    ten years.  The Judge did not accept  that  this  was  the  case.   She
    expressly considered an argument put forward for the Appellant that  he
    had continuing leave under Section 3C Immigration Act 1971 ("Section 3C
    leave") based on his family relationship with  his  brother  who  is  a
    British citizen and who it is said was exercising EU Treaty  rights  by
    reason of a short period spent in Ireland.  It  was  said  that,  as  a
    result of the Appellant's dependency on his brother, he was entitled to
    remain in the UK under EU law as his brother's extended  family  member
    and could benefit from Section  3C  leave.   The  Judge  rejected  that
    argument.  Her conclusion in that regard is not  challenged  -  rightly
    so.

 3. However, the Appellant also raised  an  argument  that,  since  he  was
    residing in the UK under EU law, such period  of  residence  should  be
    counted as lawful residence applying the Respondent's  policy  entitled
    "Long Residence: Version 15.0"  published  on  3  April  2017  (see  in
    particular page [24] of [43]).  At the very  least,  it  is  said,  the
    Judge was obliged to consider the exercise of discretion in that regard
    and has failed to do so. That was then, says the Appellant, relevant to
    the public interest when coming to assess the Article 8 claim.

 4. Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  ID  Boyes  on  2
    September 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

    "2.  The grounds assert that the Judge erred in failing to  consider  a
         matter raised by the appellant.

    3.   Permission to  appeal  is  granted  as  the  grounds  are  clearly
         arguable."

 5. The matter came before us to decide whether the Decision  does  contain
    any error of law.  At the end of the hearing, we indicated that we were
    satisfied  that  no  material  error  of  law  was  disclosed  by   the
    Appellant's grounds and that we would provide our  reasons  in  writing
    for so finding which we now turn to do.




    DISCUSSION

 6. In order to understand the reason why we found  no  material  error  of
    law, it is necessary to say something  about  the  chronology  in  this
    case.  The Appellant came to the UK as a student on 22 September  2007.
    His leave was extended, first in that category, thereafter as a Tier  1
    Post-Study Worker and then  again  as  a  student  to  30  March  2016.
    However, on 26 November 2014, his leave was curtailed to expire  on  30
    January 2015 because his sponsor's licence was revoked.  He made an in-
    time application to remain outside the Immigration Rules ("the  Rules")
    which was refused on 27 August 2015.

 7. On 1 September 2015, the Appellant made the application for a residence
    permit under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    ("the EEA Regulations") to remain  as  his  brother's  extended  family
    member.  That application was refused by the Respondent on 19  February
    2016.  His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Bell on 6 February 2017.   The  Appellant  was  not  present  nor
    represented.  The Respondent was not present  either.   We  infer  that
    this may be because, at that time, the case of  Sala  (EFMs:  right  of
    appeal: Albania) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) was in force and meant that  the
    Judge was bound to dismiss the appeal for want of  jurisdiction.   When
    doing so, however, the Judge recorded the content of  the  Respondent's
    decision refusing the application  at  [2]  and  [3]  of  the  decision
    promulgated on 21 February 2017.  The Judge noted that  the  Respondent
    had not accepted the relationship because there was only a six  months'
    difference in age between the Appellant and the person he  claimed  was
    his "real brother".  Further, the Appellant's brother had only  resided
    in Ireland for a period of three months from April to July 2015 and the
    Respondent did not accept that he had genuinely transferred the  centre
    of his life to Ireland and had therefore not exercised Treaty rights.

 8. At the outset of the hearing, we drew Mr  Saini's  attention  to  those
    facts.  He confirmed on instruction that the Appellant and his  brother
    were related as claimed.  They could not explain the difference in  age
    being less than nine months but said that they were prepared to undergo
    DNA testing to establish the relationship.  Reliance was placed on  the
    brother's time spent in Ireland, notwithstanding the shortness of  time
    spent there, as establishing rights under EU law.  It was not said that
    the Appellant accompanied his brother to Ireland  and  that  period  of
    absence also undermined the statement made  in  this  matter  that  the
    Appellant had continuously lived with  his  brother  at  his  brother's
    family home throughout the period from October 2008.

 9. In order to complete  the  chronology,  we  note  that,  following  the
    exhaustion of his appeal rights on 8 March 2017, the Appellant  applied
    for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his  family  and  private
    life.  He varied that application to one for  indefinite  leave  on  11
    December 2017.  The Respondent refused that application  and  certified
    the human rights claim under section 94  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  The Appellant challenged certification.  The judicial
    review papers are within the Appellant's bundle and, we  note,  contain
    no reference to the Appellant's residence being  lawful  by  reason  of
    time  spent  under  EU  law  (although  the  application,  refusal  and
    dismissal of the appeal  are  part  of  the  factual  background  there
    stated).

10. Although the application for permission to apply  for  judicial  review
    was granted on the papers and subsequently resolved by consent so  that
    the Respondent could reconsider her decision, we also observe that,  at
    no time after February 2017 did the Appellant  seek  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Bell dismissing the appeal on "Sala" grounds,  either
    by way of judicial review of the Respondent's underlying decision or by
    way of an application for permission to  appeal  out  of  time.  As  it
    transpires, he was right not to do so.

11. In addition to drawing Mr Saini's attention to the facts  to  which  we
    refer at [7] above which elicited the response we have recorded at  [8]
    above, we also drew his attention to a point which we accept Judge Bell
    had not noted which is the basis of the Appellant's  brother's  EU  law
    rights.  The Appellant's brother is a British citizen.  The only  basis
    on which he could be said to be exercising EU law rights  was  in  2015
    when he went to  Ireland  for  three  months.   However,  in  order  to
    establish a case  under  Regulation  8  of  the  EEA  Regulations,  the
    Appellant would  have  to  show  not  only  present  dependency  on  or
    membership of the household of an EEA national.  He would also have  to
    show that he was previously dependent on his brother or a member of his
    household before he came to  the  UK  from  Pakistan.   Crucially,  the
    Appellant's brother would at that time himself have to be exercising EU
    Treaty rights.  The Appellant came to the UK in 2007.   At  that  time,
    there is no evidence that the Appellant's brother was exercising Treaty
    rights.  Put at its highest, the Appellant's case is only that  he  did
    so between April and July 2015.  We have evidence that the  Appellant's
    brother was a British citizen from  January  2015  at  the  latest  but
    nothing to show that he was entitled to benefit under EU law at that or
    any earlier time.

12. Mr Saini very fairly accepted that those facts put him  in  substantial
    difficulties.  Although as he pointed out,  and  we  accept,  there  is
    error in Judge Bird's failure to grapple with the Appellant's  argument
    in this regard, as a matter of fact and law for  the  reasons  we  have
    given, the argument based on a lawful EU right of residence  could  not
    possibly have  succeeded.   Accordingly,  the  error  asserted  is  not
    material.

13. The basis on which the Judge assessed the Article 8 claim was therefore
    factually correct.  The Appellant had  leave  until  1  September  2015
    (following the refusal of his application made  on  28  January  2015).
    That decision did not give rise to a right of  appeal  and  accordingly
    the Appellant's Section 3C leave ended when that decision  was  served.
    Thereafter, he did not have lawful leave nor, for the reasons  we  have
    already articulated, was there any basis for the Judge to consider that
    he did.  The Judge was therefore entitled to dismiss the appeal against
    the refusal of the human rights claim for the reasons she gave at  [40]
    to  [44]  of  the  Decision.   There  are  and  were   no   exceptional
    circumstances as asserted at [12] to [30] of the grounds.  Contrary  to
    what is there said, the Appellant would  not  have  established  lawful
    residence if his earlier appeal against the refusal  of  the  residence
    permit had proceeded substantively.  It  was  bound  to  fail  for  the
    factual and legal reasons which we have already set out.




    CONCLUSIONS

14. For those reasons, we are satisfied that there is no material error  of
    law disclosed by the Respondent's  grounds.  We  therefore  uphold  the
    Decision with the consequence that the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.






    DECISION

    We are satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material error of
    law. We uphold the decision of First-tier Tribunal Bird promulgated  on
    2 August 2019 with the consequence that the Appellant's  appeal  stands
    dismissed
    Signed   [pic]    Dated:25 November 2019
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
