
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03735/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 June 2019                      |On 03 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    B. M.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation;
Appellant:    Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
Respondent:   Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of the Republic of Congo, entered the UK legally
and then made a protection claim which was refused on 5 April 2017. The
Appellant's appeal against that decision was first heard and dismissed by
First tier Tribunal Judge Kempton in a decision of 5 June 2017. That
decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal on 16 April 2018, and the
appeal remitted for re-hearing de novo.

The appeal was then heard, and dismissed, by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Hands, in a decision promulgated on 7 March 2019. The Appellant's
application for permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Welsh on 17 April 2019. The Respondent did not reply to that grant
with a Rule 24 response, and neither party applied pursuant to Rule 15(2A)
to introduce further evidence.

The Appellant's case was that as a result of her experience of persecution
she was seriously unwell. The nature of her illness could have had an
impact upon her ability to give evidence, or at least, the way in which she
did so. It is common ground before me that the Judge's decision cannot be
read as engaging with the medical evidence, and considering whether there
might be such an impact, in assessing the weight to be given to the
Appellant's evidence and its credibility.

The Appellant relied upon documentary evidence to corroborate her account.
Although the Judge noted its existence in the course of her rehearsal of
the evidence [16] it is common ground before me that she made no findings
in relation to its existence and content, or, reliability.

In the circumstances both parties agree that a fresh hearing is the only
pragmatic course open, because it cannot be said that the Appellant has yet
had a fair hearing of her appeal. I agree. In circumstances such as this,
where it would appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been
considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has
been to deprive the parties of the opportunity for their case to be
properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the
Practice Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial
fact finding exercise required is such that having regard to the over-
riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to
the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13
November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than either First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton or First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Hands, at the North Shields Hearing Centre.

    A French interpreter is required.

    The remitted appeal is suitable for the short warned list. The parties
    should expect the appeal to called on for hearing at short notice after
    5 August 2019.



Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing, with the directions set out above.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28 June 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
