
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03680/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 3rd January 2020                  |On 4th March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     BLA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Masih of Counsel, instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq  who  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally in October 2015 and claimed asylum.  That claim  was  refused
    in a decision of 2nd October 2019.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal against that refusal, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge French for hearing on 18th June 2019.

3.   It was accepted that the appellant was of  Kurdish  ethnicity  and  may
    indeed have been a Peshmerga soldier.  It was  not  accepted,  however,
    that he received threats from ISIS because of that involvement  but  in
    any event, the hold of ISIS in certain areas of Iraq were no longer  in
    existence.  It was not accepted that the  appellant  faced  any  danger
    upon his return.

4.   Certain findings were  made  as  to  credibility,  particularly  having
    regard to the fact that he had claimed asylum in Hungary  but  had  not
    stayed to pursue that.  The explanation  given  by  the  appellant  for
    leaving Hungary was that he had been beaten up by the Hungarian police.
     The Judge noted that explanation but also noted that it had  not  been
    an explanation that had been  given  before.   That,  together  with  a
    number of inconsistencies in the accounts, led the Judge to  find  that
    the appellant lacked credibility.

5.    The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  could  obtain  the  necessary
    documents and return.  Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

6.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision and permission  to
    do so was granted particularly on the basis that the Judge  had  failed
    to consider whether the appellant had or would be able to obtain a CSID
    prior to return or within a reasonable time thereafter.

7.   At the outset of the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  Mrs  Aboni
    accepted two matters on behalf of the respondent.  The first  was  that
    the Judge's treatment as to whether or not the appellant would be  able
    to obtain the necessary documents to facilitate return  was  inadequate
    such as to constitute an error of law.

8.   Secondly, she conceded that the Judge failed to give due  consideration
    to the then country guidance case.

9.   It was her submission, however, in  accordance  with  the  respondent's
    response under Rule 24 filed on 7th October 2019, that the findings  as
    to credibility were properly made.

10.  Mrs Aboni asked for the matter to be reconsidered at a further  hearing
    and she asked me to preserve the findings as to lack of credibility.

11.  It is argued on behalf of the appellant that  essentially  the  finding
    of credibility, or lack of  credibility,  was  focused  more  upon  the
    issues in Hungary rather than a  more  holistic  consideration  of  the
    evidence.  It was accepted that the appellant was a Peshmerga  soldier,
    thus there should have been perhaps a more detailed consideration as to
    the reasons why the appellant left Iraq.  So far as the  comments  made
    by the Judge as to the explanation as to why the appellant left Hungary
    it is  submitted  that  no  consideration  was  given  to  the  witness
    statement of the appellant dated 7th June 2019 which had made reference
    as to why it was that he had left.

12.  Given the concessions made by the respondent that there  were  material
    errors of law in the decision, it seems to  me  that  there  is  little
    alternative but for me to set the decision aside  to  be  re-made.   In
    terms of credibility I do not preserve such findings, although it would
    be open to the First-tier Tribunal upon a re-hearing to adopt what  was
    set out in the original decision if need be.

13.  There are a number of features which will arise  for  consideration  in
    this case.  The appellant is from Sulaymaniyah which is  a  safe  area.
    He has an uncle and relatives living in that area, although  he  claims
    that he has had no contact with them.  There was no  indication  as  to
    whether the appellant has made any effort to try and make contact  with
    them.

14.  I bear in mind that there has been a recent country  guidance  case  in
    SMO, KSP and IM (Article 15(c), identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT
    00400 (IAC) and that flights directly to Sulaymaniyah are now possible.
     The decision sets out the arrangements that  are  currently  available
    for the issue of identity documents.

15.  It may be that the question of credibility is  of  importance  in  this
    case.  The finding at paragraph 391 and 392  of  that  case  was  that,
    given the importance of such documents  to  daily  life,  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect  that  people  who  leave  Iraq  would  take  such
    documents with them and/or have a clear recollection as to the  details
    on such a document so  as  to  obtain  a  replacement.   While  certain
    matters were not canvassed with the appellant, he was asked  about  his
    ability to source documents and in his  initial  interview  at  4.4  he
    spoke of having all the information on mobile phone photos.  It may  be
    argued that if  he  took  the  trouble  to  take  photographs  of  such
    documents the CSID would be one of those.  In his interview at question
    12 the appellant indicated that he destroyed his passport  in  2015  in
    Turkey.  Why he should do so was not the subject of any  investigation.
    Such may be relevant as in another passage he seems  to  indicate  that
    his passport was lost.

16.  No doubt these other matters would be of some concern to  the  Tribunal
    upon re-hearing.



Notice of Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside to  be  re-
    made by a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

    An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   P.D. King     Date 14 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
