
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03991/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 10 October 2016              | on 14 December 2016            |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    MSAF
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by Dicksons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Frankish promulgated on the  11  April  2016  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed  the  appellants  appeal  against  the  order   for   his
        deportation from the United Kingdom on protection and human  rights
        grounds.
     2. The appellant's immigration history is set out at  paragraph  3  of
        the decision under challenge.  Relevant  parts  of  the  sentencing
        remarks appear at paragraph 5.  The  appellant  was  convicted  and
        sentenced for seven counts of  sexual  assault  and  one  count  of
        sexual activity with a child.
     3. Miss Rutherford,  the  appellants  counsel  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal, accepted that the case related to Article 2  and  3  ECHR
        only. The appellant is excluded from the protection of the  Refugee
        Convention as a result of his commission of a particularly  serious
        crime. The presumption was not found to have been rebutted  by  the
        appellant [10].
     4. The Judge set out the appellants  case  at  [6]  in  the  following
        terms:


        "The appellant's evidence is that he faces torture, persecution and
        ill treatment on return as a draft evader.  It is true that he  was
        issued with a seven year  passport  but  that  does  not  mean  the
        military authorities had no interest in him.  Seven years passports
        are standard.  He was issued with the passport at a  time  when  he
        has a valid reason for postponement of conscription.  On return  he
        will either be forced to complete his military service or  punished
        for evasion.  He will be mistreated whilst in detention.  He  wants
        to return in the long run but not while it is  unsafe.  He  is  not
        politically inclined and does not have strong beliefs but does  not
        approve of the current regime's use of force against people.  It is
        wrong to say he will be of no interest because, at  thirty,  he  is
        over conscription age.  He will be punished as a draft evader.   He
        also lost his certificate of permission for postponing his military
        service. There will be serious consequences for  him  as  a  failed
        asylum seeker."


     5. The Judge finds in paragraph 11 that nothing had been drawn to  his
        attention in respect of consequences of  draft  dodging,  which  is
        said to be factually inaccurate as discussed below.
     6. At [12] the Judge found:


        "What is clear and, indeed, as the  refusal  letter  picks  up,  is
        that, unless they are a student or an only son, Egyptians generally
        have to complete one to three years of military service between the
        ages of 18 and 30 but, beyond that, they are  considered  too  old.
        Hence the appellants  claim  that  he  will  be  forced  back  into
        conscription is misconceived.  Even if he were, it is no more  than
        applies to other  males  with  brothers  in  Egypt  and  cannot  be
        construed as a breach of articles 2 or 3.  It is  also  clear  that
        those liable to military service cannot leave the  country  without
        an exemption which, by inference, applies to the appellant who  was
        issued with a valid passport with which he was able to  leave.   He
        said that he obtained a temporary passport with which he  was  able
        to leave. He said that obtained a temporary deferment  because  his
        brothers, respectively seven and five years younger than him,  were
        students at the time and someone had to  hold  the  fort  at  home.
        Such a claimed exemption is, in fact, back to front in  respect  of
        the background information (i.e. it is students and the only  sons,
        not students brothers who are exempt).  Finally, the  appellant  is
        in regular  touch  with  his  family  back  home.   There  has,  he
        conceded, been no evidence of the authorities showing  any  adverse
        interest towards him such as home visits,  summonses,  warrants  or
        the like.  The above analysis also indicates that the appellant had
        the benefit of his own exemption by which to  come  to  the  United
        Kingdom.  It follows that (a) the appellant will not be  considered
        to be a draft dodger and (b) is now too old to have to complete his
        military  service.  In  short,  he  does  not  face  a   reasonable
        likelihood of punishment for past draft dodging  or  of  having  to
        complete that military service now."

Grounds of challenge

     7. The appellant asserts the Judge erred  in  claiming  there  was  no
        evidence of what would happen if a person evaded  military  service
        when paragraphs 6 and 7 of the skeleton argument  provided  by  the
        appellants counsel at the hearing is said to deal with this  issue.
        It is accepted the paragraphs quoted in the  grounds  of  challenge
        refer to the text of  the  skeleton  argument  and  that  whilst  a
        skeleton argument is not evidence, there is  reference  to  country
        material in the footnote.  This is only an error that  is  arguably
        material if it is accepted that the appellant is a person who  will
        be viewed on return as a draft evader.
     8. The grounds also assert that the  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
        reasons for why the appellant, a man who at that time was under  30
        years  of  age  will  not  be  viewed  as  a  person   liable   for
        conscription.  It was accepted by the Judge that the  relevant  age
        range is 18-30. This argument has not been pursued as at  the  date
        of this hearing the appellant is over the age of 30 and will be  so
        at the date of return. Any error, even if made out, is not arguably
        material.
     9. The grounds also challenge the Judges findings that  the  appellant
        had received a deferment in order to study. It is asserted that the
        appellant has failed to return when he stated he would to  complete
        his military service and will have to face the consequences of  his
        failure. It is argued that the  appellant  will  face  adverse  ill
        treatment similar to that experienced by political opponents as his
        failure to undertake military service will be viewed as a political
        act.
    10. The grant of permission to appeal is based upon two  issues,  being
        (a) the assertion in relation to the lack of evidence, set  out  at
        paragraph 7 above, and (b) the lack of reasoning for rejecting  the
        credibility of the  appellants  account  in  paragraph  12  of  the
        determination.


Discussion


    11. It is accepted age is not an issue as  the  appellant  is  now  31.
        The country material specifically states that those over the age of
        30 are not conscripted as they are considered too old and unfit for
        military service.  As stated above at paragraph 8, the point  taken
        in relation to age is not material.
    12. It has been accepted by Ms Aboni that prison  conditions  are  poor
        and that there is a real risk of torture and ill treatment  if  the
        appellant is imprisoned sufficient to engage article 3 ECHR if  the
        appellant is sentenced. The issue under  discussion  was  therefore
        accepted as being limited to whether the appellant is likely to  be
        detained on return.
    13. The appellant entered the UK  lawfully  with  leave  as  a  Tier  4
        (General) Student Migrant on 3 June 2011 with leave  valid  to  11
        September 2011. To have been permitted to  leave  by  the  Egyptian
        authorities the appellant must have been granted  an  exemption  as
        found by the Judge.  Service is postponed for students until  their
        studies are finished, before they attain 25 years of age, and  they
        cannot travel without a permit from the Ministry of Defence.
    14. The appellant admitted in his asylum interview [Q.13] that  he  was
        given permission to delay his  military  service whilst  still  in
        Egypt as he was studying for a degree in Business management and IT
        at the  Alexandria  Higher  Institute.  The  appellant  claimed  he
        switched to an  engineering  course  and  studied  for  an  HND  in
        Engineering Mechatronic which he  describes  as  a  'Scottish  HND'
        [Q18]. The appellant admitted he was granted  permission  to  delay
        his military service [Q23] although his  reasoning/explanation  was
        not accepted as being credibly by the Judge. The appellant  claimed
        he should have started his military service in February 2012  [Q24]
        but left Egypt to enter the UK to study further on 4 June 2011.
    15. The appellant applied for and was granted a visa to enter the UK as
        a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant. The visa was valid from 23  May
        2011 to 11 September 2012, a period of nearly 16 months which  must
        have been to cover the duration of his course.  The  claim  in  the
        interview that he was expected back in February 2012  is  therefore
        arguably implausible as his exemption from military  service  would
        have been for the duration of the course of which he would have had
        to provide evidence to the authorities.
    16. The finding  by  the  Judge  that  the  appellant  was  granted  an
        exemption has not been shown to be a finding  tainted  by  arguable
        legal error. The appellant asserts he was  supposed  to  return  in
        February 2012 when he was to start his  military  service  but  the
        duration of his Tier 4 visa,  which  must  relate  to  his  course,
        undermines this claim.
    17. The finding by the Judge that there  was  no  evidence  of  adverse
        interest in him by the authorities such as  home  visits,  warrants
        etc. is a finding reasonably open to the Judge on the basis of  the
        evidence made available.    The grounds challenge this  finding  on
        the basis the appellant claimed that he never discussed this  issue
        when he had contact with his family and that he  simply  made  sure
        the family are alright and  told  them  that  he  was,  but  it  is
        reasonable to assume that the family also spoke to him and that  if
        there had been any such adverse interest the family would have told
        the appellant as the same must be  relevant  to  his  own  personal
        safety and welfare.
    18. The finding the appellant left Egypt legally with an exemption  has
        not been shown to be infected by arguable legal error  material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal, such  that  it  should  be  set
        aside.
    19. The findings the appellant studied in  the  UK,  which  formed  the
        basis of the exemption  has  not  been  shown  to  be  infected  by
        arguable legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal
        such that it should be set aside.
    20. The fact the appellant overstayed his visa, in part as a result  of
        his imprisonment has not been shown, per se, to warrant  a  finding
        of imputed political opinion as  a  draft  evader  as  there  is  a
        plausible explanation for why the appellant was unable  to  return.
        It has not been shown to  be  infected  any  arguable  legal  error
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal such that it  should
        be set aside.
    21. The appellant is over age and the finding he will not have to serve
        in the military is a finding reasonably open to the appellant which
        has not been shown to be infected by arguable legal error  material
        to the decision to dismiss the appeal, such that it should  be  set
        aside.
    22. The finding the claim the appellant will not  be  imprisoned  as  a
        result of his actions has not  been  shown  to  be  a  finding  not
        reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.  If  he  should  have
        reported in 2012, and is viewed as a draft evader, it is reasonable
        to expect evidence of enquiry having been made by  the  authorities
        with his family at his home address, yet there was  nothing  before
        the Judge to this effect. It is arguably reasonable for  the  Judge
        to conclude that the lack of evidence of  such  strongly  indicates
        the appellant is of no adverse interest  and  will  not  be  so  on
        return. It has not been  shown  to  be  a  conclusion  infected  ay
        arguable legal error  material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal, such that it should be set aside.
    23. I find the appellant has not made out any arguable legal  error  in
        the core finding that the appellant will be able to return to Egypt
        without evidence of imprisonment and resultant ill  treatment,  and
        that he will not be required to undertake military service  due  to
        his age. As a result his assertion in the interview in relation  to
        his opposition to performing military service at that time, did not
        need to be explored further by the Judge. This is not  a  case  in
        which the appellant will have to deny a fundamentally  held  belief
        to avoid ill treatment in breach of the  HJ  (Iran)  principles  or
        that he will face a  double  jeopardy  risk  as  a  result  of  his
        conviction, which was not pleaded  as  a  basis  of  claim  in  any
        event.



Decision

    24. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
         I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 November 2016












