
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03434/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 December 2019                  |On 23 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    B A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, McGlashan MacKay Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  David  Clapham,  promulgated  on  30  July  2019,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 14 March 2019 to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against that decision, and for the reasons set out below, that decision
    was set aside, although the findings of fact as to what had occurred to
    the appellant in Iraq were set aside, with the decision  to  be  remade
    without a further hearing, but on the basis of  submissions  commencing
    with the appellant, then the respondent  and  then  a  reply  from  the
    appellant.  These were received within time.

 3. The appellant's case is that he is at risk on return to  Iraq.   He  is
    Kurdish and is from Tuz Khurmatu in Saladin (also  known  as  Salah  ad
    Din) governorate.  He states that Hashid Shaabi, a  Shia-based  militia
    organisation (also  known  in  English  as  the  People's  Mobilisation
    Committee or the Popular Mobilisation Units), came to  his  village  in
    2014.  Hashid Shaabi compelled  the  appellant  to  join  them  and  he
    underwent training with weapons and  was  then  posted  to  a  village,
    Gharya Salam.  Whilst there, and looking out for ISIS  approaching  the
    village, the appellant's colleague was shot in  the  head  and  killed.
    The appellant decided to run away and reached a hill where he  went  to
    sleep.  On waking he encountered a man and woman  who  confiscated  his
    weapons and directed him back to his home area.  On return, he was told
    by a neighbour that Hashid Shaabi were looking for him as they  thought
    he had joined ISIS; the family of the dead colleague were also  looking
    for him and they had raided and burnt down his home.   His  sister  had
    been shot.  The appellant fears that if he returns to Iraq he  will  be
    killed either by Hashid Shaabi or his dead colleague's family.

 4. The respondent did not accept this account  and  on  6  September  2016
    rejected his claim.  The appeal against that decision was dismissed  on
    6  April  2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Green  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 April 2017.

 5. After that decision, the appellant made further submissions, which  the
    Secretary of State treated as  a  fresh  claim  resulting  in  a  fresh
    decision made on 14 March 2019.

 6. In that decision, the respondent noted that the judge  had  disbelieved
    the appellant's account of what had happened concluding that he did not
    accept the appellant's account that his house had burnt  down  and  his
    CSID destroyed.  The judge also found the appellant has family  members
    with whom he is in contact and who could return his CSID  to  him  thus
    enabling him to secure the necessary  travel  documents  to  return  to
    Iraq.  The Secretary of State went on to conclude  that  the  appellant
    would not, coming from Yengejeh in Saladin governorate, that  he  would
    be at risk of indiscriminate violence so that he would be  entitled  to
    humanitarian  protection  pursuant  to  Article   15(c)   Qualification
    Directive.  It was noted also  [25]  that  he  had  failed  to  provide
    information as to why he would have lost touch with the family  members
    and that he had not provided proof that he had attempted to  trace  his
    family through the Red Cross.  The Secretary of State  considered  also
    that the appellant would, following the guidance in AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212, be  able  to  relocate  within
    Iraq and he would be able to obtain the  necessary  documentation  from
    the Iraqi Embassy in London.  It was noted  he  had  not  provided  any
    documentary evidence that he had attempted to do so [29].

 7. The respondent noted that the appellant would be able to fly to the IKR
    and he would not be required to have sponsorship there.  The respondent
    noted also [38] that the appellant would be able to rely on funds under
    the Assisted Voluntary Returns Scheme  which  would  allow  him  to  be
    accommodated for a few months concluding that he would be able to  find
    employment.  The respondent noted also that the appellant would be able
    to reside in Baghdad [45] and that he  had  not  provided  evidence  of
    significant obstacles in his relocation there.

 8. On appeal the judge noted [15] the appellant's account as  set  out  in
    the decision of Judge Green, noting  also  [17]  that  the  appellant's
    account had not been believed.  Although noting that the appellant  had
    now produced a letter from the Red Cross showing that a tracing request
    had been made, the judge concluded that this was  not  evidence  as  to
    whether there is or is not family in Iraq, there being no evidence that
    is materially different from the evidence that was before  Judge  Green
    [20].  He noted also [22] that Judge Green had held that it was  common
    ground that the appellant could not return to his home because he  fell
    within the contested area.

 9. The judge concluded [23] that there was no reason why he should take  a
    different view from Judge Green of  the  appellant's  credibility,  the
    only additional information that had not been in front of  Judge  Green
    being the Red Cross letter.

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in his application of Devaseelan and in failing  properly  to
    apply AAH (Iraq) [2018], in particular failing  to  note  the  evidence
    that the appellant's mother and sister would be unable to assist him in
    getting further documentation and the difficulties of doing so in  what
    was a contested area.  It was further submitted that the judge erred in
    failing to carry out an assessment on whether life in  the  IKR  was  a
    reasonable option, it having been agreed between the parties  that  the
    only place in which the appellant could take up residence was the  IKR,
    there being no proper analysis of his situation;  and,  had  failed  to
    have regard to the ability of Kurds to relocate internally  within  the
    IKR notwithstanding the availability of a CSID.

11. On 4 October 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Neville granted  permission
    on all grounds.

12.  At  the  hearing  before   me,   I   heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives.  Having  announced  that  I  was  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal had involved the making of an error
    of law, I adjourned the matter pending promulgation of  a  new  country
    guidance case on Iraq, now reported as SMO, KSP and IM (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC) and  gave  directions
    as to the timetable for making submissions.

    Error of law decision

13. I am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  application  of
    Devaseelan.  The only new evidence supplied by the appellant which  was
    personal to him was the letter from the Red Cross which, as  the  judge
    rightly noted, adds little.  At best,  all  the  letter  says  is  that
    enquiries are being made.

14. Given that the appellant would be returned to Baghdad,  as  he  was  an
    Iraqi Kurd originating  from  outside  the  IKR,  and  given  that  the
    relevant Country Policy and  Information  Note  (CPIN)  indicated  that
    individuals from the appellant's area could not be redocumented  within
    Baghdad, there was no proper  consideration  of  whether  he  could  be
    redocumented within a reasonable timeframe.  I am satisfied  also  that
    the judge erred in his assessment of whether relocation within the  IKR
    was reasonable.  I conclude that the judge did not properly assess  the
    feasibility of the appellant being present in Baghdad in the  light  of
    the agreement that it would not be in dispute between the  parties  and
    it would not be reasonable for him to do so.  The judge appears to have
    conflated  this  issue  with  whether  he  could  stay  there   pending
    redocumentation in a reasonable timeframe.  The judge did not  properly
    assess return to the IKR and in the circumstances the  appeal  must  be
    set aside owing to the failure to do so.

15. I consider that in the circumstances of this case it is appropriate for
    the decision to be remade without the need of a further  hearing  which
    would consist solely of submissions.  I accept the findings of fact  as
    made by the judge and indeed Judge Green as to  what  had  occurred  in
    Iraq.  The finding that the appellant would be able to obtain the CSID,
    and being in contact with family, remains.

    Remaking the decision

16. The burden is on the appellant to demonstrate to the lower standard  of
    proof  that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Iraq  or  that
    his removal there would be in breach of articles 2 or 3  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention;  or, that his removal would expose him to  treatment
    contrary to article 15 (c) of the Qualification Directive.

17. It is to be noted in SMO, KSP& IM the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  the
    current situation in terms of article 15 (c), not whether  there  might
    be in that area a risk of persecution of any specific minority.     The
    Upper Tribunal set out the scope of the decision as follows:
    12.  We have set out the facts of the appellants' cases and  the  state
         of the current guidance at some length  in  order  to  explain  and
         contextualise the scope of our task.  In each of the appeals before
         us, the appellant's claim under the  Refugee  Convention  has  been
         finally  determined.   It  would  not  be  appropriate,  in   those
         circumstances, to embark  upon  a  general  consideration  of  risk
         categories in Iraq under that Convention.[emphasis added]  Although
         the first and second  appellants'  written  submissions  seemed  on
         occasion to range into that territory, Mr Knafler  accepted  orally
         that no issues under the  1951  Convention  arose  before  us.   He
         clarified that the risk  categories  relied  upon  in  the  written
         submissions were relevant  to  the  "sliding   scale"  question  of
         whether an individual with particular characteristics might be more
         specifically affected  by  indiscriminate  violence  under  Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive: Elgafaji  v  Staatssecretaris
         van Jutsitie (C-465/07); [2009] 2 CMLR 45 refers, at [39].

18. The Upper Tribunal also state this at [203]:

    203. As we have stated above, our enquiry in these cases is confined to
         Article 15 of the Qualification Directive and Article 3  ECHR.  The
         Refugee Convention does not  fall  for  consideration  due  to  the
         findings which have  been  preserved  in  the  individual  appeals.
         Other decision makers will wish to recall the instruction at [154]-
         [156] of AK (Afghanistan) CG [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC), however, and to
         ensure that questions of subsidiary protection  are  only  resolved
         after consideration of any entitlement under the Refugee Convention
         [emphasis added].

19. The appeal before the FtT was an  appeal  on  all  permissible  grounds
    including asylum, that  issue  remains  live,  that  is,  whether  this
    appellant as a Kurd is at risk of persecution for that reason.

20. The starting point for the assessment of any claim must be the position
    in the home area.  I am satisfied that it was found that the  appellant
    is from Tuz Khurmatu, an area referred to in significant detail in  MO,
    KSP and IM at [85], [94] [263] and [401]. While that relates  primarily
    to the situation in general, I note the strong evidence that there  has
    been a significant displacement of Kurds  from  Tuz  Khurmatu  by  Shia
    militia, and while as the respondent submits, there is  no  generalised
    article 15 (c) risk in Tuz Khurmatu, it does not follow (a) that  Kurds
    are not at risk of persecution or (b) that, adopting a  'sliding  scale
    approach', this appellant is not at risk of a  generalised  risk  given
    his particular characteristics.

21. The respondent accepts that there is an ethno-sectarian conflict within
    the home area, but submits it is a fact that the appellant  remains  in
    contact with his family and that there is nothing to  suggest  they  do
    not still reside in Tuz Khurmatu.

22. Given the level of violence  in  Tuz  Khurmatu,  much  of  it  directed
    against Kurds, I consider that the suggestion that the family are still
    there is speculative, not least as the evidence is  that  the  area  is
    very hostile for Kurds.  I am not satisfied that they are still  there,
    or, even if they were, that this means that the appellant would not  be
    at risk there as a Kurd and/or as a Sunni  Muslim.    The  respondent's
    case that he could live and support himself in  such  an  area  as  Tuz
    Khurmatu as a Kurd is, with respect, fanciful even if he has a CSID.

23. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the appellant is at  risk  of
    persecution on account of his ethnicity and/or  religion  in  his  home
    area.

24. The question then arises of whether he could relocate to Baghdad.   The
    appellant's submissions at [6] assert that the respondent has  conceded
    that it would be unduly harsh to relocate to Baghdad. That point is not
    challenged by the respondent in her submissions, nor  does  she  submit
    that he could relocate to Baghdad.  I am therefore satisfied  that  the
    concession has been validly made, despite what was said in the  refusal
    letter at [45] to [46].

25. I then turn to whether it would be  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to
    relocate to the IKR.  The starting point  for  the  analysis  is  that,
    following the guidance given in SMO, KSP and IM, the appellant would be
    able to travel there, given the undisturbed finding that he can  obtain
    a CSID through his family.

26. The respondent accepts in her submissions at [14]  that  the  appellant
    was not a former resident of the IKR, and submits the he would be  able
    to travel there from Baghdad; and, would  be  permitted  to  enter  and
    reside. It is also accepted that his accommodation options as  limited;
    that is in line with SMO, KSP and IM in the headnote at [27] and [28].

27. The finding that the appellant was in contact with family was  made  in
    April 2017 by FtTJ A M S Green who found  that  the  appellant  was  in
    contact with family and that they could return his CSID to  him.   That
    said, he did in his evidence before Judge Green  refer  to  a  maternal
    uncle with whom he was not in contact [7 (v)] as well as his mother and
    a sister whom he appears to have contacted by mobile phone.

28. Assuming that his family were originally in the Tuz Khurmatu area,  and
    that they are Kurdish, it is likely that they are no longer there given
    the extent of ethnic cleansing as shown by the background evidence, but
    there is no reliable evidence as to their current whereabouts. It is of
    note that the findings on family were made in April 2017 prior  to  the
    actions of Shia militia in the area from October 2017.

29. While the appellant has been found not to be credible,  and  thus  that
    his evidence is not to be believed, it does not  follow  that  this  is
    positive evidence that he in fact does have family in the IKR  or  that
    they would be able to support him.  The submissions  now  made  by  the
    respondent differ from what was said in the refusal letter of 14  March
    2019 in which it was said at [35] that the appellant had not shown that
    he  had  no  family  in  Iraq  to  support  him,  him  as  he  had  not
    "demonstrated that he did not have family still living in  Salahuddin".
    The letter then goes on at [38] to [44] to conclude that  he  would  be
    able to relocate to the IKR without family support [36].

30. The difficulty with the respondent's case as now put - that he has  not
    shown that he has no family in the IKR is that  there  is  no  positive
    evidence either way and it is difficult, absent any questions being put
    to him on the issue, to submit that he has not shown he has  no  family
    in the IKR.  At best, it could be said to be plausible that his  family
    who were in the Tuz Khurmatu area are not  longer  there  given  action
    taken against Kurds, and that they may have gone to  the  IKR,  but  it
    cannot be shown that he has family established there.

31. In applying the guidance within SMO, KSP and IM in  the  head  note  at
    [21] to [29] I note the distinction between those who  have  family  to
    assist and those who do not. In the body of the decision much  of  this
    is predicated on there being a lack  of  change  since  AAH  (Iraq)  CG
    [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC) was decided. Although it  is  no  longer  Country
    Guidance which must be followed, that decision formed at [417] to [424]
    much of the reasoning in the current Country Guidance.

32. At [424] the Upper Tribunal stated this:

         We consider the position to be as follows.  ...  In  respect  of  a
         Kurdish individual from the Formerly Contested Areas,  the  UNHCR's
         stance essentially replicates the guidance  given  in  AAH  (Iraq),
         albeit in a more compressed form.  Decision  makers  must  consider
         whether  a  Kurdish  returnee  has  a  viable  support  network  in
         accordance with that decision.  In the  event  that  they  do  not,
         consideration  must  be  given  to  their   individual's   specific
         circumstances with a view to determining their  ability  to  secure
         accommodation and employment in the IKR.  It will  be  unreasonable
         for a Kurdish individual to relocate from  the  Formerly  Contested
         Areas to the IKR in the absence of a viable support network or  the
         means to find accommodation and employment in accordance  with  the
         guidance in  AAH  (Iraq),  the  ongoing  application  of  which  is
         confirmed.

33. I am satisfied given the earlier preserved findings that the  appellant
    will be able to travel  to  the  IKR  and  would  be  admitted  without
    difficulty. While there are no express findings as to his education  or
    skills, it is implicit in the first judge's findings at  [13]  that  he
    was of little education. While he may be able to do unskilled labouring
    or similar casual work, I am not satisfied that  he  has  acquired  any
    skills in  the  United  Kingdom  that  would  be  useful  in  obtaining
    employment. I accept that he has been able to adapt in this country but
    he has had the support of the asylum support network, and that  is  not
    in my view an indicator that he would be able readily to obtain work in
    Iraq.

34. The findings in AAH, at [122] to  [132]  about  family  being  able  to
    assist are predicated on the assumption that they  have  some  sort  of
    accommodation to share and some sort  network  of  support  that  would
    assist a newcomer. The position would be different if they were  in  an
    IDP camp. While I do not doubt that the appellant has family in Iraq, I
    am not satisfied on the evidence that they are based in the IKR or  are
    (together with relatives they may have)  in  a  position  to  help  the
    appellant. Although some 64% of those who have been  displaced  to  the
    IKR have family support, that leaves a large number  who  do  not.  The
    suggestion by the respondent that they may be there is speculative.

35. Turning then to the factors identified in SMO, KSP  &  IM  at  [26]  to
    [28], I conclude that the  appellant  will  not  have  the  support  of
    family, the suggestion that he does being speculative and not  grounded
    in evidence. I conclude therefore that the options for him are  limited
    in terms of accommodation. I bear in mind that the appellant will  have
    the benefit of a grant of money on  departure,  but  some  of  that  is
    likely to be spent in travelling  from  Baghdad  to  the  IKR.  He  may
    nonetheless be able to rent accommodation for a  short  time  while  he
    looks for work - it would last at best a few months as accepted by  the
    respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  at  [38].   There  is,  I   find,
    insufficient evidence that he could rely on remittances from  relatives
    abroad, nor given his very limited skills, is it likely that  he  would
    find it easy to find employment, and being from Tuz  Khurmatu  and  its
    previous associations with ISIL. Viewing the evidence as a whole, I  am
    not satisfied that the area does not, as the respondent submits, have a
    marked association with ISIL.  The  evidence  cited  is  taken  out  of
    context and if anything, the evidence that "They [ISIL]  were  able  to
    find support in the area and could be very  effective"  points  in  the
    other direction.

36. I conclude, given the lack of family support and the lack  of  evidence
    of being able to rely on remittances from abroad for which there is  no
    evidence, that the appellant would after a short time be  compelled  to
    live in a "critical shelter" which I find would be unduly harsh,  given
    that the only likely basis on which he could  survive  would  be  adhoc
    charity or PDS rations. While that  would  not  necessarily  reach  the
    article 3 threshold, that is not  the  applicable  test  -  see  Januzi
    [2006] UKHL 5 and AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 at [9]. Applying  the  test
    set out in those cases, and the factors set out in  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  I
    conclude that it would not be reasonable for this appellant to relocate
    to the IKR. Accordingly, I am satisfied that he has a well-founded fear
    of persecution in Iraq on account of his  ethnicity  and  I  allow  the
    appeal on that basis.

37. Having allowed the appeal on asylum grounds, I  must  formally  dismiss
    the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds as, being a  refugee,  he
    cannot qualify for humanitarian protection.

38. Having allowed the appeal on asylum grounds, I am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's removal would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act and I allow his appeal on that basis also.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.


 2) I allow the appeal on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds.

 3) I formally dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.


 4) Anonymity direction.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 2 June 2020
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

