
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03365/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 4 October 2018                    |On 12 October 2018                    |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                   MR P T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Benfield, Counsel  (instructed by York
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Landes on 10 August 2018 against  the  determination
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig who had dismissed the appeal of
         the Appellant against  the  refusal  of  his  second  international
         protection claim.  The decision and reasons was promulgated  on  11
         July 2018.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Sri  Lanka  of  Tamil  ethnicity,
         born on 16 February 1993.  He said he arrived in the United Kingdom
         on 29 September 2013, travelling on a false  German  passport.   He
         claimed asylum on 18 November 2013, asserting a  fear  of  the  Sri
         Lankan government as a suspected separatist.  His claim was refused
         by the Secretary of  State  on  20  March  2015.   His  appeal  was
         dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk on 30 July 2015,  which
         was upheld by the Upper Tribunal.   The  Court  of  Appeal  refused
         permission to appeal on 13 June 2016.    The  Appellant  failed  to
         leave the  United  Kingdom.   He  made  further  submissions  on  8
         December  2016,  asserting  that  his  sur  place   activities   in
         connection with the TGTE in the United Kingdom  were  a  source  of
         real risk.  Ultimately these submissions were accepted as  a  fresh
         claim.  The fresh claim was refused on 13 February 2018.

    3.     Judge  Pullig  provided  a  complete  history  of  both  of  the
         Appellant's claims and the previous determinations  in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal.  He set out full details  of  the
         sur place  claim,  including  the  evidence,  expert  evidence  and
         submissions.  The Appellant was treated as a vulnerable witness  at
         the hearing.  Counsel's skeleton argument ran  to  18  pages.   The
         judge spent some time considering his decision.  The  determination
         as promulgated contained 168 paragraphs and 32 pages.  Judge Pullig
         found that the Appellant's credibility was low.  The Appellant  had
         engaged in sur place activities with the TGTE for  the  purpose  of
         promoting his fresh asylum claim.  Those activities were at too low
         a level to cause him a real risk on return.  The Appellant was  not
         at real risk of suicide if his return were  enforced.   The  appeal
         was accordingly dismissed.

    4.     Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
         arguable that the judge had given insufficient reasons for some  of
         his findings, and had failed to consider the risk of  detention  on
         return because of his illegal exit.  Two further  grounds,  failure
         to apply country guidance and relevant authority, were given little
         encouragement but were left open.




    Submissions

    5.     Ms Benfield for the Appellant relied on the grounds and grant of
         permission to appeal, and referred to her  skeleton  argument  from
         the First-tier Tribunal hearing which was available in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal appeal file and was read.  Counsel developed each  of
         the four nominal grounds of onwards appeal in some detail.   It  is
         sufficient to  summarise  them  here.   The  judge  had  not  given
         adequate reasons for rejecting parts of  the  Appellant's  evidence
         and had failed to apply anxious scrutiny to the fresh claim.   More
         weight should have been given to the evidence  of  the  Sri  Lankan
         attorney and the Appellant's father.  Judge Birk had  made  largely
         positive findings which had been insufficiently taken into account.
          There had not been a rounded assessment of the risk on return  and
         relevant  authority  had  not  been  applied  to  that  issue,   in
         particular ME (Sri Lanka) [2018] EWCA Civ 1486,  a  decision  which
         had been handed down between the hearing and  promulgation  of  the
         judge's decision.  Nor had country guidance as provided in GJ  (Sri
         Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) been properly applied.   Finally,
         the judge had not considered the separate Article 3 ECHR risk faced
         by the Appellant as a forced returnee.

    6.     Mr Lindsay for the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
         opposed the appeal.  The judge had dealt with the Appellant's claim
         exhaustively, in a comprehensive decision  and  reasons.   ME  (Sri
         Lanka) (above) was a  post  hearing  decision  from  the  Court  of
         Appeal, and was not relevant.  The facts of that case had concerned
         an arms cache and were far removed from  the  Appellant's  history.
         The judge had given sufficient reasons.  He had not  been  required
         to  deal  with  every  single  point.   There  was   no   hint   of
         irrationality.    Judge  Birk  had  found  discrepancies   in   the
         Appellant's evidence, as highlighted by the Upper Tribunal.   Judge
         Pullig had taken a generous approach.   He  had  given  sustainable
         reasons for his findings and had applied GJ (above).   The  illegal
         exit claim was bound up with the protection claim  which  had  been
         dealt with.

    7.     In reply, Ms Benfield  emphasised  that  the  contact  with  the
         authorities which  the  Appellant  would  face  on  return  was  an
         exacerbating risk factor.




    No error of law finding

    8.     In the tribunal's view, the determination of First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Pullig was meticulous  and,  as  Mr  Lindsay  submitted,  was
         exhaustive of all elements of the Appellant's claim.   That  claim,
         by the time it reached Judge Pullig, was an elaborate one,  with  a
         large amount of information and a much detail.   Judge  Pullig  did
         not shirk from what by any standards was an onerous  judicial  task
         in sifting through the evidence.  It is not surprising that it took
         some time for the determination to be prepared.  Its  structure  is
         one of constant review and analysis, highlighting points considered
         to be of significance, and then drawing the threads together in the
         findings reached.  The approach taken  was  a  generous  one,  with
         maximum allowance made before  adverse  credibility  findings  were
         reached.  It would be hard to find  a  better  example  of  anxious
         scrutiny, or a fuller consideration of a repeat claim.

    9.     The grounds of onwards appeal were  largely  generic,  with  the
         familiar  litany  of  complaints  about  a  perfectly  satisfactory
         decision, as so often seen in this jurisdiction.  The decision  and
         reasons explained to the Appellant in clear terms why he  had  been
         disbelieved and why his appeal was dismissed.  The very experienced
         judge applied Devaseelan* [2002]  UKAIT  00702  correctly,  working
         from the Upper Tribunal decision which was  binding:  see  [10]  of
         Judge Pullig's decision.  The material  facts  are  very  different
         from those found in ME (above) and there was no need for the  judge
         to mention ME in his decision as it was not the subject of any post
         hearing submission.  As First-tier Tribunal Judges  receive  weekly
         bulletins, and other updates, it is highly likely that Judge Pullig
         was well aware of the decision.  There was nothing  new  in  ME  of
         relevance.

    10.    An example of the generic  nature  of  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal was the complaint that  the  judge  had  given  insufficient
         weight to parts of the evidence.  That invites the response that it
         is trite law that weight is a matter for the trial judge, which  of
         course it is, but it should also be pointed out that  Judge  Pullig
         gave a full explanation of why he was unable  to  give  significant
         weight  to  the  evidence  of  Dr  Saleh  Dhumad,  Mr   Sockalingam
         Yogalingam (of the TGTE) and Mr Kanatheepan (Sri Lankan  attorney).
         Those reasons were cogent and secure.

    11.    A similarly generic complaint was that GJ (above) had  not  been
         correctly applied.  In fact the judge examined all of the  relevant
         risk categories set  out  in  GJ  in  depth,  with  particular  and
         relevant  attention  to  the  Appellant's  attendance   at   public
         demonstrations in London  in  his  claim-building  role  presenting
         himself as a TGTE  supporter.   Perception,  not  motive,  was  the
         issue.  The judge correctly directed  himself  in  accordance  with
         Danian [1999] EWCA Civ 3000, YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ  360  and
         BA (Demonstrations in Britain) CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).   He  found
         that the Appellant's attendance was of such low profile that it was
         not reasonably likely to be of any interest to the authorities: see
         [153] onwards of the decision and reasons.  It is obvious that such
         demonstrations attract large numbers of persons.

    12.    Those findings, reached after an exhaustive examination  of  the
         evidence, encompassed any additional real risk (asylum as  well  as
         Article 3 ECHR) faced by the Appellant as a forced returnee,  which
         included consideration of the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  on  the
         previous claim, which was that the Appellant was of  no  continuing
         interest to the authorities: again see [10]  of  the  decision  and
         reasons.

    13.    Thus in the end the submissions advanced for  the  Appellant  in
         the onwards grounds of appeal amounted to no more than disagreement
         with the very experienced judge's decision.  This was an  elaborate
         repeat claim, it has to be said of  a  kind  frequently  seen.   It
         might be thought that its very  elaborateness,  requiring  argument
         and  justification  at  every  stage  seeking   to   overcome   its
         deficiencies, only served in the end  to  underline  its  contrived
         nature and lack of substance.  The tribunal finds that the  onwards
         appeal has no proper basis and that there was no material error  of
         law in the decision challenged.   Indeed,  the  tribunal  considers
         that Judge Pullig deserves commendation  for  a  most  careful  and
         comprehensive examination of the Appellant's claims.

    DECISION

    The appeal is dismissed

    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.




    Signed Dated 8 October 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


