
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03030/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 April 2019                        |On 29 May 2019                      |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    nmaab
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bass of Asylum Justice
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  we  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
    public identifying the  appellant.   A  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a  Palestinian  who  claims  to  have  been  born  and
    habitually resident in Syria in a place called Dar'a.   He  is  now  28
    years old.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  21  October  2016  and
    claimed asylum.  The basis of his claim was that as a Palestinian  from
    Syria he was perceived as anti-government and feared the Syrian regime.
     He  claimed  that  he  had  been  detained  and  ill-treated  on  five
    occasions.

 4. In his decision of 15 February 2018, the Secretary of State refused the
    appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  on  human
    rights grounds.  The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant was a Palestinian from Syria.  The Secretary of State did not
    accept that the appellant's identity was as he claimed.  The  Secretary
    of  State  relied,  in  part,  upon  evidence  obtained  from  the   US
    authorities  which  matched  the  appellant's  fingerprints   with   an
    application for entry clearance to the US made on 6 November 2007 by  a
    Jordanian national, whom we shall refer to as "NA".  The  Secretary  of
    State concluded that the appellant was, in fact, a  citizen  of  Jordan
    and that, therefore, his account was untrue and he did not have a well-
    founded fear of persecution in Syria as he claimed.

The Appellant to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  O'Rourke
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 6. Before Judge O'Rourke, the appellant produced an expert report from  Dr
    Fatah relating to the authenticity of the appellant's claimed Syrian ID
    documents.  He also relied upon on a medical  report.   The  respondent
    produced a linguistic origin report dated 15 March 2017.  In  addition,
    the respondent relied upon a document from his  own  National  Document
    Fraud Unit relating to the authenticity of the documents.  Finally, the
    respondent relied upon the US visa application in the name of NA and  a
    witness statement from Mr Matthew Johnson, a Home Office official based
    at Lunar House dated 24 May 2018 reporting that the fingerprints  taken
    from the appellant when he claimed asylum on 21  October  2016  matched
    those of the applicant for the US visa (NA) taken on  26  May  2011  in
    Amman, Jordan when that individual applied for his US visa.

 7. Judge O'Rourke reached his adverse finding for the reasons he  gave  at
    para 22-26 as follows:

         "22.  Appellant's  Credibility.   The  Appellant's  credibility  is
             damaged by two matters, as follows:

             i.   The documents he has provided are  clearly  false.   Even
                  his own expert effectively concludes that to be the  case,
                  as does (in respect  of  the  ID  card)  the  Respondent's
                  document  examiner.   I  do  not   accept   Mr   Simmonds'
                  submissions that Dr Fatah is either  unqualified  to  have
                  expertise in this area, or that his report is somehow  not
                  an 'expert' one.  Dr Fatah's CV is an impressive one and a
                  cursory examination of some of the appeals in which he has
                  been involved [paragraph 13 of  his report] indicate  that
                  his evidence has been well regarded by and influential  on
                  those Tribunals who heard it.  The  report  Dr  Fatah  now
                  provides is detailed and considered and I accept it in its
                  entirety.   Applying   s.8(2)(b)   of   the   Asylum   and
                  Immigration (Treatment of Claimant's, etc.) Act 2004,  the
                  Claimant has  exhibited,  by  providing  these  documents,
                  behaviour designed or likely to mislead.

             ii.  His denial  of  having  made  the  US  visa  application,
                  despite, while now bearded and some years older than  when
                  the   clean-shaven   photograph   was   taken   for   that
                  application, it bearing a  striking  resemblance  to  him,
                  combined with the unlikely coincidence that  his  mother's
                  name  in  both  that  application  and  the  Civil  Record
                  document match.

             iii. The sheer implausibility that on leaving Syria  he  would
                  not have taken any documentation whatsoever with  him,  to
                  include official documents, family documents, photographs,
                  or retained access to social media data,  any  or  all  of
                  which could have helped establish that he came from Syria,
                  when, six years into the conflict there, it must have been
                  common knowledge (and particularly  to  people  smugglers)
                  that simply being a  Syrian  would  be  sufficient  to  be
                  granted asylum.

         23.  Appellant's Knowledge of Syria.  In the absence, therefore, of
             any reliable documentary evidence to support his  appeal,  the
             Appellant is left to rely only on his oral evidence as to  his
             life in Syria.  In interview,  he  did  exhibit  a  relatively
             detailed knowledge of  that  Country,  to  include  geography,
             currency,  politics  and  the  war.   However,  all  of   this
             information is available from open sources.  The Appellant  is
             relatively well-educated (to secondary  level)  and  would  be
             capable, if  so  minded,  of  researching  such  matters.   An
             alternative explanation may be that he did, at some  point  in
             the past, live in Syria, hence his knowledge of that  Country,
             but perhaps prior to, or since the commencement of the war, he
             and  his  family  moved  to  Jordan,  thus  also   potentially
             providing some explanation for the visa application.  I  note,
             in this respect that Daraa is only  thirteen  kilometres  from
             the border with Jordan.  His account  of  being  assaulted  by
             either anti or pro-government forces has been a common account
             of many Syrians and in view of my findings  above  as  to  his
             credibility, could simply be a fabrication, or be matters that
             predated any move of his to Jordan.

         24.  Linguistic Origin Identification Report.  The author  of  this
             report was not requested  to  test  the  hypothesis  that  the
             Appellant could be a Palestinian from Jordan.  The report does
             not, as is asserted by Mr  Simmonds,  conclusively  prove  the
             Appellant can only come from Syria, but merely states that  he
             speaks a Palestinian dialect and that many  Palestinians  live
             in Syria (but also of course in many other areas of the Middle
             East, to include Jordan) and in any event  the  Appellant,  on
             his account, lived only thirteen kilometres  from  Jordan  and
             therefore it would seem unlikely that his dialect would differ
             greatly from Palestinians living in that Country.

         25.  Fingerprint and Visa Application Evidence.  I  find  that  the
             Respondent has, just, on the balance of  probabilities,  shown
             that the Appellant is more likely than not to come  (at  least
             latterly) from Jordan.  I do so for the following reasons:

             i.    Based  on  Mr  Johnson's  statement,   the   Appellant's
                  fingerprint record, taken on the day  he  claimed  asylum,
                  was sent to the US authorities and a match was  found  and
                  which linked him to the  visa  application.   Although  Mr
                  Johnson was not in attendance to give evidence,  it  seems
                  unlikely to me that that  core  element  of  his  evidence
                  would have been likely to  shift  under  cross-examination
                  and therefore I afford it due weight.   While,  also,  his
                  statement is unsigned, I view that  as  an  administrative
                  error on the Respondent's part, rather than any attempt to
                  evade the  normal  procedural  requirements.   I  have  no
                  reason to doubt the honesty of what is  set  out  in  that
                  statement.  While the Respondent did not  strictly  comply
                  with the  Tribunal's  direction  as  to  disclosure  of  a
                  fingerprint report, it seems unlikely that any such report
                  is going to say any more than is set out by Mr Johnson, or
                  be of such a form as to be challengeable by the Appellant.

             ii.   The  photograph  in  the  application  has  a   striking
                  similarity to the Appellant.

             iii. There is the coincidence of the Appellant's  since-stated
                  desire to travel to the US and the match, or  near  match,
                  of his mother's family name.

             iv.  I don't view the misstating  of  the  date  of  the  visa
                  application as particularly significant, the date  of  the
                  actual document itself being clear.

         26.  Conclusion.  Considering all the evidence  in  the  round  and
             seen through the prism of my findings as  to  the  Appellant's
             credibility, I find that on the balance of probabilities he is
             from Jordan, not Syria.  Accordingly, therefore the Convention
             is not engaged.  For these reasons, therefore, I find that the
             Appellant has not shown that there are substantial grounds for
             believing that he has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  or
             ill-treatment, or worse, if returned to Jordan.   Accordingly,
             I  find  that  the  Respondent's  decision   to   reject   the
             Appellant's application for asylum does not place  the  United
             Kingdom in breach of the 1951 Convention or the ECHR".

 8. As can be seen, the judge found that the appellant had not established,
    on  the  lower  standard  applicable  in  asylum  cases,  that  he  was
    Palestinian  from  Syria.   The  Secretary  of  State   had,   however,
    established on a balance of probabilities that he was from Jordan.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds relating to the judge's reasoning in paras 22-26.

10. On 9 October 2018, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lambert) granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

11. The respondent did not file a rule 24 response.

Discussion

12. Mr Bass, who represented the appellant, submitted that  Judge  O'Rourke
    had relied upon four matters in reaching his adverse finding:  (1)  the
    documentation said to  identify  the  appellant;  (2)  the  appellant's
    claimed knowledge of Syria; (3) the  linguistic  origin  identification
    report; and (4) the fingerprint evidence linking the appellant to a  US
    visa application by a Jordanian national, NA.  In respect  of  (1)  and
    (2) Mr Bass submitted that Judge O'Rourke's reasoning  was  irrational.
    In respect of (3) and (4) Mr Bass submitted that the judge's  treatment
    of the evidence was unfair.

13. We deal first with the documents and  the  judge's  reasoning  in  para
    22(i)-(iii) which we have set out above.

14. The evidence concerning the documents was set out in  the  respondent's
    notification  from  the  National  Document  Fraud  Unit  and  in   the
    appellant's own expert report prepared by Dr Fatah.

15. As regards the former, the judge summarised the evidence at para 18  as
    follows:

         "18. The Respondent's National Document Fraud Unit was requested to
             examine  the  two  documents  subsequently  provided  by   the
             Appellant and concluded the following:

             i.   In respect of the 'civil Record' document, the  Unit  had
                  no  comparative  documents  against  which  it  could   be
                  compared and could not be conclusive therefore  about  its
                  authenticity.  No alterations were noted on the document.

             ii.  In respect of the ID card, that was considered  to  be  a
                  counterfeit, as the 'background print was not as expected.
                   Document fluoresces highly under UV light.'"

    As will be clear, that report was neutral  in  respect  of  the  'Civil
    Record' document but was damning of the authenticity  of  the  ID  card
    upon which the appellant relied.

16. In relation to Dr Fatah's report the judge summarised his  evidence  at
    para 19 of his determination as follows:

         "19. Dr Fatah's CV makes it clear that he has  extensive  expertise
             in respect of the Middle East  and  has  been  working  as  an
             expert witness  since  2000.   While  also  providing  country
             expert  reports,  he  also  has  expertise  in   documentation
             authentication, having examined 'thousands of documents'  from
             the region  (also  including  North  Africa).   He  has  given
             evidence in five country guidance cases.  His  conclusions  in
             respect of the Appellant's documents are that they  'lack  the
             main characteristics  of  reliable  documents  issued  by  the
             Syrian authorities', because, in summary:

             i.   in respect of the ID card, a holographic stamp is of poor
                  quality and not holographic;  the  card  itself  does  not
                  react to UV light, showing,  as  would  be  normal,  shiny
                  images; the barcode does not provide any information  when
                  scanned; the number of the card does not match the  number
                  on the Civil Record, when it should do and it  is  unusual
                  for the Appellant's mother's  name  to  be  shown  as  'Al
                  Bargouthy' (rather than her own family's surname).

             ii   in respect of the Civil Record, again the  mother's  name
                  is identified as a discrepancy, as is  the  serial  number
                  provided; the term 'sect' is used, rather than the  normal
                  'religion and sect'; the use of the phrase 'for the  first
                  time' when recording the date of registration is  unusual;
                  there is one fewer duty stamp than there should be and the
                  existing one is  of  the  wrong  value;  the  use  of  the
                  heading 'events' is  unusual;  the  issuing  clerk's  name
                  would be handwritten, rather than printed; it  is  unusual
                  that the place of issue is  not  recorded;  no  reason  is
                  given for the issuing of the document, when a reason would
                  normally be provided, such as it being required by another
                  organisation and at least one of the four  stamps  on  the
                  documents has  been  scanned  and  printed  onto  it,  not
                  stamped."

17. It is fair to say that  Dr  Fatah's  report  identified  a  significant
    number of anomalies with the appellant's ID card  and  'Civil  Record'.
    The report could not realistically be said  to  support  the  appellant
    despite it having been provided to  the  Tribunal  by  the  appellant's
    legal representatives.  Indeed, as is clear  from  para  21(i)  of  the
    judge's  determination,  the  appellant's  representatives  sought   to
    discount Dr Fatah's report on the basis that  he  was  unqualified  and
    lacked expertise in assessing these documents.  That is a most  unusual
    submission made by the party who had put  an  expert  report  before  a
    Tribunal or court.  Not surprisingly, given Dr  Fatah's  expertise  and
    experience, Judge O'Rourke rejected that  submission  and,  as  he  was
    undoubtedly entitled to, placed reliance upon his report.  That  report
    provided a sound evidential basis for  concluding  that  the  documents
    were, at best, unreliable, but, at worst, were not authentic but false.
     We see nothing irrational in Judge O'Rourke's conclusion  or,  indeed,
    his reasoning leading to that conclusion based upon Dr  Fatah's  report
    that the documents relied upon by the appellant were false.

18. Mr Bass did not address us in his oral  submissions  upon  the  judge's
    reasoning in para  22(ii)  or  (iii).   We  would,  however,  make  the
    following  observations  in  relation  to  para  22(i).   The   judge's
    assessment in para 22(i) that the "clean-shaven" photograph on  the  US
    visa taken  some  years  ago  was  of  a  person  "bearing  a  striking
    resemblance" to the appellant some years later when he has a beard,  we
    doubt would be a  sound  reason  for  linking  the  appellant  to  that
    application if it were a central part  of  the  judge's  reasoning.   A
    visual identification in these circumstances would be problematic.   Of
    course, it was not central to the  judge's  reasoning.   The  important
    aspect of the evidence concerning the application for a US visa was the
    fingerprint evidence to which we shall turn shortly.

19. We turn now to the judge's reference to the  appellant's  knowledge  of
    Syria in para  23.   The  judge  acknowledged,  and  this  was  in  the
    appellant's favour, that he had a  "relatively  detailed  knowledge  of
    that country, to include geography, currency, politics  and  the  war".
    As Mr Mills submitted, this was in truth the only evidence  that  truly
    supported the appellant's claimed connection  with  Syria.   The  judge
    clearly took it into account but, in the context of all  the  evidence,
    did not find it persuasive to discharge the burden of  proof  upon  the
    appellant.  In our judgment,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account that  the  knowledge  could  have  been  acquired  without  the
    appellant actually having lived in Syria, particularly  given  that  he
    claimed to come from a place which was only  thirteen  kilometres  from
    the Jordanian  border.   When  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  other
    evidence, in  particular  the  fingerprint  evidence,  we  see  nothing
    irrational in the judge's reasoning and in not treating the appellant's
    knowledge of Syria as sufficient to discharge the burden of proof  upon
    the appellant.

20. Turning now to the linguistic origin identification report,  the  judge
    rejected the submission of the appellant's (then)  representative  that
    it "conclusively" proved that the  appellant  was  a  Palestinian  from
    Syria.  We took Mr Bass to that report.  It plainly does not  have  the
    effect that was claimed.  In reality, it identifies that the  appellant
    speaks a Palestinian dialect and comes from the relevant  area  in  the
    Middle East including Syria and Jordan.  It  was,  undoubtedly,  strong
    evidence that the appellant was a Palestinian.  Indeed, Judge  O'Rourke
    did not suggest otherwise.  The report  did  not,  however,  establish,
    conclusively or otherwise, that the appellant  came  from  Syria.   The
    report is equally consistent with the appellant coming from Syria as he
    claims, or from Jordan as the respondent alleged.

21. Mr Bass criticised the judge for referring in para 24 to the fact  that
    the appellant claimed to come from a  place  only  thirteen  kilometres
    from Jordan and that his dialect was unlikely to  differ  greatly  from
    Palestinians living in Jordan.  In fact, that  is  entirely  consistent
    with the report itself.  The report  only  assisted  the  appellant  to
    establish that he was a Palestinian and not in establishing from  which
    country he claimed to be.

22. Turning now to the fingerprint evidence, Mr Bass criticised the judge's
    approach in para 25 on the basis that the  witness  statement  was  not
    signed by Mr Johnson and Mr  Johnson  was  not  present  to  be  cross-
    examined.  He submitted that it was unfair to place great weight on  Mr
    Johnson's evidence of the link between the appellant's fingerprints and
    those of the individual (NA) who had made the US  visa  application  in
    2011.

23. The difficulty with the first aspect of that submission, as we  pointed
    out to Mr Bass at the hearing, is that there is an electronic signature
    by "Matthew Johnson" at the end of his witness statement.  That, in our
    judgment, is sufficient to treat this evidence as being evidence  which
    its maker has according to the "statement  of  truth"  attested  to  be
    true.  Evidence transmitted by electronic means does not  require  hard
    copy or a "wet" signature unless there I some  well-founded  reason  to
    doubt its authenticity.  In the absence of any  evidence  or  suspicion
    that the typed signature was not, in fact, placed there by  or  at  the
    behest of the maker  of  the  witness  statement,  Judge  O'Rourke  was
    entitled to place weight upon the statement.

24. As regards the submission that the judge should not have placed  weight
    upon Mr Johnson's statement because he  was  not  available  to  cross-
    examine, that argument is simply untenable.  There was  no  request  to
    adjourn the hearing and no request to cross-examine  Mr  Johnson.   The
    appellant's representative  was  content  that  the  appeal  should  be
    determined in the light of the written evidence from  Mr  Johnson.   In
    those circumstances, there was nothing unfair or  irrational  in  Judge
    O'Rourke placing reliance upon Mr Johnson's evidence  in  reaching  his
    factual finding adverse to the appellant.

25. Given that he had the US visa application before  him  and  a  document
    dated 3 October 2016 dealing with the data-sharing  process  (biometric
    data-sharing  process  (Five  Country  Conference  (FCC)   data-sharing
    process)) it was not, in our judgment, irrational for Judge O'Rourke to
    find that the appellant's fingerprints matched those of  the  different
    individual (both in name and nationality) who  had  made  the  US  visa
    application in 2011.   That  was  undoubtedly  very  powerful  evidence
    indeed that the appellant was not whom he claimed to be and that he had
    not established, even on the lower standard applicable in international
    protection cases, that he was whom he claimed to  be  and  to  be  from
    Syria.  Indeed, on the basis of this evidence the judge was  rationally
    entitled to conclude that the  Secretary  of  State  had  proved  on  a
    balance of probabilities that the  appellant  was  indeed  from  Jordan
    rather than Syria.

26. For these reasons, we reject Mr Bass's submissions that Judge  O'Rourke
    erred in law in reaching his adverse findings at  paras  22-26  of  his
    determination.   He  was  fully  entitled  to  find  that,  although  a
    Palestinian, the appellant had not established that he was  from  Syria
    as he claimed.  The judge was entitled  to  find,  in  fact,  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  had  established  that  he   was   from   Jordan.
    Accordingly, on the basis of those findings, the  appellant  failed  to
    establish a well-founded fear of persecution  in  the  country  of  his
    claimed habitual residence, namely Syria or, and the appellant did  not
    put his case on this basis in any event, in Jordan.

Decision

27. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal on  all  grounds  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision stands.

28. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 29 May 2019


