

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/03328/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 December 2017                   |              On 8 February 2018      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL


                                   Between

                                   Mr A S
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini, counsel (instructed by Adam Bernard)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction


    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  Landes  on   15   September   2017   against   the
         determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien   who   had
         dismissed the appeal of the Appellant against the  refusal  of  his
         international protection  claim.   The  decision  and  reasons  was
         promulgated on 31 May 2017.


    2.     The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 3 July  1988.
         He had claimed asylum on  25  February  2017,  having  entered  the
         United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant as long ago as
         15 January 2010.  His immigration history is summarised at  [2]  of
         Judge Owens's decision.  The Appellant asserted that he was at risk
         because of his  opposition  political  opinion:  he  supported  the
         Bangladesh National Party ("BNP")  and  the  Awami  League  was  in
         power.  He had been injured in an  attack  while  attending  a  BNP
         demonstration in June 2009.  A case had been lodged against him  in
         Bangladesh by the Awami League,  after  he  left  Bangladesh.   The
         Appellant also claimed that he had married in  the  United  Kingdom
         without his parents' approval and had been disowned.


    3.     Judge Owens found that the Appellant had  failed  to  prove  his
         claims and  was  not  a  credible  witness.   His  evidence  lacked
         consistency and his documents were  not  reliable.   His  delay  in
         claiming asylum further detracted from his credibility.  The  judge
         found that the Appellant  was  a  low  level  BNP  member  with  no
         significant profile in Bangladesh or in the United Kingdom.   There
         was no current threat and he could return to Bangladesh in  safety.
         The Appellant had not been rejected  by  his  family  and  internal
         relocation was available in any event.   The appeal was accordingly
         dismissed.


    4.     Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Landes  on  partially
         limited grounds because it was held arguable  that  the  judge  had
         erred in her approach to the Appellant's documents, by  failing  to
         consider them in the round  and  had  also  arguably  misunderstood
         them.  The other complaints raised in the grounds had little  force
         if any.




    Submissions


    5.     Mr Saini for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal and grant.  In summary, he  submitted  that  the  judge  was
         confused about  the  Appellant's  documents,  mixing  up  one  with
         another.   Dates  had  been  conflated  and  the  judge  had   made
         preliminary  findings,  prematurely  dismissing  the   case.    The
         documents were not totally inconsistent.   There had been a failure
         to assess the evidence in the round.   The  finding  that  internal
         relocation was possible was mistaken as the persecution  which  was
         feared was state wide.  The decision and  reasons  was  unsafe  and
         should be set aside and the appeal reheard.


    6.     Mr Kandola for the Respondent submitted that complaint about the
         approach to the documents was misplaced.   The  evidence  had  been
         looked at in the round, in its proper  context  of  a  late  claim.
         Perhaps the structure of the determination was less than ideal  but
         the substance was correct.  The documents were  of  obviously  poor
         quality with a dubious provenance.  Any error was not  fundamental.
         The onwards appeal should be dismissed.


    7.     In reply, Mr Saini emphasised that the judge's findings had been
         reached erroneously.  Had there been a piecemeal assessment leading
         to a foregone  conclusion?   A  misreading  of  the  documents  was
         important and could have affected the outcome of the appeal.




    No material error of law finding


    8.     The tribunal accepts the submissions  of  Mr  Kandola.   In  the
         tribunal's view, the errors asserted to exist in the  decision  and
         reasons are illusory.  This  was  plainly  and  obviously  a  "last
         ditch" appeal, devoid of any genuine merit, where an appellant  had
         claimed asylum only after all other manoeuvres  had  failed.    The
         structure of the judge's analysis was criticised but there  was  no
         suggestion that the judge had left any of the evidence produced  by
         the Appellant out of account.  The judge examined  the  Appellant's
         documents in their natural context of a seriously belated claim  by
         a person who had had access  to  any  necessary  information  about
         seeking international protection in the United Kingdom, and who had
         had ample time to do so. The judge made specific findings  to  such
         effect.


    9.     The documents produced were of poor quality and were selectively
         disclosed, without adequate provenance,  as  the  judge  found  for
         sufficient  reasons:  see,  e.g.,  [43].   The  judge  applied  the
         familiar Tanveer Ahmed test to the Appellant's documents,  although
         at [49]  the  judge  referred  to  the  documents  as  having  been
         "fabricated",  which  was  perhaps  going  somewhat  further   than
         necessary  but  which  was  a  justified  inference.   It  was  the
         Appellant's responsibility to provide accurate translations of  the
         Bengali documents on which  he  relied.   Those  translations  were
         clumsily worded.  The judge had to work from what the Appellant had
         chosen to provide. No fresh or improved translations were  provided
         to the Upper Tribunal to suggest that the judge had erred in taking
         the English translations at face value.


    10.    It was open to the judge to consider the  Appellant's  documents
         in two groups, the BNP materials and then the court documents.   As
         the judge found that none of the documents  about  the  Appellant's
         political activities showed more than a vague, low level connection
         to the BNP, it was open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the  court
         documents also bore no weight.  The judge again inferred  that  the
         court documents had been fabricated, which was again justified.  In
         the tribunal's view, this was not an  analysis  which  had  started
         with  a  preliminary  finding  or  even  hypothesis   against   the
         Appellant, save for the undisputed chronology which showed the huge
         delay of 7 years on the Appellant's part: see [53] and [54] of  the
         decision and reasons. The tribunal is far from persuaded  that  the
         judge misunderstood the Appellant's evidence.


    11.    The judge placed the  Appellant's  claim  into  the  context  of
         current country guidance concerning Bangladesh:  see  [55]  of  the
         decision and reasons.  Perhaps that might have been a better  place
         at which  to  commence  the  judicial  analysis  but  that  country
         background is familiar and uncontroversial.  No doubt it was in the
         judge's mind at the start of the hearing.   There  was  no  country
         background material relied on by  the  Appellant  which  the  judge
         omitted to consider.


    12.    It was open to the judge to find that the  Appellant  could  and
         should have provided evidence of his claimed political activity for
         the BNP in the United Kingdom, as it involved no risk or logistical
         difficulty for him.  The contrast  with  the  number  of  documents
         produced from Bangladesh (where he was said to be  at  risk)  could
         hardly have been more plain.


    13.    Indeed, the judge's finding that the Appellant had  been  a  low
         level member of the BNP at college in Bangladesh might be thought a
         somewhat generous finding in  the  Appellant's  favour,  given  the
         numerous deficiencies in the Appellant's evidence identified by the
         judge.  But that generosity is indicative of the  anxious  scrutiny
         which the judge applied to the evidence, and is  not  something  of
         which the Appellant can complain.


    14.    Mr Saini's submissions, like the onwards  grounds,  focussed  on
         potential weaknesses in the judge's  decision  and  reasons  rather
         than on the merits of the claim.   In the end the submissions  made
         on the Appellant's behalf amounted to little more than disagreement
         with the judge's decision, which had exposed a  transparently  weak
         and implausible case. The tribunal finds that there was no material
         error of law in the decision challenged.




    DECISION


    The appeal is dismissed


    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.




    Signed                             Dated 6 February 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


