
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03707/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2016                  |On 1 February 2017                   |
|Determination given 11 November 2016 |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                Sutharsan [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison, Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, date of  birth  23  July  1997,
    appealed  against  the  Respondent's  decision,  dated  5  April  2016,
    refusing an asylum and protection claim and also under the  Immigration
    Rules in terms of private life.

2.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll  (the  judge),
    who on 16 September 2016 dismissed  the  claims  on  all  grounds.   An
    anonymity order was not made.  The judge had at least the  disadvantage
    that the Appellant was unable to give evidence.  There was  no  witness
    statement from the Appellant and therefore when  assessing  credibility
    and the centrepiece of the claim the judge  was  largely  reliant  upon
    other evidence, particularly medical evidence, country information  and
    other assessments in terms of the relevance of the  Appellant's  health
    to the extent of risk he faced upon return.  At paragraph 20 the  judge
    said:

         "... I have carefully considered all of the  evidence  relating  to
         his claim, including the medical evidence referred to above, and  I
         find that the Appellant is not credible as to the circumstances  in
         which he claims he was compelled to flee Sri Lanka  or  as  to  his
         claimed fear of return."

3.   The judge then indicated certain matters of fact which she  had  regard
    to.  Mr Davison points out that those facts  were  not  developed  into
    reasons as to why they were significant or material or should be  given
    particular weight in the circumstances of the case.

4.   For example, the judge said "the Appellant gave an alias  name  at  his
    screening interview".  That may be correct as a  fact  but  it  is  the
    question of what consequences that has or  direct  bearing  it  has  on
    credibility.  The Appellant was further and more fully  interviewed  in
    an asylum interview  which  was  extensively  recorded.   The  question
    therefore is what weight was being given to the screening interview  as
    being relevant to the assessment of credibility.  Similarly  the  judge
    also identified "the  Appellant  has  given  two  completely  different
    accounts, in his screening and substantive asylum  interviews,  on  the
    basis of his claim for asylum.  Nowhere has the judge explained why  he
    has given two such different accounts."

5.   It must be obvious, in the light of the case law,  that  answers  given
    in screening interviews are not  necessarily  considered  determinative
    when, although the interviewee is being told that they must answer  the
    questions  fully  and  truthfully,  the  brevity  and  purpose  of  the
    screening interview in practice limits the scope to which an 'in depth'
    explanation can be given of events: Assuming that the asylum seeker  is
    confident and able to give a full account at the time.  To  the  extent
    to which a contrast is drawn between the two interviews it seems to  me
    again could be, if  not  properly  explained,  a  basis  for  rejecting
    credibility or at least having doubts about  it.   However,  the  judge
    having recited these and other factors simply does not pull the threads
    together to substantiate the argument, which presumably she  wished  to
    make, that they are sufficiently significant as to seriously damage the
    Appellant's credibility.

6.   Similarly the judge in looking at the medical evidence I think  in  one
    sense fails to follow the approach identified in the  case  of  Mibanga
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367 but rather, in the circumstances, does not  explain
    to  a  sufficient  extent  her  reasoning  why  that  medical  evidence
    ultimately was demonstrating inconsistencies or  unreliability  in  the
    Appellant's account as presented to others.  Finally the  judge  refers
    to the background evidence to which she has taken account but again the
    assessment as to whether or not the Appellant falls into a category  of
    persons at risk on return or at risk by virtue of  his  mental  health,
    really is not properly addressed against that  background  information.
    For these reasons I  am  satisfied  the  Original  Tribunal's  decision
    cannot stand and the matter will have to be readdressed in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that a resumed hearing is required.



DIRECTIONS

(1)  List two hours not before Judge Carroll.

(2)  Tamil interpreter required.

(3)  All further documents relied upon to be provided to  the  Tribunal  and
    the Home Office not later than ten  working  days  before  the  further
    hearing and any further medical evidence relied upon either as  to  the
    issues of the Appellant's mental health or  ability  to  give  evidence
    again to be served on the Tribunal and the Home Office not  later  than
    ten working days before the further hearing.



ANONYMITY

No anonymity order was required.


Signed                                  Date 30 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation which is due to the file being miss-
    located.

