
                                    [pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03523/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 December 2016                  |On 6 January 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               TA (Bangladesh)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sangeetha Iengar (Counsel instructed by Jacobs &
                    Co Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to
    refuse to  recognise  him  as  a  political  refugee.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal made an anonymity direction in his favour, and I  consider  it
    appropriate that the Appellant continues to be accorded  anonymity  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, who was born in 1986.  On 20
    July 2008, he applied to an Entry Clearance Officer in Dhaka for  entry
    clearance as a working holidaymaker.  The application was refused on 28
    July 2008, and the Appellant appealed against the refusal.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal in  March  2009.   Following
    notification of the successful appeal, an Entry  Clearance  Officer  in
    Dhaka granted the Appellant entry clearance for a period of  two  years
    on 27 April 2009.  His working holidaymaker visa  was  valid  until  27
    April 2011.

 4. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 May 2009, and did not
    depart from the country before the expiry of his visa.  He applied  for
    leave to remain on the basis of family and private life established  in
    the UK on 11 June 2013.  His application was refused  on  9  July  2013
    without a right of appeal.  His representatives made a request for  his
    application to be reconsidered on 2 August 2013.  This application  was
    rejected on 27 December 2013. The Appellant was encountered  by  police
    during a  traffic  stop  on  15  May  2015.   He  was  arrested  as  an
    overstayer, and he was detained at Colnbrook IRC from 16 May 2015 to  4
    July 2015.  On 21 May 2015 it was decided that his human  rights  claim
    that was refused on 2013 should be reconsidered, giving him a right  of
    appeal.  The Appellant claimed asylum on 3 June 2015.

 5. His claim was that he had been a member of the  Bangladesh  Nationalist
    party ("BNP") since 2002.  In 2003 to 2005 he held the role  of  school
    committee secretary.  He had worked with his local MP to  campaign  for
    votes during election time and had attended programs with this MP.

 6. He said that in 2008 a false case was lodged against him  accusing  him
    of assaulting the presiding officer during  voting.   He  had  gone  to
    court in January 2009 and he was granted  bail  on  condition  that  he
    report to the court every four weeks, which  he  did  not  do.   Before
    leaving for the UK,  he  had  hidden  at  his  grandfather's  house  in
    Moulvibazar for three months.

 7. He had been politically active in the  UK,  attending  BNP  events  and
    acting as an organising secretary.  If he returned  to  Bangladesh,  he
    feared he would be killed by Awami League supporters.

 8. On 24 November 2015, the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing to recognise the Appellant as a refugee.   With  reference  to
    the alleged outstanding court case, it  was  noted  that  his  passport
    contained an emigration clearance card dated 5 May 2009.  His  evidence
    in interview was that, as he had a  case  pending,  he  could  not  get
    clearance from his local  police  station  because  he  had  an  arrest
    warrant against him.  So his lawyer applied on his behalf in  Dhaka  to
    get this emigration clearance card so he would not  have  any  problems
    leaving Bangladesh.  However, objective evidence stated that it was not
    necessary to obtain an exit permit.  Further, as it was not the role of
    the emigration clearance card to  provide  evidence  of  government  or
    police clearance to facilitate a person's  departure  from  Bangladesh,
    the fact that he held such a card would  not  prevent  the  immigration
    police from stopping him from leaving the country should they have been
    aware of his outstanding court case.

 9. He had submitted five FIRs including an  FIR  dated  29  December  2008
    which he said contained a false allegation against him.  It  was  noted
    that the other four FIRs were not related to his case and did not refer
    to him, and so they were not considered to add any weight to his claim.



10. He had also submitted a letter from Anwar Hossain, who  claimed  to  be
    representing him, and who listed the FIR dated 29 December 2008 in  his
    letter of support.  Officials at the British High Commission  in  Dhaka
    had attempted to check the veracity of this FIR  at  the  Osmani  Nagir
    Police Station in Sylhet and were unable to do so.  They  had  verified
    the FIR as non-genuine.

11. He claimed that the other people named on the charges also fled, except
    for his brother, Abdur Rouf, who remained in Bangladesh. But he had not
    claimed that his brother had been harmed, although he claimed he was in
    hiding.

12. Notwithstanding the fact that  the  FIR  which  he  had  submitted  was
    clearly fraudulent, it was noted that the report of  the  British  High
    Commission in Dhaka stated that a genuine FIR 14/297 was  linked  to  a
    case concerning an Abdur Rouf.  Although no evidence had been submitted
    showing the relationship  between  himself  and  Abdur  Rouf,  and  his
    relationship to an Abdur Rouf named in the FIR was not established, his
    risk on return due to his association with  him  had  nonetheless  been
    considered.

13. It was noted that the further FIRs that he had submitted  showed  Abdur
    Rouf attending court, and they were  therefore  inconsistent  with  his
    claim that his brother was in hiding.   Given  his  use  of  fraudulent
    documentation  and  also  the  prevalence  of  fraudulent  and   forged
    documentation in  Bangladesh,  it  was  considered  unlikely  that  the
    additional four FIRs mentioning Abdur Rouf were genuine. But  if  there
    were outstanding cases  against  his  brother  for  which  he  was  not
    complying with bail conditions, he would not be  granted  further  bail
    for additional cases, he would  be  arrested  for  non-compliance  with
    breach of his original bail conditions.

14. So it was not accepted his brother had been in hiding  since  2009,  or
    that the appellant was wanted by the government, or that he would be in
    danger on return to Bangladesh due to his association with his brother.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

15. The Appellant's appeal came  before  Judge  Andrew  Wilson  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on the First-tier  Tribunal  on  23  September  2016.   Ms
    Iengar of Counsel appeared on behalf of the Appellant, and Ms  John  of
    Counsel appeared on behalf of the Respondent.

16. In her Skeleton Argument, Ms Iengar submitted at paragraph 8 that there
    was an outstanding arrest warrant in the Appellant's  name  from  2008.
    His advocate had confirmed at AB page 22  that  the  case  was  one  of
    political enmity.  This was also confirmed by two separate  letters  in
    the Appellant's bundle provided by Mr Ali Ahmed, Secretary of the  BNP,
    Sylhet district and Mr Shamim, President of the BNP, Sylhet district.

17. At paragraph 19 of her Skeleton Argument,  Ms  Iengar  submitted  that,
    given the nature and extent of the  Appellant's  participation  in  sur
    place  activities,  and   the   Bangladeshi   authorities'   recognised
    surveillance of political opponents, the Appellant was likely to be  of
    adverse interest to the authorities on return.

18. Moreover, as the Appellant was known to be a  committed  opponent  from
    his school days, coupled with the outstanding  arrest  warrant  in  his
    name, and his breach of bail conditions, the Appellant was likely to be
    at risk  on  return  such  that  he  should  be  granted  international
    protection.

19. In his subsequent decision, Judge  Wilson  gave  detailed  reasons  for
    rejecting the various strands of the Appellant's asylum claim.  On  the
    topic of the Document Verification Report relied on by the  Respondent,
    the Judge said as follows at paragraph [7] of his decision:

         Assertions were made to me that in fact it was  simple  date  error
         and a mistake made in the interpretation of  the  Appellant's  name
         from the Sylheti.  I am not satisfied that this  counter  assertion
         has any real weight.   I  note  the  letter  from  the  Appellant's
         advocate in Sri Lanka contains the reference  number  and  name  in
         respect of which the Respondent searched.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

20. The application for permission to appeal  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    settled by a colleague of Ms Iengar in  her  chambers.   Three  Grounds
    were pleaded.  Ground 2 was  that  in  making  findings  rejecting  the
    Appellant's claim to face an associated risk as  a  result  of  an  FIR
    being issued against his older brother, Abdur Rouf, the Judge had erred
    in failing to make findings  in  relation  to  a  number  of  documents
    contained within the Appellant's bundle, including a  letter  from  the
    Secretary of the BNP  confirming  that  false  cases  have  been  filed
    against all three brothers, including the Appellant.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

21. On 23  November  2016,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         At paragraph 12 the Judge has acknowledged that there was a genuine
         FIR but it was the Respondent's view that the FIR relied on by  the
         Appellant was fraudulent.  The Judge has said  that  the  Appellant
         has not established that he was at risk on return by reason of  his
         brother's action, but it is not entirely clear on what  basis  this
         finding was made.  It was argued  that  the  Judge's  reasoning  in
         respect of this issue was inadequate and  therefore  permission  to
         appeal is granted.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

22. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Iengar directed my attention to the passage from Judge Wilson's
    decision quoted above and to the documentary evidence relating  to  the
    FIR in the Home Office's bundle.

23. She submitted that Judge Wilson had misunderstood the  submission  that
    she had made to him about the interrelationship between these documents
    and the Document  Verification  Report,  and  he  had  thus  not  given
    adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant would not be at risk on
    return.  In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that no error  of  law  was  made
    out.

Discussion

24. I am not persuaded that the Judge erred in law in his disposal of  some
    of the strands  of  the  Appellant's  claim,  namely  (a)  the  alleged
    enhanced risk to him rising from his brother's involvement in  the  BNP
    or (b) the alleged risk to him arising  from  his  accepted  sur  place
    activities, or (c) arising from his mere continued participation in BNP
    activities on return to Bangladesh,  in  circumstances  where,  as  the
    Judge found, he was not a particularly high profile leader.

25. However, I consider there is  merit  in  the  error  of  law  challenge
    articulated by Ms Iengar.  There is a procedural difficulty in that  an
    error of  law  in  these  terms  is  not  specifically  raised  in  the
    application for permission to appeal.  Ms Iengar recognised  this,  and
    so sought permission to advance it as an additional Ground  of  Appeal.
    Mr Tufan did not object to  permission  being  granted,  but  I  cannot
    ignore the fact that the necessary formalities have not been  observed.



26. Having reflected on the matter, I consider that  it  is  in  accordance
    with the overriding objective to entertain the error of  law  challenge
    advanced by Ms Iengar on the ground that it falls within the  scope  of
    the grant of permission to appeal.  It does so  because  the  topic  of
    legitimate complaint identified by the  Judge  granting  permission  to
    appeal is the risk implication for the appellant of  the  finding  that
    the FIR relating to the older brother is genuine.

27. It is apparent from the translated documents in the Home Office  bundle
    that the FIR relied on by the Appellant did not name anybody.  The  FIR
    was purportedly filed on 30 December 2008 in  respect  of  an  incident
    which had occurred the day before on 29 December 2008.   The  name  and
    residence of the accused was said to be unknown.  The accused consisted
    of 100 to 150 unknown persons.

28. It was only in the charge sheet relating to FIR number 14/297 dated  29
    March 2009 that the names and  addresses  of  the  accused  are  given.
    According to the translation, the Appellant is one of the five  accused
    who have absconded, and who therefore have not been sent up for  trial.
    Abdur Rouf is also named as one of the five accused who have absconded.
     The remaining two accused have  said  to  have  been  arrested  on  17
    January 2009 and sent for trial.  As the other accused have  absconded,
    warrants of arrest have (allegedly) been issued against them.

29. According to the Document Verification Report dated 18  November  2015,
    officials of the British High Commission in Dhaka visited the  relevant
    police station in Sylhet on  12  November  2015.   They  requested  the
    officer in charge to check their records on the  veracity  of  the  FIR
    report number 14/297 dated 29 December 2008.  The officer  checked  the
    records, but could not find FIR number 14/297 to  be  existent  on  the
    given date of 29  December  2008.   He  permitted  them  to  check  the
    register, and they could find no links between FIR number  14/297  with
    the date 29 December 2008.  However, FIR number 14/297 was seen  to  be
    linked with another date, 29 March 2009 which had seven names under the
    accused list: Anhar Miah, Monsur Ahmed, Taref, Salim, Sohel, Abdur Rouf
    and Azad.  They examined the FIR but could not find the name [TA] to be
    amongst the names of the accused.

30. The date of 29 March 2009 corresponds to the date which appears on  the
    charge sheet discussed earlier.  The names listed by the  British  High
    Commission appear on the charge sheet, save that  [TA]  on  the  charge
    sheet is said to be "Taref" in the  list  given  by  the  British  High
    Commission.

31. The Verification Report appears to be inaccurate in saying  that  there
    are no links between FIR number 14/297 and  the  date  of  29  December
    2008.  The  charge  sheet  makes  it  clear  that  the  incident  which
    triggered the FIR  being  registered  on  30  December  2008  allegedly
    occurred on 29 December 2008.

32. The case which Ms Iengar put to Judge Wilson was  that  officials  from
    the British High Commission had made  a  mistake.   Firstly,  they  had
    wrongly searched the records  on  the  basis  that  the  FIR  had  been
    registered on 29 December 2008, rather  than  upon  30  December  2008.
    Secondly, they had  incorrectly  translated  the  name  given  for  the
    Appellant in the  charge  sheet,  so  as  to  arrive  at  the  mistaken
    conclusion that the Appellant was not named in the charge sheet  of  29
    March 2009, which was apparently accepted as genuine so  far  as  Abdur
    Rouf was concerned.

33. The charge sheet runs counter to the Appellant's case in that it  makes
    no reference to him having been arrested, and then  released  on  bail,
    following an attendance at court in January 2009.

34. Also, it does not appear that the  purported  original  of  the  charge
    sheet was before the Tribunal so that the Judge could make an  informed
    decision, with the assistance of the court interpreter, as  to  whether
    the Appellant's name appeared in the original but had not been properly
    translated.

35. However, I consider that the Judge has not adequately engaged  with  Ms
    Iengar's  submission  that  there  is  an  apparent  mistake   in   the
    Verification Report in respect of the assertion that there is  no  link
    between FIR number 14/297 and the date of 29 December 2008.

36. The only reason given by the Judge for rejecting  Counsel's  submission
    of a "simple date error" was  that  the  letter  from  the  Appellant's
    advocate in Sri Lanka contained the same reference number and  name  in
    respect of which the Respondent searched.  This does  not  address  the
    putative mistake.  The fact that the advocate gives the same  reference
    number and name is entirely consistent with  the  hypothesis  that  the
    British High Commission has made a simple date error.  It does not tend
    to indicate that the British High  Commission  has  not  made  such  an
    error.  So the reason given by the  Judge  for  rejecting  Ms  Iengar's
    hypothesis tends to suggest that he did not understand her  submission.



37. At all events, the upshot is that the  Judge  has  not  given  adequate
    reasons for rejecting a key part of the  Appellant's  case  by  way  of
    appeal, which is that the charge sheet for FIR  14/297  is  genuine  in
    relation him as well as in relation to his older brother.

38. Accordingly, I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    vitiated by a material error of law such that the decision must be  set
    aside and re-made.

Conclusion

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law, such
    that it must be set aside and remade.

Directions

40. This appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross
    for a de novo hearing before any Judge apart from Judge Wilson.

41. None of the findings of fact made by the  previous  Tribunal  shall  be
    preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

