
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03273/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th February 2018                          |On 1st March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [A A]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen
For the Respondent:    Ms Jagaraja


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Buchanan made following a hearing at North Shields on 3rd May 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a Sinhalese citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1984.  He
    arrived in the UK on 4th February 2011 with a valid visa to  25th  June
    2013.

 3. On 29th April 2016 the appellant was arrested for fraud  and  sentenced
    to eight months' imprisonment.  He claimed  asylum  on  27th  September
    2016 but was refused on 28th March 2017.

 4. The appellant said that he had a Tamil friend with whom  he  lived  for
    approximately three years.  In November 2010 the  police  attended  his
    home and questioned him about his friend, returning on 20th  June  2011
    when they arrested him.  He was held for ten days and badly mistreated.
     He claimed that his mother and uncle, with  the  help  of  a  Buddhist
    monk, secured his release and subsequently arranged for his  exit  from
    the country.

 5.  The  appellant  produced  a  medical  report  which  described   scars
    consistent with the appellant's account and diagnosed PTSD and moderate
    depression.

 6. The Secretary of State believed the appellant's claim that he had  been
    detained and suffered ill-treatment but did not accept that he had been
    released with the help of a Buddhist monk  as  claimed  or  that  there
    would be any ongoing interest in him.

 7. The judge set out the evidence in the appellant's witness statement and
    in the oral evidence.  He noted the concession given by  the  Secretary
    of State.  He then considered the case of GJ (post civil war returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 and concluded that the appellant  was  not
    someone who was perceived to have a significant role in  post  conflict
    Tamil separatism nor someone who had publicly  published  criticism  of
    the Sri Lankan  government  or  who  had  given  evidence  against  the
    authorities.

 8. The judge then turned to the Home Office Report on Fact-Finding Mission
    to Sri Lanka 2016.  He set out the report in some detail together  with
    a report from the appellant from Freedom of Torture.

 9. He concluded as follows:

         "It is in the light  of  the  contents  of  these  reports  that  I
         conclude  that  the  appellant   is   entitled   to   international
         protection.  He is someone in whom the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka
         have had a recent (2011) interest in because of perceived links  to
         the LTTE.  He now bears  the  physical  and  mental  scars  of  the
         torture which was inflicted upon him.  He is therefore  branded  in
         the physical sense discussed in the reports  mentioned  above.   He
         would on the objective fact-finding report  produced  by  the  Home
         Office relating to matters found to exist in July 2016, be  someone
         in whom the authorities would have an interest on a return  to  the
         country.  His return from the UK will be questioned.  His perceived
         links with the LTTE would be identified.  As someone returning from
         overseas after an absence of five years he would be  likely  to  be
         questioned about his time in the UK.  His return  would,  according
         to the evidence mentioned in the reports detailed above, be  likely
         to give rise to his arrest because he falls within the  description
         given of those whom the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  will  question,
         detain and  arrest.   When  arrested  as  the  likelihood  is,  the
         prospects are that the appellant will be subjected to further abuse
         and torture."

10. The judge recognised that the appellant had failed to claim asylum  for
    over five years but was satisfied that the appellant was so  afraid  of
    being deported to Sri Lanka that he was prepared to sit it out with his
    false passport rather than face the prospect of questioning and  return
    to Sri Lanka.

11. On that basis he allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

12. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had made a material error in law in not following the country
    guidance case of GJ.  The Secretary of State  referred  to  a  previous
    country guidance case of LP (Sri Lanka) CG  [2007]  UKIAT  00076  which
    recorded that material from NGOs could be selective and  that  much  of
    the background  evidence  which  comes  from  sources  with  a  special
    interest or specific  agenda.   She  relied  on  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in SG (Iraq)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940  which  requires  country
    guidance determinations to  be  followed  unless  very  strong  grounds
    supported by cogent evidence are adduced justifying there not doing so.
     The judge's reference to the two  reports  did  not   amount  to  very
    strong grounds supported by cogent evidence.

13. Permission to appeal was initially refused but subsequently granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam.

Submissions

14. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds.  She accepted that there had  been
    interest in  the  appellant  in  2011  but,  as  a  Sinhalese  who  had
    undertaken no activities in the UK it was not possible to see from  the
    judge's determination why he would be at risk on return.

15. Ms Jagaraja defended the determination.   She  submitted  that  it  was
    unlawful for the Secretary of State to rely on LP in the grounds  since
    this had been specifically withdrawn as country guidance.   The   judge
    had undertaken a detailed analysis of the fact-finding report which  in
    fact had been produced by the Secretary of State herself and it  was  a
    matter for him to decide what passages in it were relevant.

16. I told Ms Jagaraja that, in my opinion, there  was  a  lacuna  in  this
    determination since the judge had not made any findings of fact upon  a
    central issue in this appeal, namely whether the appellant had in  fact
    escaped with the help of a  Buddhist  monk  as  claimed.   Ms  Jagaraja
    accepted that there was no specific finding on that point, but the only
    logical inference from his consideration of the background evidence was
    that the appellant's evidence had been accepted.  In any event this was
    not a matter which had been raised by the Secretary  of  State  in  the
    grounds and it would be unfair to allow the Secretary of State  to  now
    plead a ground which had not been relied upon originally.  There  would
    be obvious unfairness in  depriving  the  respondent  of  a  favourable
    judgment and the Tribunal should be cautious in  reopening  a  question
    which had not been raised by the Secretary of State.

Findings and Conclusions

17. The country guidance case of GJ sets out the persons who are at risk of
    persecution or serious harm on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   They  are  as
    follows:

          i) "Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to  the
             integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or
             are perceived to have a significant role in relation to  post-
             conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal
             of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

         ii) Journalists (whether in print or other media) or human  rights
             activists who, in either case, have criticised the Sri  Lankan
             government, in particular its human rights record or  who  are
             associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri  Lankan
             government.

        iii) Individuals who have given evidence to the lessons learned and
             reconciliation commission implicating the Sri Lankan  security
             forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in  alleged
             war crimes.  Among those who may  have  witnessed  war  crimes
             during the conflict, particularly in the no fire zones in  May
             2009, only those who have  already  identified  themselves  by
             giving  such  evidence  will  be  known  to  the  Sri   Lankan
             authorities and therefore  only  they  are  at  real  risk  of
             adverse attention or persecution on  return  as  potential  or
             actual war crimes witnesses.

         iv) A person  whose name  appears  on  a  computerised  stop  list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name appears on a stop list will be  stopped
             at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri  Lankan
             authorities, in pursuit of such order or warrant."

18. The judge stated that the appellant does  not  fall  within  the  first
    three categories but then concluded that, in reliance on the July  2016
    Report, there was cogent evidence that there was a risk of torture  for
    someone such as the appellant,.

19. He wrote:

         "The report is littered with confirmation from several sources that
         those with perceived links to the LTTE are still, in July 2016,  at
         risk of being arbitrarily removed and tortured."

20. Whilst the judge was entitled to look at more up-to-date evidence since
    the country guidance was published, in  order  to  decide  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk, he was not entitled to, in effect, create a
    further risk category.

21. The decision of Judge Buchanan is set aside.

22. Ms Pettersen asked that the appeal should be dismissed.  However  there
    are  insufficient  findings  of  fact  to  enable  me  to  do  so.   In
    particular, there is no finding about the circumstances  in  which  the
    appellant left Sri Lanka.  I am not  prepared to infer from the judge's
    assessment of the background evidence that positive findings of fact in
    his favour had been made.

23. Accordingly the appeal is  remitted  to  be  heard  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by a judge other than Judge  Buchanan  so  that  the  relevant
    findings can be made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed[pic]                             Date 24 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

