
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03588/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for business       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 6 January 2021                         |On 20 January 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                    H A
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C. Dunne, legal representative on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant, a citizen of Iran, appeals with  permission  against
         the  decision  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   (Judge   Monaghan)
         (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")  who   dismissed   his
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         9 October 2019.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 6 January 2021, by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via  video.  There
         were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

Background:

      4. The immigration history of the appellant is set out in the decision
         of the FtTJ. The appellant claimed to have left Iran on 9  February
         2016 and travelled to Turkey where he stayed for 6 weeks.  He  then
         travelled to Kos and later Italy before his arrival in France where
         he remained for a period of 2 � years and claimed asylum there on 5
         August 2016. His claim was refused in France in December  2017  and
         he remained in France for a further year.

      5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 December 2018 and
         claimed asylum on the same date. He had a  screening  interview  on
         the 1 January 2019 was substantively interviewed on  the  12  March
         2019. Further representations were submitted on the 22 March 2019.

      6. The basis of the appellant's claim that when  he  was  in  Iran  he
         became disillusioned with Islam and  at  the  age  of  21,  he  was
         arrested by the morality  police  for  playing  pop  music  in  his
         vehicle. A further incident occurred later  when  he  was  drinking
         water during Ramadan. Further incidents were also  referred  to  in
         the appellant's evidence. This led to the appellant at the  age  of
         21 to stop his practice of the Islamic faith.

      7. The appellant claimed that he began a  relationship  with  a  woman
         called N and after eight or nine months together, she told him that
         she had converted to Christianity.

      8.  Approximately 2 to 3 months later, she asked him to attend one  of
         her gatherings with her  Christian  friends.  They  were  concerned
         about him because she told them that she had informed him that  she
         was a Christian. They chatted for around 2 to 3 hours so they could
         get to know him. 2 to 3 months after this, his girlfriend gave  him
         a copy of the Gospels whilst they were in  the  car  together.  The
         book was in Farsi but because he was called back to  work  urgently
         he left the book he had been given in  the  compartment  under  the
         dashboard in the car. A few hours later a  colleague  came  to  the
         office. He used to be in the Sepah and was very  religious.  During
         the journey, the man asked if he had any cologne and the  appellant
         told in that there  was  some  under  the  dashboard,  but  he  had
         forgotten about the copy of the Gospels. The man  opened  the  book
         and started reading it and began shouting stating that the book was
         dirty, and that the appellant was "insulting Islam". They then  got
         into a fight and the man threatened to  tell  his  friends  in  the
         Sepah about the book.

      9. The appellant stated that later on the man  and  other  members  of
         Sepah had gone to the appellant's house and raided it  looking  for
         the appellant.

     10. Arrangements were made for the  appellant  to  leave  Iran  and  he
         travelled to France. On 5 August 2016 he claimed  asylum.  When  in
         France he was helped by people from churches there and in or  about
         July 2016 he began to attend church. During his time in France  the
         appellant was baptised. He was told about a church  called  Persian
         church Cyrus (an international church run by Iranians based in  the
         Netherlands) and initiated contact with them. A meeting took  place
         and the appellant stated that he  was  baptised.  It  is  also  his
         account that he evangelised whilst he was in France.

     11. After the claim for asylum was rejected by the French  authorities,
         the appellant travelled to Turkey and then made an  onward  journey
         by air to the United Kingdom.

     12. Whilst in the United  Kingdom  the  appellant  has  been  attending
         church since January 2019 and it is his claim that he is a  genuine
         Christian convert.

     13. The respondent refused his claim in  a  decision  letter  dated  29
         March 2019.

     14. The appellant appealed that decision to the FtT (Judge Monaghan) on
         the 23 September 2019.  The  FtTJ  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
         appellant and the Reverend.

     15. In a decision promulgated on 9 October 2019 the FtTJ dismissed  his
         appeal. The FtTJ set out her analysis of the evidence  and  factual
         findings at paragraphs [69  -  97].  As  to  the  events  that  the
         appellant claimed had occurred in Iran, the FtTJ  whilst  accepting
         that it was possible for him to be disillusioned with Islam for the
         reasons that he gave, the judge did not accept that  the  appellant
         had given a credible or consistent account of events that  occurred
         in Iran. At paragraph [78] the FtTJ  took  into  account  that  the
         appellant had failed to give a consistent  account  concerning  the
         woman with whom he claimed to have  had  a  relationship  with  for
         around 11 to 12 months and at paragraphs [89 - 92], the  judge  did
         not  find  his  account  to  be  plausible  or  credible  that  his
         girlfriend had  taken him to a meeting or gathering  after  such  a
         relatively short period of time and  only  after  he  expressed  an
         interest in her faith. In the alternative, the judge found at  [89]
         that it was not plausible that having attended and spent  a  period
         of three hours  there,  that  none  of  the  gathering  would  have
         discussed Christian beliefs with him.  The  judge  found  that  "in
         taking the decision to allow the appellant to attend, the 11- or 12-
         persons present had therefore already exposed themselves  to  being
         discovered if the appellant had chosen to report  their  activities
         as it is his case that he knew that it was a gathering of Christian
         converts. There therefore seemed little point in not discussing any
         aspect of the religion within once he was present. I  do  not  find
         this at all plausible, particularly as he had been taken  there  by
         his girlfriend who was in effect vouching  for  him  to  the  other
         members."

     16. At paragraphs [90 - 91] the judge rejected his  account  of  having
         left the Gospels in the glove compartment. This was the event which
         the appellant claimed had led him to flee from Iran.

     17. The judge also considered the events in France. At paragraphs [79 -
         88], the FtTJ considered the evidence of the appellant that he  had
         been baptised in Paris  but  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  those
         paragraphs rejected his evidence. In doing so the  FtTJ  took  into
         account the written documents from the church  in  the  Netherlands
         but reached the conclusion that the evidence had  been  written  by
         two different people from the church and that  the  judge  had  not
         been told what position either of  those  people  held  within  the
         church or whether they had sufficient knowledge and  experience  to
         be considered " Dorodian witnesses". The judge also found that  one
         of the emails was "very generic" and thus limited weight  could  be
         attached to it. The documents also referred to a  simple  procedure
         for acceptance for baptism and accepted that they could not and did
         not want to assess whether someone was genuine in their face before
         baptising them. In the alternative at [87]  the  judge  found  that
         even if she accepted the baptism certificate, at its highest it was
         evidence that he went through a ceremony but  did  so  without  any
         assessment of whether he was genuine or not in his beliefs.

     18. At paragraphs [94 - 95] the judge went on to consider the  evidence
         from the Reverend who attended court  to  support  the  appellant's
         claim that he was a genuine Christian convert who had practised his
         faith in the United Kingdom since his arrival. The  judge  referred
         to this as "strong evidence" that he had been  regularly  attending
         and participating in services and other related activities since  a
         date in mid-February 2019. At [95] whilst the judge had  found  him
         to be a credible witness who had knowledge and  experience  of  the
         appellant and his range of activities and  that  he  had  given  an
         opinion based on his own observations of and interactions with  the
         appellant, the judge found that whilst it  carried  weight  in  the
         overall assessment, the FtTJ concluded at [96]  that  the  evidence
         did not outweigh  the  "many  inconsistencies,  implausibility  and
         credibility of the other evidence relating to acclaimed  conversion
         in Iran, which I do not accept, nor  of  a  claimed  conversion  in
         Paris, which I do not accept either. Given  that  I  have  rejected
         those matters, I also reject the claim  conversion  United  Kingdom
         and do not find it to be genuine, like  the  claim  conversions  in
         Iran and Paris."

     19. The FtTJ dismissed his appeal on the basis that he would not be  at
         a real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  on  account  of  his
         religion if returned to Iran.

     20. Permission to appeal was sought and permission was refused by  FtTJ
         Woodcraft but on renewal was granted by UTJ  Stephen  Smith  on  21
         April 2020.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     21. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 5 October 2020, inter alia,  indicating  that  it
         was provisionally of the view that the error of law issue could  be
         determined without a face-to-face hearing and that this could  take
         place via Skype. Both parties have indicated that they were content
         for the hearing to proceed by this method. Therefore, the  Tribunal
         listed the hearing to enable oral submissions to be given  by  each
         of the parties.

     22. Ms Dunne on behalf of the appellant relied upon the written grounds
         of appeal. There were also further  written  submissions  (undated)
         which were reproduced in a bundle of documents for the hearing sent
         on the 21 December 2020.

     23. There was no Rule 24 response on behalf of the respondent.

     24. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions. I intend  to
         consider their respective submissions when addressing  the  grounds
         of challenge advanced on behalf of the appellant.

Decision on error of law:

     25. The grounds advanced on behalf of the  appellant  assert  that  the
         FtTJ compartmentalised her findings on the  appellant's  claim  and
         took what the grounds  describe  as  a  "linear"  approach  to  the
         evidence.  In  respect  of  the  adverse  findings  of  fact   made
         concerning his conduct in Iran and in France, it is submitted  that
         the FtTJ went on to reject the evidence  of  the  church  witnesses
         without giving proper consideration to that evidence.

     26. Ms Pettersen on behalf of the respondent submitted that  there  was
         no error in the FtTJ's approach to the evidence and  that  she  was
         entitled to consider each aspect of the appellant's  account  as  a
         matter of structure and to make the factual findings that  she  did
         in the way set out in the decision.

     27. As to the evidence of his baptism in Paris, she submitted that even
         though the witness evidence was to the effect  that  they  accepted
         that he had previously been baptised and therefore did not  baptise
         him again, the  FtTJ was entitled to take that evidence and compare
         it alongside the appellant's evidence to reach the conclusion  that
         the appellant had misled those witnesses in the UK.

     28. Ms Pettersen further submitted that whilst the  grounds  criticised
         the FtTJ for failing to deal with the evidence of the Reverend, the
         decision at paragraph [95] demonstrated that the judge  did  attach
         weight to that evidence but for the reasons given at paragraph [96]
         the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  evidence  outweighed   the
         inconsistencies given in the appellant's evidence (which the  judge
         had outlined in the previous factual  findings)  which  related  to
         events in Iran and France. Thus she submitted the  judge  did  give
         appropriate weight to the evidence of the Reverend, but the  weight
         attached to it was a matter for the judge consequently there was no
         error in the FtTJ's decision.

     29. I have carefully considered the decision of the FtTJ and have  done
         so in the light of the evidence that was before the  Tribunal.  The
         appellant's account related to events in Iran which  concerned  his
         disillusionment with Islam, his discovery of  Christianity  through
         his girlfriend and that  he  had  come  to  the  attention  of  the
         authorities by having a Bible in the glove  compartment  which  was
         later found. His account was that after he had left  Iran,  he  had
         attended church in Paris  and  was  baptised  there  and  also  had
         carried out some evangelising. In France he had made  a  claim  for
         asylum which was refused which had then led  to  him  returning  to
         Turkey from where he travelled to the UK. Once in the UK  he  began
         attending church in 2019 and his claim was that he  was  a  genuine
         Christian convert.

     30. The summary of the evidence before the Tribunal is set out  in  the
         decision at paragraphs [13 - 59] and other evidence  is  summarised
         at paragraphs [60 - 67]. The evidence is  set  out  in  detail  and
         there is  no  suggestion  in  the  written  grounds,  or  the  oral
         submissions made that the judge was in error in her summary of  the
         evidence. At paragraphs [69 - 97] the judge set out her findings of
         fact which included her consideration of the  events  in  Iran  and
         also in Paris before  considering  the  evidence  relating  to  his
         church activities in the UK.

     31. Upon reading the factual findings  made  by  the  FtTJ,  I  do  not
         consider that there  is  any  error  in  the  judge's  approach  by
         considering events in a chronological way or that the judge was  in
         error by considering the evidence concerning  events  in  Iran  and
         Paris before considering the evidence concerning his conduct in the
         UK. As submitted on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  it  is  entirely
         permissible for a judge to structure a  decision  in  such  a  way.
         However, having considered the factual findings and  in  particular
         the assessment of the evidence from the Reverend which is  set  out
         at paragraphs [94 -96], I am satisfied that  the  judge  fell  into
         error in the way the grounds assert.

     32. Dealing with  the  grounds,  it  is  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant that the judge fell into  error  having  found  that  the
         appellant was not credible relating to past events relying  on  the
         decision in TF (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2018] CSIH 58, 2019 SC 81.

     33. It is submitted that  the  judge  did  not  adequately  assess  his
         conversion to Christianity independently of the claim  relating  to
         events in Iran and in France.

     34. I have therefore carefully considered the submissions in the  light
         of the evidence before the FtTJ and in the light  of  the  relevant
         jurisprudence. The  grounds  cite  the  decision  in  TF  (Iran)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH 58, 2019  SC
         81 which was before the FtTJ.

     35. In the decision of  the Extra Division of the Inner  House  of  the
         Court of Session in TF (Iran) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] CSIH 58, 2019 SC 81 the appeal concerned an issue
         about  the  genuineness  of  a  claimed  conversion.  Lord  Glennie
         observed at paragraph [44]  that  it  was  not  possible  to  "open
         windows onto men's souls" and that it was  therefore  necessary  in
         determining the genuineness of the conversion, to  draw  inferences
         from more easily ascertainable and concrete facts, such as  regular
         attendance at religious services. Whilst  active  participation  in
         church was not conclusive evidence of the genuineness of a  claimed
         conversion, the court found that  it  was  "likely  to  be  a  very
         powerful consideration, to be assessed alongside any other evidence
         pointing to the sincerity or otherwise of the claimed conversion to
         Christianity."

     36. The remainder of  the  opinion  was  concerned  with  the  type  of
         evidence that would be admissible to support the genuineness  of  a
         conversion to Christianity. At [58] the Court did  not  accept  the
         suggestion that evidence had to come from someone at  a  particular
         level in the hierarchy (if any) of the church but what mattered was
         that evidence should come from individuals with:


             "sufficient knowledge of the practices of the church of  which
             they are a member;  sufficient  experience  of  observing  and
             interacting with  those  seeking  to  become  members  of  the
             church; sufficient knowledge and experience of others who have
             gone  through  similar  processes  of  engagement  in   church
             activities with a view to becoming members of the church; and,
             in  cases  such  as  these,  sufficient   knowledge   of   the
             individuals concerned and of the manner  in  which  they  have
             thrown themselves into church activities.'

     37. In TF there had been independent evidence including  oral  evidence
         from one witness which supported the genuineness of the appellant's
         conversion. The evidence given  was  detailed  and  extensive  (see
         paragraph 9 - 16). The judge fell into error because he  failed  to
         engage with the evidence and as a result the appeal was remitted.

     38. At paragraph [59] the Court stated:


             'Of course, it remains for the court or tribunal to  make  the
             final decision, and nothing in the expert  evidence  can  take
             that away from the court or tribunal. To  this  extent  it  is
             legitimate to question the experts on their opinions and as to
             the basis upon which they have reached those opinions. In some
             cases, it may be appropriate to question  the  objectivity  of
             the assessment made by the witness, or to suggest  that  there
             may be an element of wishful thinking  given  the  evangelical
             mission of the particular church. But, as we have already made
             clear, that exercise should not start with any  predisposition
             to reject the evidence because it does not fit in with some  a
             priori view formed as to the credibility of the appellant. The
             evidence should be considered on its merits  and  without  any
             preconception, based upon  an  assessment  of  the  individual
             appellants, that it  is  suspect  or  otherwise  falls  to  be
             disregarded'.

     39. In a  more  recent  decision  of  MH  (review;  slip  rule;  church
         witnesses) Iran [2020] UKUT 125 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal  set  out
         in its headnote that:-

              "written and oral evidence given  by  "church  witnesses"  is
             potentially significant in cases of Christian conversion  (see
             TF and MA). Such evidence is not aptly characterised as expert
             evidence,  nor  is  it  necessarily  deserving  of  particular
             weight, and the weight to be attached to such evidence is that
             of the judicial factfinder".

     40. The Tribunal went on to refer to the decision  of  TF  and  MA  and
         stated at [48-49] as follows:


             "48. We do not understand Gilbart J to have suggested that  it
             is impermissible as a matter of law for a judge who is  tasked
             with assessing a  claimed  religious  conversion  to  consider
             anything other  than  whether  the  individual  is  an  active
             participant in the church. That he did not intend  to  suggest
             as much is clear, in our judgment,  from  the  final  sentence
             which we have underlined. Insofar as this paragraph is  relied
             upon by representatives in support of a submission that active
             participation in church activities suffices, without more,  to
             demonstrate the  truthfulness  of  a  conversion,  we  do  not
             consider that to be the  position.  On  the  contrary,  it  is
             entirely permissible for a judge in a case of this  nature  to
             turn his mind to a whole range of  additional  considerations,
             including  not  least  the  timing  of  the  conversion,   the
             individual's knowledge of the faith, and the opinions of other
             members of the congregation  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the
             conversion.


             49.  We are conscious that  the  opinions  we  have  expressed
             above are obiter, but we  consider  it  necessary  to  express
             them, since it is the  experience  of  both  members  of  this
             Tribunal that TF & MA and R (SA) v SSHD are  frequently  cited
             in cases of this nature."

     41.  A general point from those cases above and from the opinion of the
         Court as delivered by Lord Glennie in TF and MA is  that  in  these
         cases, as in all others, the factfinder considers the evidence as a
         whole, which includes the opinion evidence from the church.

     42. There may be enquiries into the extent to which the  person  giving
         the opinion is able to show that  his  or  her  opinion  should  be
         accepted; and, in any event, the opinion evidence needs to  be  set
         in the context of all the evidence in the case, to be considered as
         a whole.

     43. In the recent decision of PS (Christianity - risk) Iran  CG  [2020]
         UKUT 46 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal gave country guidance relating  to
         Christians in Iran and therefore its relevance to this appeal is by
         way of general points made. At [10] it was stated:

             "10.  That  leads  to  our  second  point:  what  we  mean  by
             'Christian convert'.  It is not possible to make windows  into
             men's souls. Whether someone is, or is not, a Christian  is  a
             matter of fact that is impossible to objectively verify.   For
             example, an  individual  may  pay  very  little  attention  to
             scripture or sermon but might  fervently  believe  that  Jesus
             Christ is the son of God; Christians with a long-held and deep
             belief can still face a crisis of faith at any  given  moment.
              It is no doubt for that reason  that  the  Tribunal  in  Ali
             Dorodian  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department
             (01/TH/1537) preferred to focus on the externally  observable:
             "as we have said, it is church  membership  rather  than  mere
             belief, which may lead to risk".  This difficulty  means  that
             in this jurisdiction decision makers must rely largely on  the
             observations of others to determine whether someone is, or  is
             not, a 'genuine'  Christian.   A  further  complexity  arises.
             There is no doubt for many a path to wholehearted belief, with
             gradations   marked   by   life   events   and   a   deepening
             understanding. At what point along  that  path  an  individual
             might become a 'Christian' is not clearly signposted. There is
             certainly no theological consensus on the matter;  baptism  is
             an indicator, but it should not be regarded as  determinative.
              The terminology used in this decision must therefore be read
             with that caveat in mind. For our purposes  we  are  primarily
             concerned  with  those  whom  the  Iranian  state  regard   as
             'Christians'."

     44. Having considered the jurisprudence, I am satisfied that the  judge
         did fall into error in the way that the grounds submit by reference
         to the decision in TF and MA. As set out  above,  it  concerns  the
         approach in circumstances  where  the  judge  has  found  that  the
         appellant  is  not  telling  the  truth   in   relation   to   past
         persecution/events. As Lord Glennie points out, the mere fact  that
         somebody is not telling the truth in one part of his evidence  does
         not necessarily mean that he is not telling the  truth  in  another
         part of his evidence.

     45. As set out in  the  grounds,  the  judge  rejected  the  Reverend's
         evidence ( and that of his colleague) solely on the  basis  of  the
         appellant's lack of credibility in relation  to  his  claimed  past
         events in Iran and France none  of  which  were  referable  to  the
         evidence given by the Reverend himself ( see paragraph  69  of  the
         decision). Whilst the Reverend did give evidence as to  his  church
         attendance, active participation  in  church  activities  does  not
         suffice,  without  more,  to  demonstrate  the  truthfulness  of  a
         conversion and there are  a  range  of  additional  considerations,
         including not least the timing of the conversion, the  individual's
         knowledge of the faith, and the opinions of other  members  of  the
         congregation as to the genuineness  of  the  conversion  which  are
         relevant considerations. However, the evidence given by the witness
         arguably went beyond church attendance and as the grounds set  out,
         the evidence of the Reverend was not based on  what  the  appellant
         had told him but was  based   upon  his  own  observations  of  the
         appellant alongside observations of others  who  also  had  engaged
         with the appellant.

     46. As set out above and by reference to paragraph 59 of TF and MA,  it
         is legitimate to question the witness on their opinions and  as  to
         the basis upon which they have  reached  those  opinions.  In  some
         cases, it may be appropriate to question  the  objectivity  of  the
         assessment made by the witness. The Reverend  was  asked  questions
         concerning his objectivity and how he had  reached  the  conclusion
         that the appellant was genuine in his conversion,  but  no  factual
         findings were made on that evidence as reflected in the  concluding
         paragraph at [96] where the  judge  made  reference  to  the  "many
         inconsistencies,  implausibility  and  credibility  of  the   other
         evidence relating to acclaim conversion in Iran,  which  I  do  not
         accept, nor the claim conversion in Paris, which I  do  not  accept
         either. Given that I have rejected those matters, I also reject the
         claimed conversion in the United Kingdom and do not find it  to  be
         genuine like the claimed conversions in Iran and Paris."

     47. I am therefore satisfied that the judge did fall into error in  the
         way that the grounds submit and that the FtTJ, having rejected  the
         appellant's conversion in Paris went on to reject his conversion in
         the UK rather than considering the evidence "in the round".

     48. Consequently I am satisfied that the FtTJ dismissed the evidence of
         the Reverend and the Canon with no real  analysis  and  did  so  by
         making an overall credibility assessment by viewing the evidence of
         the Reverend from the adverse reference point of  her  analysis  of
         the events relating to both Iran and Paris and thus failed to carry
         out an assessment "in the round" by considering all of the relevant
         evidence.

     49. That being the  case,  I  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
         decision to dismiss the appeal cannot stand and shall be set aside.

     50. As to the remaking of  the  appeal,  Ms  Dunne  accepted  that  the
         evidence of the Reverend was not expressly relevant to events  that
         occurred in Iran and that  the  grounds  did  not  challenge  those
         particular findings.

     51. Furthermore, having considered  the  factual  findings  made  I  am
         satisfied that the judge carefully considered the events which  the
         appellant claimed  had occurred  in  Iran  and  gave  adequate  and
         sustainable reasons by reference to the evidence for  reaching  the
         adverse findings. Whilst the judge accepted that the appellant  had
         given a consistent and plausible account that he was  disillusioned
         with Islam for the reasons set out at paragraph [73 to 75], it  was
         open to the judge to conclude that it was not necessarily the  case
         that he  would  have  become  interested  in  another  faith,  i.e.
         Christianity and convert to it in Iran. The FtTJ also gave adequate
         and sustainable reasons as to why she was not satisfied that he had
         given consistent and credible evidence concerning  events  in  Iran
         which included attendance at the house church and the reasons given
         for leaving Iran ( at paragraphs [88 -92]). Those paragraphs should
         be preserved findings.

     52. As to the evidence relating to Paris and the issue of his  baptism,
         the FtTJ did not take into account the evidence from  the  Reverend
         and the Canon that they did not baptise him again because they  had
         accepted he had  already  been  baptised.  The  relevance  of  that
         evidence had not been considered or taken into account by the  FtTJ
         when reaching findings of fact on  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
         conduct in France and in particular his baptism in Paris as set out
         in the grounds. I do not preserve any further findings of fact.

     53. I have therefore considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

              "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is
             satisfied that:-
             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or
             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

     54. Both advocates submit that the venue for hearing the appeal should
         be the FtT in the event of an error of law being found. I have
         considered their submissions in the light of the practice statement
         recited above. As it  will be necessary for the appellant  and the
         Reverend to give evidence and  to deal with the evidential issues,
         further fact-finding will be necessary alongside the analysis of
         risk on return in the light of the relevant  evidence, and in my
         judgement the best course and consistent with the overriding
         objective is for it to be remitted to the FtT for a further
         hearing.

     55. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision should be set aside  with  the
         findings of fact at paragraphs [89 - 92] preserved.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall be set  aside.
 It will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated   8 January 2021




         NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

         1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must
         make a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such
         application must be received by the Upper Tribunal within the
         appropriate period after this decision was sent to the person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the way in which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

         2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention under the Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days if
         the notice of decision is sent electronically).

         3. Where the person making the application is in detention under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

         4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time that the application for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

         5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

         6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
         covering letter or covering email
