
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03703/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 November 2017                    |On 3 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                    [V K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms R. Popal, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik,
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Russia  who  appealed  against  the
       determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen  promulgated  on  9
       February 2017 dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
       respondent made on 1 April 2016 refusing his  asylum  claim  and  the
       associated claims for humanitarian protection and  under  Articles  2
       and 3 as well as his claim that removal would  breach  his  right  to
       respect for family and private  life  under  Article  8.  The  latter
       consideration was conducted first by considering the public  interest
       criteria in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1) and then whether  the
       family should receive Discretionary  Leave  outside  the  Immigration
       Rules.

    2. The appellant and his family are Muslims.

The issues raised in the grounds

    3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the asylum claim on the basis
       that it lacked credibility. The reasons provided by the Judge are set
       out in paragraphs 49 to  58  of  his  determination.  The  claim  was
       centred upon a business arrangement involving a Mr  Azamat.   Certain
       unidentified individuals lent 13 million roubles, apparently  to  the
       appellant himself, into business in which Mr Azamat was concerned  as
       a sole trader. When the  business  did  not  produce  a  profit,  the
       appellant claims that he became  liable  for  the  repayment  of  the
       advance and that this placed him at risk on return to  Russia.  I  am
       satisfied that the reasons advanced by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       in dismissing the appeal are both sound and sensible. A challenge  to
       this element of the determination was not pursued before me.

    4. It is also said that the Judge acted unlawfully in failing  to  treat
       the  appellant  as  'a  vulnerable  adult'  in  reaching  an  adverse
       credibility finding. The basis of this claim appears to  be  that  in
       two answers he provided in his asylum interview he had stated that he
       was  depressed  and  was  taking  medication  for  this.  I  have  no
       hesitation in rejecting this contention. Any  Judge  is  required  to
       assess the evidence of an  individual  with  all  the  frailties  and
       anxieties that any witness brings to a hearing, especially where  the
       individual is an unfamiliar environment and whether  proceedings  may
       be difficult to follow and conducted in a language which is  not  his
       primary tongue.  This does not prevent a Judge  from  performing  his
       duty in assessing the evidence. Nor does it require the Judge to make
       express reference to that  individual's  vulnerability.  Once  again,
       this ground was not argued before me.

    5. Similarly,  there  is  nothing  in  the  allegation  that  the  Judge
       improperly  imposed  a  requirement  for  corroboration.   The  Judge
       commented upon the lack of written material  in  circumstances  where
       there was none.  This point, like  the  preceding  grounds,  was  not
       argued before me.  The  stance  adopted  by  Ms  Popal  was  entirely
       correct, reflecting no doubt what Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  had
       written in her grant of permission that the grounds  challenging  the
       adverse credibility findings had no merit.

    6. Accordingly, the only  point  pursued  was  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge's approach to the Article 8 claim  in  the  circumstances  that
       arose in relation to one of the appellant's children, F, who was born
       on 6 November 2011 and who was 14 at the time the respondent made her
       decision on 1 April 2016.  She had reached the age  of  15  when  the
       determination  was  promulgated.  The  appellant's  wife  and   their
       children entered the United Kingdom on 19 October 2010 and  had  been
       in the United Kingdom for 5 � years when the  relevant  decision  was
       made.

The determination

    7. It is apparent that the family was in the forefront  of  the  judge's
       mind when he recited their immigration history in paragraph 7 of  the
       determination. Having set out in summary form the facts  in  relation
       to the asylum claim, the Judge turned in paragraphs 40 and 41 to  the
       Article 8 claim. It is immediately apparent that  his  attention  was
       focused upon F. He described how she suffered  from  severe  anxiety,
       depression and panic attacks.  He referred to  the  difficulties  she
       had experienced in 2014 when  she  had  attended  a  private  Islamic
       school. He described how she had told OFSTED inspectors how badly the
       school was run and this had resulted in a  hostile  reaction  on  the
       part of the staff in their treatment towards her. She  was  withdrawn
       from the school and subsequently educated at home with  the  approval
       of the local authority. He said in paragraph 41

         "Evidence in relation to the wellbeing of the children  appears  on
         pages 76 to 86 of the appeal bundle, and as to education  at  pages
         88-115. In summary, they have been  receiving  appropriate  medical
         care and educational services, and have been benefiting from them."

    8. There was no dispute about this material. It was unnecessary for  any
       cross- examination to be conducted in relation to  it.  There  is  no
       suggestion that the respondent challenged any of the contents. It was
       unnecessary to repeat it or make findings upon it. In  the  same  way
       that the appellant was recorded as being a Russian national born on 1
       October 1973 rendering it unnecessary to make a specific  finding  of
       fact upon it, so too was it accepted that F was suffering from severe
       anxiety, depression and panic attacks.

    9. The Judge commenced  his  examination  of  the  Article  8  claim  in
       paragraph 60, commencing with a statement of  fact  that  the  family
       would be in no danger on return to the Russian Federation. They would
       return as a family unit where they would re-establish their lives  in
       Russia notwithstanding the inevitable disturbance  to  their  present
       lives  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Judge  acknowledged  that  the
       inevitable disturbance to  the  children's  education  needed  to  be
       placed in the balance. He reasonably noted, however, that  whilst  he
       fully understood why the appellant would prefer his family to  remain
       in the United Kingdom  and  for  their  current  lives  to  continue,
       Article 8 did not involve the principle that the family had the right
       of  free  choice.  He  correctly  treated  the  issue   as   one   of
       proportionality. In doing so, he needed to say no more than  he  took
       into account the requirements of s. 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
       and Immigration Act 2009. He is, of course, a very experienced  judge
       who expressly recognised  the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
       welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom. In paragraph 66 of
       the determination he said:

         "However I take into account what I find to be the strong interests
         of the children to be with their parents,  wherever  those  parents
         may be, whether or not in the UK.  While  medical  and  educational
         services in  the  Russian  Federation  may  be  considered  by  the
         appellant and his wife to be inferior to  those  available  in  the
         United Kingdom, and while there may be some discrimination  in  the
         provision of services on grounds of religion or ethnicity, there is
         no evidence  to  show  that  such  services  are  unavailable.  The
         overriding interests of the children are, as I find, to  be  served
         by their being with  their  parents  as  a  family  group.  Neither
         Article 8, as noted above, nor the need to  safeguard  and  promote
         the welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom,  enable  the
         appellant and his wife simply to choose  where  they  would  prefer
         their family to live, however well founded such choice might be."

   10. The Judge then spoke of  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
       control and the acquisition of a private life established by a person
       at a time when that person's immigration status was precarious.  This
       was principally a reference to the appellant whose  presence  in  the
       United  Kingdom  was  as  an  asylum  seeker  whose  claim  had  been
       disbelieved. There is no suggestion that he was treating the children
       as responsible for their predicament. Inevitably, they were there  as
       a result of the decision of their parents. He concluded that  he  was
       not satisfied that removal would be disproportionate.

   11. This finding is challenged in the grounds of appeal by asserting that
       there was a failure to consider the best interests of the child F and
       that insufficient consideration was  conducted  in  relation  to  her
       health or the conditions in Russia.

   12. This challenge to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination would
       not have arisen had the Judge given a detailed recital of the medical
       evidence although, as I have said, he provided a  summary  of  it  in
       paragraph 41 of the determination which included a reference  to  the
       relevant pages in the  appellant's  bundle.  This  reference  to  the
       material demonstrates that he was aware of its contents. Furthermore,
       having seen the bundle of material that  was  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge, I am satisfied that the markers that he left  in  the
       bundle clearly demonstrate not only that he referred to the  contents
       in paragraph 41 but that he  himself  had  examined  those  pages.  I
       propose to do the same now.

The evidence

   13. The most disturbing document is from Luton and  Dunstable  University
       Hospital Foundation Trust recording F's admission on 5  October  2014
       at 2 o'clock in the morning and her discharge the following day. This
       recorded that F was  admitted  after  ingesting  40  tablets  of  her
       mother's Russian anti-hypertensive medication. Fortunately,  she  was
       admitted for observation and those observations  were  within  normal
       ranges. The specific medication was  unknown  as  it  was  marked  in
       Russian but observations were conducted as to the side-effects. F was
       seen by the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service. It transpired
       that she had taken the overdose of medication after  feeling  low  in
       mood and angry after bumping into a teacher from her previous school.
       It was an impulsive act in nature and she had  no  history  of  self-
       harm. She regretted the overdose and her wish to  live  was  stronger
       than her wish to die. It was thought safe to discharge her home under
       the care of her mother and she would be followed up by the Child  and
       Adolescent Mental Health Service [pp.  80-82].

   14. On 28 October 2014, Ms R. Grabowski, 'the coordinator  for  refugees,
       asylum seekers and all other pupils new to be United  Kingdom'  wrote
       from the Luton Learning Resource Centre recording that in the  summer
       of 2014 the family approached Luton  Borough  Council  with  enormous
       concerns regarding their education and treatment at the [ ] education
       trust in Luton. This was where the three school-age children had been
       receiving their education since October 2010, paid for privately. The
       three children, including F, were born in Moscow and Russian citizens
       but of mixed ethnicity, their Muslim faith and  dress  code  singling
       them out.

   15. Due to their poor learning environment and unacceptable treatment  by
       the [ ]  School staff and its headteacher, they raised  some  serious
       concerns in the school. This led to very poor and rude  treatment  of
       the children and their mother when she  attempted  to  raise  matters
       with the headteacher. The family contacted a  Luton  Borough  Council
       social worker who contacted Ms  Grabowski.  The  children  were  also
       referred to her by a local children's centre. She continued [p. 85]:

         "It was clear that the children could not continue to study at [  ]
         education  trust  where  they  were  facing  discrimination,   ill-
         treatment and were being seriously chastised for telling the  truth
         about certain aspects of the school life and curriculum. The OFSTED
         inspection for [ ] Girls and Boys Schools in May 2014 reported  the
         school to be inadequate (Grade 4) in all areas.   The  full  OFSTED
         report can be read on the Internet. The report reflects  the  poor,
         non-inclusive learning environment and inadequate leadership;  this
         was indeed exemplified in the treatment the [ ] children had  faced
         there. Latterly they had felt so sick about their poor treatment at
         the school that they were showing signs of anxiety and phobia about
         attending the [ ] School."

   16. Ms Grabowski's report records [p. 86]  that  arrangements  were  then
       made for the children to be placed in Putteridge High School in Luton
       where they commenced studying in September 2014.  She  spoke  of  the
       children in warm terms.

   17. The terrible experience the children  suffered  at  the  [  ]  School
       appears to be confirmed in relation to a victim support letter  dated
       15 August 2014 recording that F had been a victim of crime  [p.  76].
       I assume this was related to  her  experiences  at  the  school.  F's
       experiences are confirmed by an OFSTED letter dated  13  August  2014
       [pp. 114-5] acknowledging a complaint made to OFSTED about [  ]  Boys
       and Girls School.  Unfortunately, OFSTED washed their  hands  of  the
       complaint.

   18. On 24 November 2014, Dr Khan wrote to say that Z (not F) had  ongoing
       symptoms of stress and depression. She had been asked to be  referred
       to a psychologist. This referral had  been  done  and  she  was  then
       awaiting an appointment. Her condition arose as a result of her being
       expelled from school on 17 June 2014 [p. 77].

   19. On 14 April 2015 Dr S. Dadabhoy from the Kingsway  Health  Centre  in
       Luton wrote to say [p. 83] that F was his patient who  was  suffering
       from frequent panic attacks and depression nearly every  day  lasting
       20 minutes, occurring both in school and at home:

         "She  says  that  the  triggering  factor  is   usually   a   noisy
         environment, bright lights or  too  many  people  around  her.  She
         informed me that her mood is okay, she sleeps well and there is  no
         idea of self-harm.

         Due to depression and panic attacks patient was  unable  to  attend
         school 16 March 2015 to 14 April 2015. Due to the panic attacks she
         is frequently missing days of school so therefore it is in her best
         interests to be home schooled; F also agrees with this.

         I  have  referred  F  to  child  and  adolescent's  psychiatry  for
         assessment and management. She is waiting for the appointment."

   20. On 23 September 2015 an individual on behalf of the  Kingsway  Health
       Centre confirmed [p. 84] that F was  still  suffering  from  frequent
       panic attacks. The content of the last letter [page 83] was  repeated
       and F was still apparently awaiting an appointment from the child and
       adolescent psychiatry team.

   21. On 25 July 2016 the  Elective  Home  Education  and  Child  Licensing
       Officer of the London Borough of Barking  and  Dagenham's  children's
       services wrote to confirm  that  F  was  registered  with  the  local
       authority for Elective Home Education. Ms Kelly had visited the  home
       recently to advise on an application for her to attend another school
       should F's health allow. She said she would be  seeking  the  schools
       adviser to conduct a further visit to monitor F's progress with  this
       education [p. 79].

   22. On 4 August 2016, Dr Hannan, the GP registrar to  Dr  Sanomi  of  the
       Rush Green Medical Centre in Romford wrote in relation to F  who  was
       her patient that she suffered from anxiety symptoms  which  had  been
       getting worse with time. She was unable to use public  transport  due
       to anxiety and was reliant upon her father for transport. Her anxiety
       symptoms had resulted in her being home schooled. She was waiting  to
       see a child psychiatrist at the Child and  Adolescent  Mental  Health
       Service [p. 78].

   23. The bundle of documentation before the  Judge  continues  with  large
       numbers of documents relating to the children's progress at school as
       well as other activities.  A large number of photographs  depict  the
       children.

   24. This documentation amply demonstrates that F was deeply  troubled  by
       her experiences at the [ ] School. The Judge can have had  no  reason
       to  doubt,  and  expressed  no  doubt,  that  this  resulted  in  her
       depression, anxiety  and  panic  attacks.  Although  there  were  two
       references to F being referred to the  Child  and  Adolescent  Mental
       Health Service, there is no report from  a  psychiatrist  as  to  any
       further treatment but the underlying  difficulties  with  her  mental
       health were recorded and attested to by the local health centre.

   25. The immediate cause of the physical distress was obviously alleviated
       by leaving the school. However, it is of note  that  her  attempt  at
       suicide or self harm was triggered by her seeing one  of  the  staff.
       Happily, there was no evidence before the Judge of suicidal  ideation
       and the discharge summary points to the incident being  an  impulsive
       act  which  F  subsequently  regretted.   That  said,  her   symptoms
       continued.

The consideration of whether the determination discloses a material error

   26. I have provided  a  more  detailed  examination  of  the  documentary
       material than that  provided  by  the  Judge  in  his  determination.
       Nevertheless, I would not regard the Judge's summary of  the  medical
       evidence  in  paragraph  41  as  being  inaccurate.  He  said,  quite
       properly,  F  suffers  from  severe  anxiety,  depression  and  panic
       attacks. He recorded she had difficulty in 2014 when she was at the [
       ] School in relation to which she complained to OFSTED inspectors. He
       recorded how this had resulted in hostile treatment  of  her  by  the
       school staff causing her to leave and  to  commence  home  education.
       That, in truth, is exactly what occurred.

   27. The medical evidence was limited. There  was  no  psychiatric  report
       notwithstanding the reference to F being referred  to  the  unit  for
       treatment or assessment. There is no evidence of medication. One  can
       infer that her mental health must  have  been  somewhat  improved  by
       being removed from the environment which was so painful and  damaging
       to her. Assuming that her home education continued, we can infer that
       this was being provided by her parents.

Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1)

   28. The respondent's decision letter  set  out  why  the  various  family
       members did not meet the public interest criteria under  Appendix  FM
       and paragraph 276ADE(1).  It was not suggested by Ms Popal that  they
       did at the material time.

A wider Article 8 assessment and proportionality

   29. Consequently, it was on this basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
       came to examine whether it was proportionate to remove this family by
       reference  to  a  wider  consideration  of  Article  8.   Given   the
       interference that would be  occasioned  by  removal  was  sufficient,
       potentially, to engage Article 8, the enquiry had swiftly moved on to
       proportionality.  On the conclusion of their asylum claim, which  was
       not found to have been truthful, there was no  further  lawful  basis
       upon which the family might establish a  right  to  remain,  save  if
       removal violated their human rights. There was, of course, no  viable
       Article 3 claim based upon the risk of serious  harm  arising  either
       out of the asylum claim or the  medical  conditions  of  any  of  the
       family members. Furthermore, although the  Judge  acknowledged  there
       was a level of discrimination against Muslims in Russia, this did not
       amount  to  ill-treatment  of  sufficient  severity  to  engage   the
       Convention.

   30. As the family would be returning to Russia as a unit, there would  be
       no violation of their protected family life. The evidence pointed  to
       F suffering from depression and anxiety  and  panic  attacks  but  no
       further evidence was adduced as to treatment or therapeutic care.  In
       these circumstances, no judge properly directing himself  could  have
       reached the conclusion that the family's removal was  unlawful  as  a
       disproportionate interference with their  private  lives.  The  Judge
       properly recorded that mental health services in Russia may not be as
       good as in the United Kingdom. There was no evidence as to  how  that
       differential would impact upon F herself. There was no evidence  that
       a health professional had  provided  a  prognosis  dealing  with  the
       likely future course of her illness, the type  of  treatment  or  the
       length of such treatment. Nor was there any  evidence  of  a  private
       life that F had developed outside her home although, inevitably, as a
       child who has lived in the United kingdom for several  years,  it  is
       proper to infer that such a private life must have been created.

   31.  Although  criticism  is  made  of  the  Judge's  comments  that  the
       appellants immigration status was precarious, I do not consider  that
       was inappropriate given that the appellant had no leave to remain  in
       the United Kingdom save for the right not to be removed  pending  his
       unsuccessful asylum claim. That was not a firm foundation on which to
       base an Article 8 claim.

   32. I well recognise that time has passed since the  First-tier  Tribunal
       reached its decision. Time is a  significant  factor  when  assessing
       removal in cases involving children. An application  of  Appendix  FM
       and paragraph 276ADE(1) may now lead to a different  result,  I  know
       not.  Furthermore, Ms. Popal intimated that there was further medical
       evidence currently available. These considerations, however,  do  not
       impact upon my consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge
       made a material error of law. I am satisfied that he did not.  Whilst
       I acknowledge he could, as I have  done,  gone  through  the  various
       pages of the bundle,  I  am  satisfied  he  was  well  aware  of  its
       contents. Furthermore, whilst I have focused solely on  the  material
       as it affects the issue before me, namely the evidence insofar as  it
       related to F, the Judge was concerned with a much  wider  examination
       of both the asylum claim and the Article 8 claims as it affected each
       member of the family. He was confronted with the bundle of  some  200
       pages. I would not regard it as reasonable for him to have summarised
       each of those 200 pages, whereas I enjoyed the comparative luxury  of
       examining only a  small  section  of  it.  For  these  reasons  I  am
       satisfied the Judge reached the  right  conclusion  on  the  material
       before him.

DECISION

The Judge made no error on a point of law and the original determination  of
the appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                             2 November 2017

