
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03898/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 September 2016                 |On 14 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     T G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel (counsel) instructed by Irving & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant, because an anonymity direction was  deemed
necessary at first instance.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Tynan promulgated  on  13  July  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on [ ] and is a national of Egypt.

4.     On  10/12/2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the   Appellant's
application for asylum.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Tynan  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 25  August  2016  Judge  Grimmett
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

         "2.      It is arguable that the  Judge  erred  in  making  adverse
         credibility findings on matters which the respondent had not put in
         issue and that that affected  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
         claim to have been subjected to a sexual assault.

         3. It is also arguable that the  Judge  may  have  failed  to  give
         adequate consideration to the appellant's explanation as to why she
         left Tanta province."

The Hearing

7.    (a) Ms Capel, counsel for the appellant, moved the grounds of  appeal.
She produced an extract of a note prepared by counsel  who  appeared  before
the First-tier (and who framed the grounds of appeal) recording some of  the
questions asked in  examination  in  chief  and  in  cross-examination.  She
relied on that note of evidence to move ground  one,  and  argued  that  the
Judge had taken inadequate account of paragraphs 18 and 19  of  the  reasons
for refusal letter (where the respondent  accepts  that  the  appellant  has
been targeted because of her faith as a Coptic Christian). The  Judge  finds
at [18] of the decision that  the  appellant  has  not  given  a  consistent
account and rejects three incidents which are narrated  in  the  appellant's
witness statement dated, but which do  not  feature  in  substantive  asylum
interview

(b)   Ms Capel relied on the case of RR  (challenging  evidence)  Sri  Lanka
[2010] UKUT 274 (IAC) and argued that the appellant had not been given  fair
notice of matters which were determinative of aspects of the appeal, and  so
had been deprived of the opportunity to  either  provide  comment  or  offer
evidence. That failure, it was argued, amounts to procedural unfairness  and
is a material error of law  which  affects  the  decision  because,  it  was
argued, the matters considered are relevant  to  the  question  of  internal
relocation.

(c)   The second ground of appeal is an argument that the  Judge  failed  to
take account of possible explanations for the delayed disclosure of  certain
parts of the appellant's evidence. Part of the  appellant's  account,  which
was rejected by the Judge, relates to a sexual  assault  in  June  2015.  Ms
Capel relied on the UNHCR guidance on international  protection  and  gender
related persecution, and argued that, because no fair notice of a  challenge
to  the  appellant's  credibility  had  been  given,  preparation   of   the
appellant's case did not include either evidence or submissions  driving  at
the difference between the appellant's initial claim and the claim which  is
set out in her witness statement prepared for the appeal.

(d)   The third ground of appeal is a  challenge  to  the  adequacy  of  the
reasons given by the Judge for his findings on  the  ability  to  internally
relocate. It is argued that the Judge's findings did  not  take  account  of
the appellant's oral evidence and amounts  to  a  misinterpretation  of  the
case plead by the appellant. It is argued that there is a  failure  to  take
account of the evidence of the appellant which leads to a material error  of
law in the findings in relation to internal relocation. It  is  argued  that
it is important that the appellant fled from large cities  and  the  country
guidance case indicates that normally a Coptic Christian would be safe in  a
large city.

(e)   Ms Capel urged me to set the decision aside and to remit this case  to
the First-tier to be heard of new.

8.    (a) For the respondent Mr Melvin told me that the  decision  does  not
contain any  errors  material  or  otherwise.  He  placed  reliance  on  the
respondent's room 24 note and explained that  he  has  neither  a  file  law
record of the questions asked and answers given before  the  first-tier  but
does not dispute council's note of evidence from the first-tier hearing.

(b)   Mr Melvin told me that it was  open  to  the  judge  to  consider  the
difference  between  the  information  before  the  decisionmaker  when  the
reasons for refusal letter was written as an enhanced  claim  placed  before
the first-tier. He told me that in any event the challenge  to  the  judge's
findings are irrelevant because the respondent accepts  that  the  appellant
has been targeted in Egypt's because she is a Coptic  Christian  and  at  2o
and 21 of the reasons for refusal letter it is accepted that  the  appellant
demonstrates a genuine subjective  feeling  on  return  to  Egypt,  but  the
respondent's position has always been that internal relocation is  a  viable
option for the appellant.

(c)   Mr Melvin told me that the judge took full account of all of  evidence
placed before reaching findings of fact which were open  to  the  judge  and
then reaching unsustainable conclusion that  the  appellant  can  return  to
Egypt's because the option of internal relocation is available  to  her.  He
reminded me of the case  of  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set  aside)
[2013] UKUT 85 (IAC). He urged me  to  dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the
decision to stand.

Analysis

9.    There are conflicting authorities concerning the Judge's  duties  when
assessing credibility. In Carcabuk and Bla (00/TH/01426) the  Tribunal  said
that a failure to challenge credibility in the reasons  for  refusal  letter
or otherwise is not a concession that the respondent accepts as  true  those
parts of the appellant's account which he has not challenged. In  ST  (Child
asylum seekers) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 292 (IAC)  it was held  that  a  Judge
should alert the advocates when  considering  departure  from  a  favourable
assessment of credibility made by the UKBA

10.   In RR (Challenging evidence) Sri Lanka [2010]  UKUT  00274  (IAC)  the
Tribunal said that in a case where there are  obvious  but  not  necessarily
determinative difficulties in an appellant's oral evidence the  Tribunal  is
likely to  be  helped  considerably  by  independent  expert  evidence  that
supports the appellant's story. If the respondent seeks  to  challenge  such
evidence then, ideally, the challenge should be supported  by  evidence  put
before the Tribunal. If  the  appellant  or  expert  chooses  to  give  oral
evidence then the  respondent's  cross  examination  should  fearlessly  and
clearly include  the  suggesting  to  the  appellant  or  expert  that,  for
example, an injury was not caused in the way alleged by  the  appellant  but
by a different mechanism. If the respondent does not put  its  case  clearly
it may well be  very  difficult  for  the  Tribunal  to  decide  against  an
appellant  who  has  not  been  given  an  opportunity  to  deal  with   the
respondent's concern. If a party has no basis for  challenging  evidence  so
that a challenge to the evidence would appear to be abusive or foolish  then
that party must think very carefully before making the  challenge.  It  will
probably be fairer to abandon the point.

11.   In AM (fair hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC) it  was  held  that
fairness may require a Tribunal to  canvas  an  issue  which  has  not  been
ventilated by the parties or their representatives, in  fulfilment  of  each
party's right to a fair hearing.

12.   In HA and TD [2010] CSIH 28 the court considered the extent  to  which
an immigration judge was entitled to base his conclusion on a  matter  which
had not been raised during the course of the hearing before him.  The  court
said that there is no general obligation on the Tribunal to give  notice  to
the parties during the hearing of all the matters on which it  may  rely  in
reaching its decision.  The court also endorsed the view that  the  Tribunal
was not bound, as a  matter  of  natural  justice,  to  point  out  all  the
inconsistencies since an applicant can generally be  expected  to  be  aware
that the Tribunal will have to assess his credibility, and  the  consistency
of the  account  he  has  given  in  evidence  with  any  previous  accounts
contained in the documents before the Tribunal will plainly be  relevant  to
that assessment.

13.   It is quite clear from the decision that the Judge carefully  analyses
the evidence and makes findings  of  fact  between  [10]  and  [32]  of  the
decision. The Judge takes account of  each  strand  of  evidence  and  takes
account  of  the  respondent's  acceptance  of  the  account  given  by  the
appellant at asylum interview. It is pars judicis for the Judge to  consider
each strand of  evidence  and  view  the  totality  of  evidence  to  assess
consistency, credibility and reliability.  At  [18]  the  Judge  gives  good
reasons for rejecting some parts of the appellant's overall account. What  I
have to consider is whether or not that is procedurally fair, and if  it  is
an error of law whether or not it is a material error.

14.   As the question for me is one of fairness, the  fairest  way  to  deal
with this case is to take the appellant's claim  at  its  highest.  I  asked
myself what the effect would be if every part of the appellant's  claim  had
been accepted by the Judge.

15.   The appellant's claim is a fear of  non-state  agents.  The  appellant
claims that a fundamentalist Islamic sheik  from  Cairo  and  his  followers
have abused, harassed and attacked the appellant  and  her  husband  between
May and July 2015. At [20] and [21] of the reasons for  refusal  letter  the
respondent accepts the appellant's account and accepts  that  the  appellant
has a genuine subjective fear of return to Egypt. Between [23] and [33]  the
respondent finds that it would not be unreasonable to expect  the  appellant
to move beyond the reach  of  the  agent  of  persecution  by  moving  to  a
different area of Egypt.

16.   In the first sentence at [32] of  the  decision  the  Judge  correctly
identifies the determinative issuing as

         "... I have to consider how far the threat  against  the  appellant
         will extend."

17.   In MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG [2013] UKUT 611 (IAC) it  was  held
that (i) Notwithstanding  that  there  is  inadequate  state  protection  of
Coptic Christians in Egypt, they are not at a general  risk  of  persecution
or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3,  ECHR;  (ii)   However,  on  current
evidence there are some areas where Coptic Christians will face a real  risk
of persecution or ill-treatment contrary to  Article  3.  In  general  these
will be (a) areas outside the large  cities;  (b)  where  radical  Islamists
have a strong foothold; and (c) there have been  recent  attacks  on  Coptic
Christians or their  churches,  businesses  or  properties;  (iii)   On  the
evidence before the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  following  are  particular  risk
categories in the sense that those falling within  them  will  generally  be
able to show a real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to Article  3,
at least in their  home  area  (a)  converts  to  Coptic  Christianity;  (b)
persons  who  are  involved  in  construction  or  reconstruction/repair  of
churches that have been the target for  an  attack  or  attacks;  (c)  those
accused of proselytising where the accusation is  serious  and  not  casual;
(d) those accused of being physically or emotionally involved with a  Muslim
woman, where the accusation is made seriously and not casually; (iv)  Coptic
Christian women in Egypt are not in general at real risk of  persecution  or
ill-treatment, although they face difficulties additional  to  other  women,
in the  form  of  sometimes  being  the  target  of  disappearances,  forced
abduction and forced conversion; (v)  However, depending on  the  particular
circumstances of the case, Coptic Christian women in Egypt aged between  14-
25 years who lack a male protector, may be at such risk; (vi) If a  claimant
is able to establish that in their home area they fall within  one  or  more
of the risk categories identified in (iii)  (a)-(d) above or that they  come
from an area where  the  local  Coptic  population  faces  a  real  risk  of
persecution, it will not necessarily follow that they  qualify  as  refugees
or as beneficiaries of subsidiary protection or Article 3  ECHR  protection.
That will depend on whether they can show  they  would  not  have  a  viable
internal relocation alternative. In such cases there  will  be  need  for  a
fact-specific assessment but, in general  terms,  resettlement  in  an  area
where Islamists are not strong would appear to be  a  viable  option;  (vii)
None of the above necessarily precludes a Coptic  Christian  in  Egypt  from
being able to establish a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment  in  the
particular circumstances of their case, e.g. if such an individual has  been
the target of attacks because he or she is a Coptic Christian.

18.   The appellant is not a convert Coptic Christianity. The  appellant  is
not involved in the construction and  repair  of  churches  which  had  been
attacked. The appellant does not proselytise, and has  not  become  involved
with a Muslim woman.

19.   The appellant  is  undeniably  a  female  Coptic  Christian,  but  her
husband remains in Egypt - so she has a male protector there.   It  is  only
the final category in the headnote to the case of MS which  might  apply  to
the appellant, because she has been the target  of  attacks  solely  because
she is a Coptic Christian.

20.   The appellant's agent of persecution is clearly  identified  as  Sheik
Mohammed Guniem and his followers. The weight  of  evidence  indicates  that
Sheik Guniem's influence and area of interest is  restricted  to  Cairo.  He
turned his attention to the appellant solely because of  her  religion,  but
when the appellant moved beyond Cairo  she  heard  no  more  from  him.  The
background information indicates that Alexandria has a  large  community  of
Coptic Christians. In her asylum interview the appellant was asked  why  she
could not move to Alexandria, she said that she could not afford to do so.

21.   It is the appellants evidence  that  she  has  family  who  remain  in
Cairo. The background information indicates  that  the  Egyptian  government
generally respects freedom of movement.  Egypt is a  large  country  with  a
population of 84 million. The reasons for refusal letter make it clear  that
the  respondent  believes  that  sheik  Guniem  has  neither  interest   nor
influence beyond Cairo. In answer to question 50 of  the  asylum  interview,
the appellant describes Sheikh Guniem as a person who is:

         "Not part of any political groups, just extremist. Not like  Muslim
         brotherhood."

22.   Taking the appellant's own evidence  at  its  highest,  the  agent  of
persecution is a rogue Islamic extremist who is not aligned to any  Islamist
group.

23.   The Judge considered internal relocation between [32] and [34] of  the
decision. There, he sets out adequate reasons and reaches conclusions  which
were available to him on the evidence led.  His  findings  there  can  stand
independently  of  his  rejection  of  incidents  first  mentioned  by   the
appellant  in  her  witness  statement.   For  the  purposes  of   assessing
materiality, I ignore the final four sentences at [32], and still find  that
the  Judge  correctly  directed  himself  in  law  in  considering  internal
relocation and reached conclusions which were open to him  on  the  evidence
presented.

24.   The third ground of appeal (in reality) amounts to nothing  more  than
a disagreement with the  Judge's  findings.  The  Judge  correctly  directed
himself in law. There was no flaw in his fact-finding exercise  in  relation
to internal relocation.

25.   The net effect is that, taking  the  appellant's  claim  at  its  very
highest  and  accepting  each  strand  of  the  appellant's  evidence,   the
appellant establishes a genuine fear because she  has  been  targeted  by  a
rogue Islamist due to her faith is a Coptic  Christian.  The  appellant  has
had a spectacularly unpleasant time, but the remedy for  the  problems  lies
closer to home  than  she  perhaps  thinks.  The  appellant  does  not  need
international protection because she can safely live in a different part  of
Egypt. If the appellant stays away from Cairo, then  her  problems  will  be
solved.

26.   The Judge considers whether or not it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
appellant to  relocate  and,  at  [33]  after  considering  the  appellant's
circumstances, finds that it would not be  unduly  harsh  the  appellant  to
seek safety in another part of Egypt and to be reunited with her husband.

27.   No challenge is taken to  the  Judge's  findings  on  the  appellant's
article 8 ECHR appeal.

28.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

29.   I therefore find  that,  although  brief,  the  decision  is  adequate
because it focuses on the central area of dispute, there is no  misdirection
of law, and the Judge's fact-finding exercise is  sufficient.  The  decision
does not contain a material error of law.

30.   As the decision  does  not  contain  a  material  error  of  law,  the
decision stands and the appeal is dismissed.



CONCLUSION

31.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

32.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 10 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

