
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03209/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2020                           |On 3 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     F s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Eteko, Solicitor at Iras and Co

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to  the  Appellant  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal as the Secretary  of  State  and  to  the  Respondent  as  the
    Claimant.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge S J Clarke ("the judge"), promulgated on 3
    December 2019, by which she allowed the Claimant's appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal of his human rights and protection claims.
     Those  claims  were  made  following  the  initiation  of  deportation
    proceedings  by  the  Secretary  of  State  following  the   Claimant's
    conviction for assault occasioning actual bodily  harm  and  subsequent
    sentence of fifteen months' imprisonment in 2017.

 3. The protection issue no longer plays  any  part  in  this  appeal.   In
    addition, it has been accepted throughout that the Claimant was  unable
    to rely on the private life exception contained in section  117C(4)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act2002, as amended ("the  2002
    Act").  In  addition,  the  Claimant  was  not  able  to  rely  on  his
    relationship with his partner due to his lack of status at the time the
    relationship was formed and thereafter.  The focus  of  the  Claimant's
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was that it would be unduly harsh
    for him to be separated from his daughter, a British citizen,  born  in
    December 2013.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The judge found the Claimant and his partner to be  credible  witnesses
    and agreed with the Secretary of State's acceptance of  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship between the Claimant and his daughter.
     The judge concluded, in line with the Secretary of  State's  position,
    that it would be unduly harsh for the family unit to go to Afghanistan.
     She then turned to consider the question of whether  a  separation  of
    the Claimant from his partner, and more importantly his daughter, would
    also be unduly harsh.  Reference  was  made  to  the  decision  of  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal in RA (Section  117C:  "unduly  harsh";
    offence: seriousness) [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC).

 5. It is worth quoting [16] and [17] of  the  judge's  brief  decision  in
    full:

         "16. Given the spouse does not come from Afghanistan and  does  not
             speak Pashtu, and neither does the child, and given it is  not
             safe for them to travel to visit the Appellant, I find that  a
             ten year  deportation  would  indeed  by  (sic)  unduly  harsh
             because they would not enjoy any physical  and  face  to  face
             contact with the Appellant for ten years, and at best the only
             contact they can enjoy is by modern  means  of  communication.
             The consequence is that the partner of ten years and the child
             aged 6 would not see the Appellant in person for  another  ten
             years, and this is not just bleak and severe, but unduly bleak
             because they cannot visit him and the  security  situation  in
             Afghanistan is not recent but has endured for many years.   It
             is foreseeable that the advice from the Foreign  Office  would
             remain in the future.

         17.  In addition, the Appellant's  spouse  and  daughter  would  be
             deprived of his assistance to them, albeit  this  is  somewhat
             set off against by the presence of the step-son who  could  be
             called upon to assist more than he does if need be.  I  accept
             she is of low income having looked at her P60s  for  the  last
             two years, and that she receives Universal Credit, and I  find
             that it is not likely that they could raise  sufficient  funds
             to travel to visit the Appellant at some third country, or  if
             the situation in Kabul improved, to visit  him  there  in  the
             foreseeable future."

    On the basis of this the appeal was allowed.

Decision on error of law

 6. Before me, Ms Bassi relied on the Secretary of State's  grounds,  which
    in essence assert that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    the conclusion that a separation of the family would have unduly  harsh
    consequences on, in particular, the Claimant's daughter.  She relied on
    paras 8 and 17 of RA and paras 34 and 46 of PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 1213.

 7. Mr Eteko submitted that the reasons provided by the judge were open  to
    her in light of the evidence as a whole.  The  judge  had  focused  her
    attention on the position of the child which may  have  been  different
    from that of the partner, and noted that the partner and  the  Claimant
    had been deemed to have given credible evidence.

 8. As announced to the parties at the end of the hearing, I conclude  that
    the judge has materially erred in law.

 9. The reasons challenge is made out.  Clearly, cases such  as  these  are
    fact-sensitive, but the reasons provided must be done so in the context
    of the applicable legal framework and in this case  that  involved  the
    unduly harsh test and all that that entails.  As is made clear  by  the
    Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53; [2018]  1  WLR  5273  and
    subsequent decisions at various levels, the threshold is high and  that
    threshold will not be met by what has been described as  the  "ordinary
    consequences" of deportation or those that are to be  "expected"  as  a
    result of such action.

10. In my judgement the reasons as stated by the judge  in  [16]  and  [17]
    cannot properly  be  seen  as  to  amount  to  anything  more  than  an
    identification  of  those  ordinary  consequences  of  deportation   or
    consequences that are to be expected.  As  commented  by  Lord  Justice
    Hickinbottom at para 46 of PG (Jamaica), one will always have  a  great
    deal of sympathy for innocent children  whose  lives  will  be  greatly
    changed as a result of a parent having to leave.  However, that  is  in
    essence the nature of the deportation framework as it currently stands.
     For the judge to have reached  a  sustainable  conclusion  as  to  the
    crossing  of  the  unduly  harsh   threshold,   reasons   specific   to
    further/additional features going beyond the ordinary  consequences  of
    separation would have had to be identified.   They  have  not  been  so
    identified by this judge.

11. The error is clearly material, and the judge's  decision  must  be  set
    aside.

Remaking the decision

12. Mr Eteko urged me to remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal.   He
    asserted that he wished to obtain a report on the  Claimant's  daughter
    (presumably a psychological or psychiatric report,  although  this  was
    not specified).  I declined to follow this course  of  action  for  the
    following reasons.

13. First, a remittal of this  appeal  would  be  inappropriate  given  the
    nature of the issues involved, including the absence  of  any  material
    factual dispute between the parties.

14. Second, there has been no information provided that any report  has  in
    fact been commissioned, or indeed that any  relevant  expert  has  even
    been contacted.

15. Third, the parties in this case (as  in  all  cases  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal) have been on notice that the  presumption  would  be  that  a
    remaking of the decision in the appeal would follow immediately from  a
    setting aside of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Parties
    should be prepared to make submissions and have  adduced  relevant  new
    evidence in advance of the error of law hearing.  Here there  has  been
    no indication (and certainly no  details)  concerning  either  any  new
    evidence or indeed why expert evidence was not adduced before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

16. Fourth, although I take full account of the existence  of  a  child  in
    this case, it is of significance that the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal was held on 13 November 2019, only some three months  ago.  It
    cannot be said that the period between consideration by the  judge  and
    now by me is such that further evidence must be sought.  Mr  Eteko  has
    not suggested that there have been any material changes in the  child's
    circumstances.

17. In terms of the scope of the remaking decision, I am not concerned with
    protection issues.  Mr  Eteko  had  specifically  conceded  this  point
    before the First-tier Tribunal (see [7] of the judge's decision) and he
    maintained that position before me.  As mentioned earlier, the  private
    life exception under the 2002 Act and the Immigration Rules is not open
    to the Claimant, nor is that  relating  to  his  partner.  Thus,  I  am
    concerned first and foremost with the question of whether it  would  be
    unduly harsh on the Claimant's daughter were he to be deported from the
    United Kingdom, with reference to section 117C(5) of the 2002  Act  and
    paragraph 399(a) of the Rules (it has been accepted throughout that the
    daughter is British and therefore a qualifying child, and that he has a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with her).

18. The evidence I have considered is contained in the Secretary of State's
    original appeal bundle and in the Appellant's bundle prepared  for  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal (indexed and  paginated  1-103).
    In addition, I have borne in mind the fact that the  judge  deemed  the
    Claimant and his partner to be credible witnesses.

19. In all the circumstances, there  is  no  material  dispute  as  to  the
    essential factual matrix in this  case.   The  relevant  facts  are  as
    stated below:

      1) The Claimant came to the United Kingdom in  January  2010.   On  21
         July 2017 he was convicted of  assault  occasioning  actual  bodily
         harm  and  sentenced  to  fifteen  months'  imprisonment.   Shortly
         thereafter he put forward protection and human rights claims to the
         Secretary of State.  On 22  March  2019  a  deportation  order  was
         signed followed on 25 March of that year by a  decision  to  deport
         and a refusal of the protection and human rights claims;

      2) The Claimant is currently, and has been for some ten  years,  in  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  partner,  who  is  a
         British citizen;

      3) his partner has a son from a previous relationship, aged 25.  He is
         currently studying at university and he works part-time;

      4) The Claimant's daughter is also a British citizen and was  born  in
         December 2013.  She is healthy;

      5)  The  Claimant's  partner  suffers  from  some  health  conditions,
         although  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest   that   they   are
         significant, whether taken in isolation or  cumulatively,  and  she
         works part-time at weekends;

      6) The Claimant has family members residing in Afghanistan.

20. There is no expert evidence before me.

21. By way of submissions, Mr Eteko urged me  to  focus  primarily  on  the
    position of the Claimant's daughter and assess her best interests.  The
    consequences of deportation would be ten years  of  separation  between
    father and daughter.  There  would  be  difficulties  in  the  daughter
    visiting the Claimant in Afghanistan, or  indeed  anywhere  else.   The
    deportation of the Claimant would place a real  strain  on  the  family
    unit in this country.  The daughter would not be able to comprehend why
    she was being separated from her father.  I was referred to para  5  of
    the partner's witness statement and the effects on  the  daughter  when
    the Claimant was  imprisoned  in  2017.   The  Claimant  has  only  one
    conviction to his name and is now "self-rehabilitated".   His  life  in
    Afghanistan would be very difficult.  The combination of factors should
    lead to the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh  on  the  daughter
    for the Claimant to be deported.

22. Ms Bassi relied on the case law provided in respect of the error of law
    issue.  She submitted that the evidence did not disclose  any  features
    raising this  case  above  the  threshold  of  consequences  ordinarily
    expected in deportation matters.

23. In terms of the  relevant  legal  framework.  I  direct  myself  to  KO
    (Nigeria) and RA (Iraq).  The unduly harsh test sets a  high  threshold
    but cases are fact-sensitive.  The factual sensitivity must  of  course
    be placed in the relevant context of the high threshold just described.
     At para 23 of KO Lord Carnwath stated that:

         "One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond  what  would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent".

24. The Supreme Court specifically approved  the  "authoritative  guidance"
    set out by the Upper Tribunal at para 46 of MK  (Sierra  Leone)  [2015]
    UKUT 223 (IAC):

          "... we are  mindful  that  unduly  harsh  does  not  equate  with
         uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable  or  merely   difficult.
         Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated threshold.  Harsh  in
         this context, denotes  something  severe,  or  bleak.   It  is  the
         antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.  Furthermore,  the  addition
         of the adverb unduly raises  an  already  elevated  standard  still
         higher".

25. For the reasons set out below, I conclude that it  cannot  properly  be
    said that it would be unduly harsh  on  the  Claimant's  daughter  (and
    certainly not on his partner) were he to be deported to Afghanistan.

26. First, I emphasise that my consideration  of  the  unduly  harsh  issue
    incorporates taking  the  Claimant's  daughter's  best  interests  into
    account as a primary factor.  It is quite obvious these best  interests
    lie in her remaining  with  both  parents.   Having  said  that,  these
    interests do not of course act as a "trump card".

27. Second, it is undoubtedly the case that the Claimant's daughter, at the
    age of 6, would be very upset by  the  enforced  separation  and  would
    probably not comprehend why this was taking place.  I accept  that  she
    would have been upset as a result  of  her  father's  incarceration  in
    2017.  There is a very good father/daughter  relationship  between  the
    two.  To  paraphrase  Lord  Justice  Hickinbottom  at  para  46  of  PG
    (Jamaica) one has great sympathy  for  this  entirely  innocent  child.
    However, this upset and distress is, in a real sense, a consequence  to
    be expected by enforced separation.   In  the  present  case  there  is
    insufficient evidence to indicate that the  Claimant's  daughter  would
    suffer  any  particular  and  potentially  lasting   emotional   and/or
    psychological damage by virtue of the separation over  and  above  what
    would be expected following the removal of a  loving  parent  from  the
    life of their child (at least for a considerable period).  The contents
    of  the  Claimant's  and  his  partner's  witness  statements   express
    understandable parental  concerns  relating  the  daughter's  emotional
    wellbeing were deportation to occur, and  there  is  reference  to  her
    being "very affected" whilst the Claimant was in prison. This  evidence
    does not, with respect, take the case  very  much  further:  the  upset
    caused by deportation and for that matter  imprisonment  is  a  natural
    consequence of enforced separation.

28. Third, I accept that  the  Claimant's  deportation  would  deprive  the
    family unit of practical and financial assistance.  That  would  indeed
    place a strain upon his partner, and potentially his daughter as  well.
    However, once again, these matters are to be expected in the normal run
    of events following deportation.  In the present case the evidence does
    not indicate that the partner would simply be unable to either work  or
    care for her daughter.  I note  that  the  partner  receives  Universal
    Credit and is entitled to do  so  as  a  British  citizen.   Additional
    support from the state  may  potentially  be  required,  but  both  the
    partner and the daughter are British and would  be  entitled  to  this.
    The judge found that the Claimant's adult step-son  would  be  able  to
    assist to a greater extent in the future if  necessary.   There  is  no
    evidence before me to undermine that finding.

29. Fourth, the Claimant's partner would also undoubtedly be upset  by  his
    deportation. The evidence before me  does  not  disclose  any  features
    which elevate that understandable human emotion to the applicable  high
    threshold.

30. Fifth, in respect of the family unit being able  to  meet  face-to-face
    outside of the United Kingdom, it may well be the case that this  could
    not take place  in  Afghanistan  as  matters  stand.   However,  in  my
    judgement  this  of  itself  cannot  amount  to  a  feature   of   such
    significance as to make a separation unduly harsh.  The legal framework
    provides for the scenario in which it may  well  be  unduly  harsh  for
    children and/or partners to travel with the deportee  to  the  latter's
    country of origin: but that is not the end of the  matter  as  it  must
    also be shown that a separation would be unduly  harsh  on  those  left
    behind. Therefore, an inability to  go  to  another  specified  country
    cannot be decisive of the unduly harsh test.  Whilst meeting in a third
    country may involve difficulties, there is no  evidence  before  me  to
    indicate that this would be  an  impossibility  (or  even  an  unlikely
    option).

31. It follows from the above that the Claimant is unable to bring  himself
    within the family life exception under section 117C(5) or the  relevant
    Rule.

32. Although Mr Eteko did not specifically address me on  the  question  of
    whether there were, in any event, "very compelling  circumstances  over
    and  above"  those  described  in  either  of  the  two  exceptions,  I
    nonetheless go on to deal with this issue.

33. On the evidence before me and in light of the facts found by the First-
    tier Tribunal, there are no features in this case that  come  close  to
    reaching this very high threshold.  In addition to the considerations I
    have already set out, the Claimant is a healthy  individual  who  spent
    the great majority of his life in Afghanistan and has family there  who
    could provide him with support.  There are no protection issues in  his
    appeal.  In my judgement and on any rational view of the  circumstances
    in this case, removal cannot be said to be  disproportionate  when  the
    Claimant's specific  rights  are  weighed  against  the  strong  public
    interest in deporting foreign national criminals.

Anonymity

34. Although the First-tier Tribunal did not make  a  direction,  I  do  so
    because of the existence of the child in this case.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and I set it aside.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

Signed   [pic]         Date: 14 February 2020

Upper               Tribunal               Judge               Norton-Taylor

