
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03633/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 July 2019                      |On 9 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                              J S (Afghanistan)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Muneeb Akram, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Andrew McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse him refugee  status,  humanitarian  protection  or  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant, his wife and their two  daughters  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom clandestinely, arriving  on  18  September  2017  and  claiming
    asylum the next day.  The daughters would then have been 8 and 3  years
    old.

 3. The  appellant  says  he  is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan.  During  the
    appellant's oral evidence at the Upper Tribunal,  Mr  McVeety  for  the
    respondent gave notice to the appellant and his Counsel, Mr Akram, that
    the Secretary of State would withdraw her concession that the appellant
    was an Afghan man from Jalalabad, or that he is an Afghan citizen.

 4. The respondent continues to accept that the appellant is  a  person  of
    the Sikh religion, as is his wife.

 5. The appellant speaks Punjabi.  He says he  also  speaks  Dari  but  had
    difficulty in his Home Office  interview  with  the  Dari  interpreter,
    whose native tongue was Farsi.  The appellant  has  sought  to  explain
    that by the  Dari  interpreter  having  the  wrong  dialect.   I  note,
    however, that he asked for  a  Punjabi  interpreter  for  the  remaking
    hearing.

Background

 6. The appellant's account is that he and  his  wife  were  both  born  in
    Jalalabad, Afghanistan of Sikh parents.  He says  that  he  attended  a
    Punjabi school in Jalalabad until the 8th class, but was  not  educated
    after the age of 15, and went into the family  clothing  shop  business
    instead.  The appellant  came  from  a  wealthy  family:  his  paternal
    grandfather started the clothing shop where his  father  and  then  the
    appellant worked.  The appellant said that all the  clothes  they  sold
    came from a single supplier, but although he had worked in the business
    for some time, he could not name the supplier.

 7. The appellant says that he has faced harassment and discrimination  all
    his life, and that the extended families of himself and his  wife  were
    harassed particularly before they came to the United Kingdom, resulting
    in their losing their homes and business.

 8. The appellant blamed  the  success  of  the  shop  for  alienating  the
    family's Muslim friends and neighbours.  When there was peace, the shop
    was very profitable, but a time came when the shop was less profitable.
     At the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant  identified  the  period  of
    peace and profitability as the years when country evidence  shows  that
    the Taliban were in control in Jalalabad, and the period of  difficulty
    in2016/ 2017 as the time when the Taliban had  lost  control,  but  his
    evidence was that the Taliban first came to Jalalabad in 2016  or  2017
    and caused the family's problems.

 9. At interview, the appellant said that  the  family  were  evicted  from
    their rented retail premises and home because  it  was  so  profitable:
    later, he said that in Spring 2016, about 6 months before  he  and  his
    family left Afghanistan, the landlord refused  to  rent  the  shop  and
    their home to them any longer.

10. The appellant and his family were advised  by  the  Gurdwara  to  leave
    Afghanistan as they were causing difficulty for other Sikhs: the  agent
    was arranged through the Gurdwara, but was a Muslim.

11. The appellant said in the First-tier Tribunal hearing that when leaving
    Afghanistan, each member of the family had an Afghan passport, in their
    own name, issued regularly just a  few  days  before  the  family  left
    Afghanistan, but that the agent took them from him during the  journey.
    He says that the family travelled by  aeroplane,  train  and  van  from
    Afghanistan to the United Kingdom.   The  appellant's  wife's  evidence
    contradicted that: she said she had never had an Afghan passport.

12. The appellant's passage and that of his family was paid  for  with  the
    gold jewellery of his wife and mother: the arrangement with  the  agent
    was that his parents, his brother, his brother's wife and  his  younger
    brother would also come to the United Kingdom.  The price paid in  gold
    jewellery was for the travel of all of those people, but  the  rest  of
    the family had not arrived.   It is the case of the appellant  and  his
    wife that they made no arrangements to stay in touch with  his  parents
    after 18 July 2017, when they last met in Jalalabad, and that they  did
    not know whether the parents were still there.

13. The appellant said that  he  had  caused  the  President  of  a  London
    Gurdwara to telephone the Gurdwara in Jalalabad to  seek  news  of  his
    parents, but there was no news of them.  A letter from the Chairman  of
    the Khalsa Diwan Afghanistan dated 6 April 2018, produced in support of
    the appellant's case, made no mention of a  tracing  attempt,  although
    the author was said to be in touch with the small Sikh community  which
    remains in Afghanistan.

14. On his own account, the appellant had lived for a time  in  Kabul,  but
    said that it was unreasonable to expect him to live there as he had  no
    friends or  family  in  Kabul.   The  First-tier  Judge  dismissed  the
    appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision   to   refuse
    protection.

Error of law decision

15. By a decision on 11 December 2018, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  and  ordered  that  it  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I did so on the basis of irrationality in the  reasoning  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and failure to deal with the  section  55  best
    interests of the children; Ms Cleghorn, who  then  appeared,  suggested
    that the population of Sikhs in  Afghanistan  was  now  so  small  that
    further country  guidance  might  be  needed.   She  also  mentioned  a
    difficulty for Afghan  Sikh  women,  as  the  Sikh  religion  prohibits
    veiling the face, while in Afghanistan,  women  are  not  permitted  to
    leave home unless they are fully veiled, including their faces.

Evidence at the Upper Tribunal hearing

16. I have before me the evidence which was before the First-tier Tribunal,
    together with the record in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  of  the
    oral evidence given. No new bundles or witness statements were produced
    for the Upper Tribunal remaking hearing but I heard oral evidence  from
    the appellant and his wife.  In particular, there is  no  new  evidence
    about the children's best interests, or about  the  Sikh  face-covering
    issue for women.

17. The appellant gave oral evidence.   He  adopted  his  previous  witness
    statement. He said he had had it read to him by a  Punjabi  interpreter
    at the solicitors' office and that it was true.  He asked for it to  be
    treated as his evidence-in-chief.

18. In his witness statement of 5  April  2018,  the  appellant  said  that
    although he had referred to those who attacked him as 'unknown  people'
    in his screening interview, he meant that they were  Taliban.   He  did
    not know them personally, which was why  he  said  they  were  'unknown
    people'.  When young, he and other Sikhs were  constantly  harassed  by
    Muslims, forcing them to read the  six  Kalimas  (texts  which  Muslims
    memorise to learn the fundamentals of Islam), calling them Kaffirs  and
    teasing them about their hair and turban.  When the appellant  went  to
    his father's shop by himself, people would attack him and pull off  his
    turban.  When he was an adult, the attackers would tell him  to  change
    his religion.  It got worse, and he maintained  that  he  was  targeted
    both as a Sikh and because he was successful.

19. The family's landlord said the Taliban were harassing him  to  get  the
    Sikhs out of his shop and house, so the  appellant  had  no  reason  to
    think that the attackers were not Taliban.   He had twice  been  beaten
    up in an isolated alleyway on his way to the mosque, by about five  men
    whom he assumed to be Taliban because 'ordinary people do not  hurt  us
    to that level'.  He screamed for help and after five  or  six  minutes,
    the preacher from the mosque came and reasoned with his attackers,  and
    because he was elderly, they respected his wishes and left.

20. There were no Sikhs in the police force,  or  in  authority,  that  the
    family could approach for help.  They could not  be  expected  to  seek
    help from the Gurdwaras indefinitely, and neither  the  government  nor
    Muslims generally would employ Sikhs.  His daughters would not be  able
    to go to school because of the risk to them, and if  anything  were  to
    happen to the appellant his wife would be alone  at  home,  a  prisoner
    because of the risk of persecution if  she  went  out  without  a  male
    protector.  His daughters would also be very vulnerable and  unsafe  in
    Afghanistan.

21. The appellant said that he went regularly to a Gurdwara in  the  United
    Kingdom, where he heard stories of bombs exploding and innocent  people
    being killed. The power of the Taliban was  rising,  now  the  security
    forces had left  the  country.  They  walked  around  openly  and  made
    problems for Sikhs and Hindus.

22. There were no supplementary questions.  The appellant was tendered  for
    cross-examination.

23. In cross-examination, the appellant was  asked  when  the  problems  in
    Afghanistan with the Taliban began.  He could not say exactly,  but  it
    was eight or nine months before the family came to the United  Kingdom,
    which would put the difficulties as having begun early  in  2017.    He
    insisted that before that, the shop  had  been  profitable  for  years,
    'before the Taliban  came'  but  that  immediately  after  the  Taliban
    arrived in early 2017, business began to go down.

24. Before the Taliban took control of Jalalabad in 2017, business was very
    good.  The family had operated profitably and peacefully in the Taliban-
    free years in the 1990s and 2000s.  All that he could remember was that
    they had been beating him and his family from around 2017.  He did  not
    remember the dates, as they were not written down anywhere.

25. The Taliban would come to the shop, swearing and  taking  the  family's
    men's turbans off, and helping themselves to stock from the shop.  When
    the beating and swearing began, his family thought  the  men  were  the
    Taliban;  the  Taliban  had  been  teasing  and  torturing  them  since
    childhood, but it became worse  when  they  started  hitting  them  and
    damaging the business.

26. When asked what happened in 2001, the appellant sounded very  uncertain
    but said that the Taliban had taken over Afghanistan that year and were
    in full control.  Strikingly, he did not mention the 9/11 attack on the
    Twin Towers in New York as something which happened around that time.

27. In re-examination, the appellant said he had lived in Afghanistan since
    birth, for all of his life before he came to the  United  Kingdom.   He
    had paid the agent with his mother and wife's gold jewellery,  and  the
    agent arranged for them to leave via Pakistan, to the  United  Kingdom.
    The shop went back to the landlord: it was a  rented  property  and  he
    kicked the family out.

28. The appellant said that he could not go back and set  up  another  shop
    because 'they will kill us and our children, we were in  strong  danger
    there'.  He and his family were no different from other Sikhs returning
    to Pakistan; they felt their lives were at risk, and that was why  they
    had fled to the United Kingdom.  The risk was because they were  Sikhs;
    'they beat us, they hate us'.

29. The appellant's  wife  then  gave  evidence.   She  had  brought  their
    daughters to Court with her and the appellant took them outside to look
    after them while his wife testified.  She adopted her previous  witness
    statement and asked that it be treated as her evidence-in-chief.

30. The wife's witness statement is also dated 5 April 2018.   In  it,  she
    said that in Afghanistan as a woman  she  was  confined  to  her  home,
    whereas in the United Kingdom she was free to attend the  Gurdwara,  to
    meet friends, and to move around freely.  If returned, she  feared  for
    her husband and for herself: a woman in Afghanistan could not work  and
    was very vulnerable without  a  male  protector.  She  understood  that
    violence was rising in Afghanistan, significantly, and that the general
    Muslim population had no interest in coming to the  aid  of  Sikhs  who
    were attacked.

31. The witness statement continued:

         "5.  A lot of the wealthy Sikhs have left the country.   There  are
         not many families left now,  apart  from  the  old  and  the  frail
         remain.  Some young remain because they cannot leave  the  old  and
         frail behind.  However, the numbers have gone down significantly.

         6.   If we are forced to return to Afghanistan, we  have  no  home,
         friends or family that we can return to.  We have no links to Kabul
         or any place other  than  Jalalabad.   However,  in  Jalalabad  the
         situation got significantly worse for us,  so  we  were  forced  to
         leave.

         7.   We cannot be expected to live in the Gurdwara because there is
         no life living in a shelter such as the Gurdwara.   I  want  to  be
         able to live freely.  The Gurdwara provide only short-term support.
          The numbers are dwindling and the Gurdwara have run out of  money.
         Therefore, things are tough in the Gurdwaras now.

         8.   The Home Office say we can relocate  to  Kabul.   However,  as
         Sikhs we do not feel safe anywhere in Afghanistan.  Whenever we  go
         to the Gurdwara in the United  Kingdom,  we  hear  more  bombs  are
         exploding and innocent people are being killed. The  police  cannot
         stop the Taliban so how will they protect us.

         9.   the Taliban have more and more power since the security forces
         left the country.  They have made more problems for the Hindus  and
         Sikhs.  They have become stronger and now they openly walk around.

         10.  I fear for my children who are with us in the United  Kingdom.
         My daughters should be able to live a free and  open  life  without
         fearing persecution.  This would be in their  best  interests.   My
         children  should  be  able  to  go   to   school   freely   without
         discrimination and persecution.  In  Afghanistan  we  do  not  send
         children to school because they would suffer harm.  We  are  scared
         that our children could be kidnapped if left in  the  schools.   As
         far as I'm aware there are no schools in Afghanistan opened for the
         children of Sikh faith.

         11.  I want my children to be successful  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         They will work hard and make a life for themselves and  not  remain
         prisoners in their  own  home.  I  see  parents  happy  with  their
         children in the park, the school and the shopping centres.   I  see
         parents taking their children to the Gurdwaras.  This is life which
         was not possible for us in Afghanistan.

         12.  I believe we would be at risk  of  persecution  if  forced  to
         return to Afghanistan and I hope our appeal is allowed."

    There were no supplementary questions. The wife was tendered for cross-
    examination.

32. In cross-examination, she said her daughters  had  not  been  attending
    school in Afghanistan.  A man used to come and teach a little to  girls
    at the  Gurdwara;  he  taught  them  the  English  alphabet,  a  little
    counting, basic mathematics  and  world  alphabets.   Her  own  mother,
    father and two brothers remained in Afghanistan, but she did  not  know
    whether they were alive or where  they  were.   She  had  no  means  of
    contacting them.

33. The wife said  that  her  family  members  had  not  seen  her  younger
    daughter, born in 2014.   A few minutes later, she said that she  meant
    that they had not met the older daughter, born in 2009.  Given that the
    wife and her family members all lived in  Jalalabad,  where  they  were
    part of a tiny Sikh  community,  she  was  asked  to  explain  why  her
    children should not have met their relatives over such a  long  period.
    She said that with all the killing and beating, if someone wanted to go
    somewhere, nobody would tell anyone where they  were  going,  for  fear
    they might be harmed.

34. When pressed again as to why her family members had not met  her  elder
    daughter, who was 8�  years old when the family left  Afghanistan,  the
    witness said that they had  met the elder daughter but that  there  had
    been no contact between her and her family members after 2014, the year
    her younger daughter was born.  She did not know  whether  her  parents
    and brothers were alive, and nobody had seen them.  She  was  the  only
    sister and would like to see her brothers, but she was not sure whether
    even God knew where they were.  The  witness  became  tearful  at  this
    point.

35. In re-examination, the witness said that her daughters had not attended
    school in Afghanistan because it was dangerous: 'they used to take  the
    girls away'.  There was news in the papers all the time, even over  the
    last few days, and she did not know where her parents  had  gone.   She
    was still tearful.  Asked why  there  had  been  no  contact  with  her
    parents  since  2014,  the  witness  said  that  there  was  danger  in
    Afghanistan, otherwise why would they have come to the United  Kingdom.
    Too many people had come here.

Submissions

36. There were no skeleton arguments to assist the  Tribunal  but  I  heard
    oral submissions from both representatives.

37. For the respondent, Mr McVeety said that he  was  not  relying  on  the
    refusal letter as he was now advancing the argument that the  appellant
    was not an Afghan citizen, nor from Jalalabad.   He  acknowledged  that
    the appellant had answered a few questions correctly at  interview  but
    suggested that he could have  memorised  that  information,  which  was
    available on the internet.  The  appellant  knew  very  little  of  the
    history of Afghanistan, no matter how often the question was  put.   He
    did not know that 2001 was the year of the Al Qaeda attack on the  Twin
    Towers and had appeared to guess that 2001 was  the  year  the  Taliban
    took control in  Afghanistan,  when  asked,  but  by  2017  Mr  McVeety
    submitted that the Taliban were not in control in the appellant's  home
    area.  Mr McVeety did not rely on any specific country evidence on this
    point.

38. The appellant had produced evidence of his children excelling at school
    in the English language, very soon after  arrival,  and  of  his  elder
    daughter  doing  particularly  well  in  mathematics.   That  was   not
    consistent with the wife's evidence of the very limited education  they
    had received at the Gurdwara in Afghanistan.  Mr McVeety  asked  me  to
    find that the girls were more highly educated than the  appellants  had
    admitted and that such education could continue on return.

39. The wife's evidence about her family members was 'all over the  place':
    she could not or would not say why  she  had  not  seen  her  immediate
    family members for almost 4 years before  she  left  Afghanistan.   The
    Sikh community in Jalalabad and in Kabul was a tightly-knit  group  and
    it was just not credible that the wife should have had no contact  with
    her parents or brothers for so long, in such a small group  of  people.
    Mr McVeety's primary submission was that this couple were indeed Sikhs,
    but from another country  than  Afghanistan,  most  probably  India  or
    Pakistan.

40. In the alternative, the appellant's evidence  was  that  he  still  had
    family members in Jalalabad, although he  would  not  specify  who,  or
    where.  If his family members were safe, these appellants would not  be
    at risk either.   The real problem was the family's wealth,  not  their
    religion, and nothing had happened in Jalalabad until the Taliban  were
    not in control.  The appellant would be able to return with his  family
    and link up with family members in Afghanistan.

41. Mr McVeety asked me to remake the decision by dismissing the protection
    appeal.

42. For the appellant, Mr Akram relied on  the  appellant's  interview  and
    that of his wife, and also  on  their  witness  statements.  Sikhs  had
    always suffered in Afghanistan at the hands of the Taliban, who  teased
    and tortured the appellant and his relatives from childhood and damaged
    his business in 2017.

43. If returned, they would not  be  wealthy  Sikhs  now.   Jobs  were  not
    available for Sikhs from the government, or from Muslims, and the  only
    option was for Sikhs to have their own business.  The family  jewellery
    had been given to the agent, they would be unable  to  set  up  another
    business, and they would have to live in a Gurdwara.  The hardship  and
    destitution which that would entail was not in the  best  interests  of
    the children, who had settled well  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  were
    thriving here.  Help from Gurdwaras was limited.

44. The appellant would rely on the guidance in TG and others (Afghan Sikhs
    persecuted) (CG) [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC)  and  in  particular  paragraphs
    [109]-[111] and [94] thereof, which supported the appellant's  account.
    The appellant's daughters had now spent almost two years of their young
    lives in the United Kingdom, with the younger girl in reception  class,
    ready to begin primary school, and the elder in the penultimate year of
    primary school, almost ready for secondary school. The older  girl  was
    doing very well and there was some evidence of educational  progression
    and integration.  Although TG  indicated  that  private  education  was
    available, it was unlikely that they would be able to afford  the  fees
    on return.

45. I reserved my decision, which I now give.



Country guidance

46. The guidance given in TG (Afghanistan) CG is summarised in the judicial
    headnote:

         "(i) Some members of the Sikh and Hindu communities in  Afghanistan
         continue to suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim zealots.

         (ii) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan  do
         not face a real risk of persecution or  ill-treatment  such  as  to
         entitle them to a grant of international protection on the basis of
         their ethnic or religious identity, per se. Neither can it be  said
         that the cumulative impact of discrimination suffered by  the  Sikh
         and  Hindu  communities  in  general  reaches  the   threshold   of
         persecution.

         (iii)    A consideration of whether an  individual  member  of  the
         Sikh and Hindu communities is at  risk  real  of  persecution  upon
         return  to  Afghanistan  is  fact-sensitive.   All   the   relevant
         circumstances must be considered but careful  attention  should  be
         paid to the following:

             a.   women are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence  of
             appropriate protection from a male member of the family;

             b.   likely financial  circumstances  and  ability  to  access
             basic accommodation bearing in mind

                  -    Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member  of
                  the Sikh and Hindu communities

                  -    such individuals  may  face  difficulties  (including
                  threats, extortion, seizure of land and acts of  violence)
                  in retaining property and / or  pursuing  their  remaining
                  traditional pursuit, that of a shopkeeper / trader

                  -     the  traditional  source   of   support   for   such
                  individuals, the Gurdwara is much  less  able  to  provide
                  adequate support;

             c.    the  level  of  religious  devotion  and  the  practical
             accessibility to a suitable  place  of  religious  worship  in
             light of declining numbers and the  evidence  that  some  have
             been subjected to harm and threats to  harm  whilst  accessing
             the Gurdwara;

             d.   access to appropriate education for children in light  of
             discrimination  against  Sikh  and  Hindu  children  and   the
             shortage of adequate education facilities for them.

         (iv) Although it appears there is  a  willingness  at  governmental
         level to provide protection, it is not established on the  evidence
         that at a local level the police are  willing,  even  if  able,  to
         provide the necessary  level  of  protection  required  in  Refugee
         Convention/Qualification Directive terms, to those members  of  the
         Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  who  experience  serious   harm   or
         harassment amounting to persecution.

         (v)  Whether it is reasonable to expect a member  of  the  Sikh  or
         Hindu communities to relocate is a fact sensitive  assessment.  The
         relevant factors to be considered include those set  out  at  (iii)
         above. Given their particular circumstances and  declining  number,
         the practicability of settling elsewhere for members  of  the  Sikh
         and Hindu communities must be carefully considered.  Those  without
         access to  an  independent  income  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
         reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms.

         (vi) This replaces the country guidance provided in the cases of  K
         (Risk - Sikh - Women) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00057 and SL  and
         Others (Returning Sikhs and Hindus)  Afghanistan  CG  [2005]  UKAIT
         00137."

47. At [19], the Upper Tribunal said that it was not  possible  to  make  a
    clear finding as to the exact figure  of  Sikhs  and  Hindus  currently
    remaining in Afghanistan, due to lack of evidence, but that it was  not
    disputed that it was about 3000 (down from 250,000 in  the  1940s)  and
    that it continued to shrink.  The Tribunal relied on a report published
    by the Centre for Applied South Asian Studies  in  2011,  entitled  The
    History  and  Current  Position  of  Afghanistan's   Hindu   and   Sikh
    population: 2011 which said that  'as numbers  shrink,  [the  Sikh  and
    Hindu minority's] remaining members are finding  themselves  ever  more
    vulnerable to aggressive  exploitation,  against  which  they  have  no
    meaningful  defence.   Hence  the  exodus  can  only  be  expected   to
    continue'.

48. The paragraphs relied upon by the appellant  are  at  [94]  and  [108]-
    [110].  Paragraph [94] deals with the education of children:

         "94. In relation to Sikh and Hindu children a number  of  areas  of
         concern arise from the evidence we have been asked to consider. The
         evidence indicates that there have been occasions of Hindu and Sikh
         families not sending  their  children  to  school  in  Afghanistan,
         especially girls, as a result of the fear of  harassment  and  ill-
         treatment which is corroborated by the evidence. Within  the  state
         system where children of all  denominations  are  taught  there  is
         evidence  of  requirements  to  learn   and   recite   the   Koran,
         discrimination, and lack of adequate education facilities. In areas
         where numbers warrant, such as Kabul, special schools have been set
         up to provide education for children  by  Sikh  teachers  and  some
         children are taught within the Gurdwara as a result. Such education
         is only provided however up to and including primary level with the
         requirement that at secondary level children will be taught  within
         the state system where they become exposed to problems referred  to
         in the evidence unless an individual's family has the means to  pay
         them to be educated privately. If credible evidence is provided  of
         a real risk of such ill-treatment and  harassment  to  a  child  on
         return sufficient to prevent them  receiving  a  proper  education,
         which is shown to  be  a  fundamental  element  of  their  personal
         identity, that they wish to pursue, rather than a child  not  being
         further educated as a result of the traditional  belief  that  they
         will continue within a family business and therefore do not require
         to be further educated or for some  other  reason,  then  this  may
         amount  to  such  serious  discrimination  either  on  its  own  or
         cumulatively with other forms of discrimination such  as  to  cross
         the threshold of persecution. However, this  is  a  fact  sensitive
         issue that must be considered in each case."

49. Paragraphs [109]-[110] relate to employment opportunities for Sikhs and
    Hindus:

         "Employment opportunities

         109. As with many aspects of this country the evidence relating  to
         economic reality for Sikhs and Hindus is contradictory. On the  one
         hand there is evidence of members of the Sikh and  Hindu  community
         holding  positions  within  the  legislative  bodies  and   various
         community and other influential groups,  holding  trading  licences
         and having viable businesses, owners being able to retain land  and
         property or to rent accommodation for themselves and their families
         and being able to send remittances to families  living  abroad,  in
         places such as India. On the other hand, there is evidence of  poor
         members of the community being unable to earn a living  and  having
         to live in the Gurdwara which, in accordance with the tradition  of
         Sikh and Hindu hospitality,  provides  food  aid,  shelter,  and  a
         degree of companionship and protection. The evidence indicates that
         the declining numbers and economic well-being of those remaining in
         Afghanistan has an  impact  on  the  ability  of  the  Gurdwara  to
         continue to provide such hospitality and support as  it  is  itself
         dependent upon donations to be able to meet its own financial needs
         and purchase food and other items.

         110. A family without adequate resources is unlikely to be able  to
         pay for private education which may be  relevant  when  considering
         the situation of Sikh and Hindu children in Afghanistan whom it  is
         proposed to return if receiving such education is  demonstrated  to
         be fundamental to that person's identity. There  is  also  evidence
         that a Muslim is unlikely to employ a member of the Sikh  or  Hindu
         community in place of a Muslim, out of fear of  potential  reprisal
         or loss of business, indicating difficulties in securing an  income
         with which to  fund  accommodation  or  essentials  such  as  food,
         heating, clothing. The evidence  we  have  been  able  to  consider
         indicates that there is nothing in the law,  the  attitude  of  the
         Afghan government, or in theory preventing a member  of  either  of
         these faith groups returned to Afghanistan from being able  to  set
         up their own businesses but whether they are able  to  do  so  will
         depend upon the availability of adequate funding, their ability  to
         secure business premises in the  light  of  possible  hostility  or
         opposition from Muslim traders who may see them as  competition  or
         not wish to rent premises out to them, making it difficult for them
         to pursue what has now become the remaining  traditional  trade  of
         shopkeeper/trader. Whether an individual is in such a  position  is
         fact specific and they will have to satisfy the Tribunal that  they
         are  without  economic  means  especially  if  they  have  paid   a
         considerable sum of money to come to the United Kingdom, that  they
         will not be able to re-establish themselves economically,  and  the
         impact upon family members as a result. Such individuals  may  also
         be required to provide appropriate evidence to show that there  are
         no alternatives such as being supported  by  NGOs  or  through  the
         Gurdwara and that any impact upon them, if destitution is  alleged,
         is such that the threshold of Article 3 ECHR will be breached.

         111. In relation to families with children it may  be  possible  to
         establish that it is not in the best interests of such children  to
         be returned, even if the threshold of Article 3 is not breached, if
         the degree of hardship and destitution is such  that  it  leads  to
         unjustifiably harsh consequences on return for such family members.
         As with all cases any assessment of the best interests of  children
         will have to be balanced against the public interest  if  it  is  a
         consideration of a private life argument."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

50. The most recent consideration of the circumstances of Afghan  Sikhs  is
    in DSG and others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan  [2013]
    UKUT 148 (IAC), which deals with the circumstances  eight  years  after
    the country guidance in TG.   In DSG, the First-tier Judge had departed
    from the TG guidance and the Upper Tribunal  found  that  he  had  been
    entitled to do so.  The Judge in DSG was erroneously  referred  to  the
    disapproved guidance in SL and  others  (returning  Sikhs  and  Hindus)
    Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT  00137.   Paragraph  (vi)  of  the  country
    guidance in TG expressly states that it replaced SL.  The  Tribunal  in
    DSG had expert evidence from Dr Antonio Guistozzi, and an article  from
    Dr Ballard, which the Upper Tribunal summarised thus:

         "11. ...Dr Giustozzi commented on the numbers, stating  that  there
         were no certain figures of the make up of  the  Afghan  population,
         but it was estimated that by 2001 the Sikh community of Afghanistan
         had dwindled and was as little as a few  hundred  members  and  not
         more than a few thousand.  In Kabul it was estimated  that  by  the
         end of 2001 only 50 to 100 families were left of the  approximately
         2,000 who lived there in 1992.  Although the numbers of reports  of
         attacks and harassments of Sikhs  were  not  great,  it  should  be
         considered that the population was now very small and estimates  of
         its size today corresponded to no more than  a  size  of  a  single
         village.  Dr Giustozzi went on to say that if the known episodes of
         harassment and violence (which represented only a proportion of the
         actual incidents which occurred) were compared to the size  of  the
         population it should be considered that there was rampant hostility
         and discrimination against Sikhs in Afghanistan.  He also commented
         that the Sikhs were targeted with impunity  because  they  did  not
         enjoy protection from any of Afghanistan's various factions because
         they were too small numerically to matter politically.

         12.  Dr Ballard  in  his  article  commented  that  it  was  common
         knowledge that members of the Sikh and  Hindu community  had  found
         themselves subjected to steadily rising levels of hostility  during
         the course of the past four decades and had consequently  had  more
         reason to seek refuge overseas then their Muslim  counterparts  and
         that the scale of their presence in Afghanistan had been  shrinking
         steadily, the number being only a small fraction  of  their  former
         size, and that as numbers shrank its remaining members were finding
         themselves even more  vulnerable  to  aggressive  exaction  against
         which they had no  meaningful defence."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

51. The Upper Tribunal in DSG found as follows:

         "25. In the circumstances it seems to us entirely  clear  that  the
         judge was entitled to depart from  the  country  guidance  in  this
         case.  Inevitably the remaining numbers  of  Sikhs  and  Hindus  in
         Afghanistan must be to some extent a matter of speculation, but  it
         is clear if one looks at the evidence as a whole in such  documents
         as Dr Ballard's report, Dr Giustozzi's report,  the  earlier  UNHCR
         report and a more recent UNHCR report of July 2011 handed up by  Mr
         Bazini that the remaining numbers are in the region of  a  thousand
         or two.  Indeed, the  respondent's  Operational  Guidance  Note  on
         Afghanistan of April 2012 states at paragraph 3.9.2 that there  are
         an estimated 2,200  Sikhs  and  Hindus  remaining  in  Afghanistan.
          This, together with the evidence set out in Dr Giustozzi's and Dr
         Ballard's reports, clearly justified the judge  in  departing  from
         the existing country guidance.

         26.  This has clear implications for other cases involving  claimed
         risk on return to Afghanistan for Hindus or Sikhs,  in  the  period
         between now and such  time  as  further  country  guidance  on  the
         subject can be issued. ..."

52. Unfortunately, no further country guidance has yet been issued.

Country evidence

53. Neither party provided any up to date country evidence  on  Afghanistan
    and the position of Sikhs there.

54. I indicated that I would have regard to material in the public  domain,
    to test his contention that the appellant's evidence  was  contrary  to
    what was known about Afghanistan from the 1990s onwards.   I  have  had
    regard to the Home Office Country Position and Information Note  (CPIN)
    on Afghan Sikhs and Hindus issued in May 2019.  It is  a  statement  of
    the current position in Afghanistan prepared by the respondent, one  of
    the parties to these proceedings.

55. At 3.2 the CPIN notes that before 1992 there were about  22,000  Hindus
    and Sikhs  in  Afghanistan  but  there  are  now  very  few  remaining,
    concentrated  in  the  provinces  of  Nangarhar,  Kabul   and   Ghazni.
    Community members themselves speculate that the numbers of  Hindus  and
    Sikhs in Afghanistan today may be no  more  than  a  few  thousand.  At
    3.2.3, the CPIN records an undated note from a contact at Gurdwara Guru
    Nanak Darbar in Southall that 'the [Sikh] community is disappearing due
    to the fear of safety  in  Afghanistan'.  An  extract  from  that  note
    appears at 3.4.2:

         "... According to the information received from the  Gurudwaras  in
         Kabul and Jalalabad approximately 180-200 members  of  Afghan  Sikh
         and Hindu community remain in Kabul. The numbers are much  less  in
         Jalalabad with an estimated number 65-75 families. Around 25 to  30
         families remaining are in Ghazni and according to  the  information
         received there are some families living in Khost,  Herat,  Paktiya,
         Khandahar, Herat and Mazar-e-Sharif. The total number  will  be  no
         more than 1200."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

56. At 3.3.1, the report says this:

         "3.3.1 In January 2016, Al Jazeera reported:

         'The most significant Sikh exodus from Afghanistan occurred  during
         the civil war (1989-1996) and during the  subsequent  Taliban  rule
         (1996-2001), during  which  thousands,  like  many  other  Afghans,
         sought refuge in neighbouring countries.

         'Life under the Taliban was a particularly dark  time.  Officially,
         Taliban commanders were ordered by their leadership to respect Sikh
         and Hindu communities, on the condition they didn't proselytise and
         paid jizya, a religious tax imposed on non-Muslims. But  they  also
         required Sikhs to publicly identify themselves, by  wearing  yellow
         patches on their breast pocket or armbands, and to mark their homes
         and businesses with yellow flags.

         'They were allowed to continue daily prayers at  the  gurdwaras  so
         long as they couldn't be heard from the street, but it also  wasn't
         uncommon for errant Taliban to harass  or  beat  them,  Kuljit  [an
         Afghan Sikh] said.

         'Even after the fall of the Taliban, however, and promises by  both
         the Karzai and Ghani  governments  to  do  more  to  protect  their
         communities, each year the number of  Sikh  families  continues  to
         shrink.

         '"Before the wars we were integrated in  local  communities,"  said
         Sivender [an Afghan Sikh].  "But  with  the  passing  of  time  the
         prejudice against us has increased. People were really  radicalised
         by the civil wars and the Taliban.""

57. And at 3.3.2, the report quotes  the  news  outlet,  The  National,  as
    saying that:

         "...'Despite  official  political  representation  and  freedom  of
         worship, many face prejudice and harassment  as  well  as  violence
         from militant groups, prompting thousands to move to  India,  their
         spiritual homeland. India has issued long-term visas to members  of
         Afghanistan's Sikh and Hindu communities.'

         The same article stated that the Hindus  remaining  in  Afghanistan
         are those who are too poor to leave."

58. At 3.3.4, the CPIN notes a BBC report  in  July  2018  that  increasing
    numbers of Sikhs and Hindus had taken up the option of moving to India,
    'due to persecution and  repeated  threats'.   In  August  2018,  UNHCR
    confirmed that large numbers of Sikhs and Hindus were believed to  have
    left Afghanistan as a result of the severe difficulties they faced.  By
    February 2019, at a meeting between a Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office
    official and Narinder Singh Khalsa, Mr Khalsa  said  that  about  75000
    Sikhs had left Afghanistan and  gone  primarily  to  India.   Some  had
    rented out their houses.  Only about 40 or 50 families returned  during
    Hamid Karzai's  presidency.   The  majority  of  remaining  Sikhs  were
    settled in Kabul and Nangrahar.

59. Afghanistan Analysts Network recorded that there were  759  Hindus  and
    Sikhs registered  to  vote  in  Kabul  in  the  October  2018  national
    elections in Afghanistan. At 3.5.4, the CPIN records a  suicide  attack
    in July 2018, targeting Sikhs and Hindus in Jalalabad, believed to have
    been carried out by ISIS/Daesh. Hindus and Sikhs shared  their  temples
    and there were only a handful of temples left in Kabul city.   Sachdeva
    Omprakash, an Afghan Hindu attending the mass funeral for the Jalalabad
    killings, said this: "Within a few minutes, a significant part  of  our
    fraternity was wiped out: our leaders, elders and mentors".

60. At 3.6.1, the CPIN reports that at  home,  Afghan  Sikhs  speak  mainly
    Punjabi, but other quoted evidence suggested that  Afghan  Sikhs  spoke
    Pashto, with Hindi and Punjabi as  supplementary  languages,  or  Dari,
    'the nearest thing the country has to a lingua franca'.  In April 2018,
    a history graduate, Sanmeet Kaur, an Afghan Sikh living in  the  United
    Kingdom, noted that Afghan Sikhs  'speak  a  unique  dialect  known  as
    'Kabli' which is an amalgamation of Persian Dari and Punjabi.

61. At 3.7.2, the Australian Institute of International Affairs, is  quoted
    as  saying  that  only  two  Gurdwaras  (Sikh  temples)   remained   in
    Afghanistan, one in Kabul and the  other  in  Jalalabad.  However,  the
    anonymous contact at Gurdwara Guru Nanak Darbar in Southall  said  that
    there were two Gurdwaras in Jalalabad, one fully functioning and one in
    partial use, and two functioning Gurdwaras in Kabul, which were used as
    a refuge compound by  poor  Sikh  and  Hindu  families:  "Most  of  the
    Gurdwaras are being used by the community as a safe  resident  compound
    and women spend their life within these compounds like prisoners".

Analysis

62. The first question is whether, given the withdrawal of the respondent's
    concession at the hearing, I should find that the  appellant  is  of  a
    nationality other than Afghan. I note that he and his family  travelled
    on Afghan passports, on his evidence, and that at the  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal the respondent relied on that assertion to  support
    her contention that the appellant was an Afghan Sikh.

63. The  evidence  against  his  being  from  Afghanistan  relates  to  the
    appellant's lack of knowledge about the extent of the Taliban operation
    in Afghanistan, and his linguistic issues.  Given the lack  of  clarity
    in the respondent's own CPIN about the language spoken by Afghan Sikhs,
    and in particular, the evidence that there  is  a  hybrid  Punjabi/Dari
    dialect spoken by some Afghan Sikhs,  and  that  Punjabi  is  the  main
    language for many Afghan Sikhs, I am not satisfied that the  difficulty
    with the  Dari  interpreter  (whose  primary  language  was  Farsi)  is
    sufficient to establish that  this  appellant  is  not  Afghan,  having
    regard to the lower  standard  of  proof  applicable  to  international
    protection cases.

64. The second point taken against the appellant's  Afghan  nationality  is
    his vagueness as to when the Taliban were, and were not, in control  in
    Jalalabad. The appellant is not a  highly  educated  man:  on  his  own
    evidence, he left school and went into  the  family  clothing  business
    when he was about 14.  His assertion that matters got  much  worse  for
    Afghan Sikhs in 2017 is borne out by the country evidence,  as  is  the
    continuing difficulties  which  they  are  experiencing  now.   He  did
    describe difficulties at the level  of  harassment  and  discrimination
    from the Taliban for all of his  younger  life,  which  fits  with  the
    evidence that the Taliban took and retained control of  Nangrahar  from
    the late 1990s until the present day.

65. I find, to the lower standard, that the appellant is an Afghan  citizen
    and his wife and daughters are also citizens of Afghanistan.  It is not
    disputed that all of them are Sikhs.  I accept the appellant's  account
    that  his  family  had  a  clothing  business  and  lost  it   in   the
    circumstances  he  describes:  that  is  consistent  with  the  country
    evidence and the country guidance.  I also  accept  that  his  family's
    resources (the  gold  jewellery)  were  used  to  get  them  out.   The
    appellant's account, despite some areas  of  confusion,  is  consistent
    with the country evidence as to what was happening in Jalalabad at  the
    relevant times and I treat it as credible.

66. However neither child is a qualifying child under section 117D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) as they  have
    spent less than 2 years in the United Kingdom.   Their  best  interests
    clearly lie in being with both parents, and applying the  'real  world'
    test, their parents are not lawfully in the United Kingdom and  (unless
    they are entitled to international protection)  would  be  expected  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  In that case it is not unreasonable,  having
    regard to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, to expect their daughters to
    leave with them.  The children's best interests are  not  determinative
    of this appeal, one way or the other.

67. The wife's evidence about what happened between her and her  family  at
    around the time her younger daughter was born lacks  credibility.   Her
    explanation was no explanation at all.  I place no weight on that  part
    of her account.   I have considered the section 55  best  interests  of
    the daughters.   Their best interests under section 55  are  a  primary
    consideration but not  a  trump  card.   Both  girls  are  healthy  and
    prospering at school.

68. As regards the appellant's parents and brothers, again the evidence  is
    scanty but there was an attack on one of  the  Jalalabad  Gurdwaras  in
    July 2018 and many people died then.  However, even  if  the  appellant
    and his wife do still have family in Jalalabad, the community there  is
    very small now and the real question is what would be the risk to  them
    if they returned today.

69. Having regard to the lower standard of proof, and bearing in mind  that
    Afghan Sikh cases are fact specific, as stated in TG, I have considered
    the TG factors. The women of this family would have  the  appellant  to
    protect them on return, but their likely  financial  circumstances  are
    poor as the family's capital was used for their escape and there is  no
    certainty that they have family members in Jalalabad who  could  assist
    them to resettle.  The appellant is one of those who was  subjected  to
    threats and harm when accessing the Gurdwara in  Jalalabad,  less  than
    two years ago, and the country evidence does not suggest that  this  is
    likely to have improved.  The local police are unwilling or  unable  to
    assist to Refugee Convention/Qualification Directive standards.

70. I note, in particular, the guidance at (v) in TG that:

         "(v) ... Given their particular circumstances and declining number,
         the practicability of settling elsewhere for members  of  the  Sikh
         and Hindu communities must be carefully considered.  Those  without
         access to  an  independent  income  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
         reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms."

71. It is clear from DSG  that  the  situation  for  Hindus  and  Sikhs  in
    Jalalabad and Kabul has deteriorated further since the decision  in  TG
    and that very few Afghan Sikhs remain in either city.  There  are  only
    about  1000  Hindus  and  Sikhs  left  in  Afghanistan,  and  only  one
    functioning Gurdwara in Jalalabad and another  one  or  two  in  Kabul,
    where the appellant has no contacts.  The  appellant  is  no  longer  a
    wealthy man and has no business.  The evidence is that he would not  be
    employed by Muslims or the government.  The country  evidence  is  that
    women and girls lead enclosed lives in Afghanistan and that this family
    might well have to live  in  the  Gurdwara  while  they  re-established
    themselves in Afghanistan.  It remains unclear whether  they  have  any
    family there to help them do so.

72. The evidence before me does not suggest  that  the  appellant  and  his
    family would  have  access  to  an  independent  income  on  return  to
    Afghanistan. They have no family connections in Kabul, the  only  other
    area with any  significant  Sikh  population.  I  have  regard  to  the
    evidence of Dr Giustozzi in DSG that

         "... if the  known  episodes  of  harassment  and  violence  (which
         represented  only  a  proportion  of  the  actual  incidents  which
         occurred) were compared to the size of the population it should  be
         considered that there  was  rampant  hostility  and  discrimination
         against Sikhs in Afghanistan.  He also  commented  that  the  Sikhs
         were targeted with impunity because they did not  enjoy  protection
         from any of Afghanistan's various factions because  they  were  too
         small numerically to matter politically."

73. I also have regard to the evidence in DSG  from  Dr  Ballard's  article
    that:

         "... it was common knowledge that members of the  Sikh  and   Hindu
         community had found themselves subjected to steadily rising  levels
         of hostility during the course of the past  four  decades  and  had
         consequently had more reason to seek  refuge  overseas  then  their
         Muslim counterparts  and  that  the  scale  of  their  presence  in
         Afghanistan had been  shrinking steadily, the number being  only  a
         small fraction of their former size, and that as numbers shrank its
         remaining members were finding themselves even more  vulnerable  to
         aggressive  exaction  against  which  they   had   no    meaningful
         defence. "

74. That supports the appellant's account of his treatment and that of  his
    family in Jalalabad, over the  years.   Taking  all  of  this  evidence
    together, I  am  satisfied  that  for  this  family  of  Afghan  Sikhs,
    international protection is appropriate and that they would be at  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm if returned now to either Jalalabad
    or Kabul, the only options for Sikhs in Afghanistan today.   I  do  not
    consider that in reaching that conclusion I have departed from  the  TG
    guidance but to  the  extent  that  my  conclusion  differs  from  that
    guidance, for the reasons set out in DSG, I consider it appropriate  so
    to do.

DECISION

75. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appeal.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     29 July 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



