
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/03260/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |           Decision & Reasons           |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 31 October 2017                  |           On 8 November 2017           |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     MZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Pascoe of Counsel, instructed by Lawland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 5 July 1995.   He  came
    to this country to study having been issued  with  a  student  visa  in
    2014.  He returned to Sri Lanka on 7 January 2015 as  the  college  had
    withdrawn its  sponsorship  as  the  appellant  had  become  ill.   The
    appellant's parents had told the appellant  to  return  to  Sri  Lanka,
    which he did on 8 January 2015.  The appellant claimed that he had been
    questioned on arrival at Colombo Airport  where  he  had  denied  being
    involved with any Tamil Diaspora activities.  He was allowed  to  leave
    and went to his home.  However, after returning  home  the  police  had
    arrested him and taken him to the local police station and subsequently
    to another location where he had been ill-treated for about  ten  days.
    He had been accused of  participating  in  Tamil  Diaspora  activities,
    which he had denied.  His parents were able to secure his release on 18
    January 2015 having paid a bribe.  The appellant was  released  subject
    to reporting conditions and travelled to the UK on 21 January 2015  and
    applied for asylum on arrival.

2.   The Secretary of State refused the application on 18 May 2016.

3.   The appellant appealed the decision and his appeal came before a First-
    tier Judge on 30 March 2017 when Ms  Pascoe,  who  appears  before  me,
    represented the appellant.

4.   An application was made before the First-tier Judge for an  adjournment
    on the basis that the appellant  was  unwell.   It  was  common  ground
    before me that the application had in fact been made at  the  start  of
    the hearing although the judge deals with it towards  the  end  of  his
    determination.  The judge records that the appellant's case was that he
    was assisting the British Tamil Forum (BTF) in the UK while  he  was  a
    student by helping them to raise funds and distributing  leaflets.   He
    had attended meetings  and  Hero's  Day  celebrations.   The  appellant
    stated that his involvement had been  tipped  off  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities and he had been targeted as a result.

5.   The  judge  did  not  find  the  appellant's  evidence  credible.   His
    conclusions are set out at some length  and  it  is  not  necessary  to
    rehearse them for the purposes of this appeal since the principal issue
    is whether he erred in refusing to adjourn the proceedings.  Among  the
    points made by the judge was that the appellant  admitted  he  was  not
    politically motivated and the judge did not accept the evidence that he
    did not know what was in the leaflets that  he  claimed  to  have  been
    distributing.  No adequate reason had been given for  not  lodging  the
    evidence in support of his claimed activities with the BTF at the  time
    of his asylum interview.  The judge noted that the appellant's  friends
    had not attended to give evidence on his  behalf  in  relation  to  the
    assistance he claimed to have given them  distributing  leaflets.   The
    judge did not find it credible that the  bribe  having  been  paid  the
    appellant would be asked to report and warned that he might be detained
    again.  In paragraph 21 of the determination the judge referred to  the
    country guidance case of GJ (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 and concluded  that  there  was  no  reason  why  the
    appellant would be placed on a stop list:


         "I see no basis that the appellant with such low level activity, if
         indeed it ever took place, would be placed on a stop  list  or  any
         list.  I simply did not believe the evidence  and  have  considered
         the case of Tanveer Ahmed as relevant when evaluating the  evidence
         as regards the documents he had produced to support  his  case.   I
         cannot place weight on those accordingly."


6.   The judge turned to a further credibility  issue  in  relation  to  the
    medical reports in paragraphs 2 to 24 of his decision.  There had  been
    two medical reports and in  the  second  reference  had  been  made  to
    multiple burn marks consistent with cigarette burns.  There had been no
    reference to such burn marks in the first report and the judge rejected
    the explanation that the burn marks had been there all  along  and  had
    not been noticed.  The judge did not accept that the appellant had been
    detained or released on payment of a bribe.  While the  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant had undertaken any  activities  for  the  BTF
    such a very low level role would not bring him to the adverse attention
    of the authorities in Sri Lanka.  The judge referred to the guidance in
    GJ.  The appellant provided no credible evidence of  any  participation
    in demonstrations in  the  UK  and  there  was  no  evidence  that  his
    relatives or his family had  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities and he would not feature on a stop list and would not be at
    risk of detention.

7.   The judge dealt with the application for the  adjournment  towards  the
    end of his determination as follows:

         "30. Based on the above information  I  do  not  believe  that  the
             appellants evidence is credible.  Counsel  for  the  appellant
             asked for an adjournment because the appellant  had  not  been
             feeling well and the night before the appellant  had  gone  to
             the Accident and Emergency because he was sweating and unwell.
              He was prescribed Ibruprofen and amoxycillin and told that he
             had a chest infection.  However, the appellant attended before
             me and did gave evidence.  He  had  no  difficulty  in  giving
             evidence.


         31.   I  did  note  a  very  unconvincing   medical   report   from
             Nottinghamshire healthcare NHS which  was  a  poorly  prepared
             report of 9 lines, and one that stated that the appellant  had
             reported at the initial assessment that he suffered from fear,
             anxiety, poor sleep,  hyper  vigilance  and  low  mood.   Sean
             Miller who prepared this 9-line report, dated 13th March 2017,
             did not set out any of her qualifications to  prepare  such  a
             report, and did not set out the basis on which she had come to
             the conclusion that the appellant suffered from PTSD, and what
             she had seen to prepare the report."


8.   Accordingly the judge dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and Article 8 grounds.

9.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal on  grounds  settled  by
    Counsel.  It was argued that the appellant  had  just  been  discharged
    from hospital A&E and was feeling dizzy and unfocused and the appellant
    was "tearful and visibly sweating profusely during the  hearing".   The
    application for the adjournment had been made  at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing and it was an error of law to make credibility findings against
    the appellant, who was in no fit state to give evidence properly.   The
    judge had erred in referring to the medical report relied upon as being
    "unconvincing", which implied that  the  report  and  its  source  were
    unreliable.

10.  A First-tier Judge granted permission to appeal on  these  two  points.
    Other issues had been raised such as the complaint that  the  names  of
    the  representatives  had  been  misplaced  at  the   outset   of   the
    determination and it is said that the determination was  "fraught  with
    inaccuracies".  The points plainly did not commend  themselves  to  the
    First-tier Judge, who did not grant permission on them and, in my view,
    they have no merit at all.

11.  A response was filed by the respondent  on  15  September  2017  noting
    that no evidence appeared to have  been  provided  to  state  that  the
    appellant was not in a position to take part in the hearing.  The judge
    had given adequate reasons for finding that the report did  not  comply
    with the requirements of reports which were sought to  be  relied  upon
    given  the  absence  of  any   information   regarding   the   author's
    qualification and/or experiences or what tests were used  to  determine
    the findings set out regarding the appellant's health and reference was
    made to HH (Ethiopia) v Secretary of State [2007]  EWCA  Civ  306.   In
    relation to the other points there was nothing to suggest that  any  of
    these matters had a material bearing on the outcome.

12.  While Ms  Pascoe  acknowledged  that,  as  Counsel  at  the  First-tier
    hearing, she could not give evidence, the appellant had been taken  ill
    and had just been discharged from  A&E  and  the  application  for  the
    adjournment had  been  made  at  the  outset.   The  issues  turned  on
    credibility and the appellant was vulnerable and  had  been  discharged
    with a high temperature.  While he had answered questions he  had  been
    under pressure.  The judge should have adjourned the  case  to  another
    day.  The use of the word "unconvincing" suggested the  application  of
    the wrong  standard  of  proof.   The  factual  mistakes  went  to  the
    background.  The  appeal  should  be  remitted  for  a  fresh  hearing.
    Counsel acknowledged that no evidence bundle had been lodged subsequent
    to the First-tier hearing.

13.  Mr Bates submitted that the judge had  given  proper  consideration  to
    the report dated 13 March 2017.   The  appellant  had  simply  attended
    Accident and Emergency the day before the hearing and  had  been  given
    appropriate treatment and there was no reason why the  appellant  could
    not give cogent evidence.  He  had  chosen  to  give  evidence  and  it
    appears he was content to proceed.  There was nothing  to  indicate  he
    would have answered  questions  differently  had  an  adjournment  been
    granted.

14.  In reply it was submitted that Mr Bates  had  not  been  present.   The
    appellant had been tearful.  She acknowledged that there was no medical
    evidence of his condition.  The appellant  had  felt  obliged  to  give
    evidence notwithstanding his condition.  If the case had been adjourned
    he would have been able to give evidence more clearly.

15.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before  me  and  the  submissions
    made.  It is said that the judge materially erred in  law  in  refusing
    the adjournment application and in referring to the medical report  "as
    unconvincing".

16.  It is common ground, as I have said, that the  adjournment  application
    was made at the outset of the proceedings while the judge deals with it
    towards the end of his determination.  I detect no  error  in  such  an
    approach.  The  judge  had  the  benefit  of  hearing  and  seeing  the
    appellant give evidence before him and noted he had  no  difficulty  in
    giving evidence.  Counsel acknowledges that she cannot give evidence in
    the matter and there has been no evidence lodged since the  hearing  to
    support the claim that the  appellant  was  not  well  enough  to  give
    evidence.

17.  The judge took into account the 9 line report dated 13 March  2017  and
    I am not satisfied that he was unduly dismissive of it or that the  use
    of the word "unconvincing" indicates that he applied the wrong standard
    of proof and indeed he refers to the correct standard of proof  in  the
    concluding  paragraph  of  his  decision,  immediately  following   his
    consideration of the medical report.  Again, no  further  material  has
    been lodged since the hearing to deal with this  issue.   It  is  plain
    that the judge gave the medical report proper attention and I accept Mr
    Bates' submissions on this point.

18.  I am not satisfied that the determination was flawed on the  points  on
    which permission to appeal  was  granted  nor  indeed  that  the  other
    matters raised have any merit.

Notice of Decision
The appeal of the appellant is dismissed and I direct that the  decision  of
the First-tier Judge shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

I deem it appropriate to make an anonymity direction in this case.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.

Signed                                  Date 7 November 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


