
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03541/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2019                     |On 25 April 2019                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |M D                                               |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the original appellant. No  report
of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.
I make this order because the appellant  alleges  that  she  was  trafficked
into prostitution in Albania.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms E Sanders, of Counsel, instructed by Oliver &
Hasani Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Albania born  on  26  June  1990,  appeals
    against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Graham who, in
    a decision promulgated on 30 August 2018 following a hearing on 20 July
    2018, dismissed her appeal against a decision of the  respondent  dated
    24 February 2018 which refused her asylum claim of  25  February  2015.
    The respondent also refused to grant leave to remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The judge made an  adverse  credibility  assessment  and  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence that she had  been  forced  into  prostitution  in
    Albania by a man ("T") and T's associates because she and  her  husband
    owed them a debt for arranging a trip to the United Kingdom (which,  in
    the event, did not achieve the agreed  aim)  in  2014  following  their
    decision to emigrate for economic reasons to the United Kingdom or  the
    USA. The judge found that there were material internal  inconsistencies
    in  the  appellant's  accounts  which  she  considered  had  not   been
    satisfactorily explained. The judge also relied upon a letter  dated  4
    March 2017 from the British High Commission in Tirana (Annex E  of  the
    respondent's bundle) which stated that checks made revealed that  there
    was no record of the appellant or her  daughter  returning  to  Albania
    after they left Albania on 26 April 2014.

 3.  The  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum  claim,   humanitarian
    protection claim and related claim under Article 3 of the 1950 European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms
    (ECHR).

 4. The judge also dismissed the appellant's claim under Article 3  on  the
    basis of her mental health issues as well as her Article 8 claim.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Shimmin. The grounds do not challenge the judge's decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's Article 3 claim based on her mental health issues. They
    challenge the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's asylum claim,
    humanitarian protection claim and related Article 3 claim.

 6. Ground 1 includes (at para 2. (iv)(e) of the grounds)  a  challenge  to
    the judge's decision on the appellant's Article 8  claim.  I  refer  to
    this as Ground 1b.

 7. The grounds, in summary, are as follows:

    (i)    (Ground 1a) The  judge  erred  in  law  in  making  her  adverse
         credibility assessment by failing to take into  account  an  expert
         country report by Antonia Young (ground 1).

    (ii)   (Ground 1b) Ms Young's report was also material because Ms Young
         analysed the best interests of the  appellant's  children  and  the
         difficulties that the appellant would face in finding employment.

    (iii)  (Ground 2) In the alternative, the judge's failure to take  into
         account Ms Young's report meant that she failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons for dismissing the appeal.

    (iv)   (Ground 3) The judge's refusal of  the  appellant's  adjournment
         request in order to obtain a  trafficking  report  meant  that  the
         appellant had not had a fair hearing.

    (v)    (Ground 4) In the  alternative,  the  judge  failed  to  provide
         reasons for refusing the adjournment request.

    (vi)    (Ground  5)  The  judge's  approach   was   irrational   and/or
         unreasonable for the reasons given in grounds 1-4.

Basis of asylum claim

 8. This summary is taken from paras 11-22 of the judge's decision.

 9. The appellant and her husband agreed to pay T a sum of money to arrange
    travel for them and their daughter to London pursuant to their decision
    to emigrate for economic reasons (on one account, the  husband  decided
    to stay in Albania due to lack of funds). The appellant,  her  daughter
    and (on one account) her husband left Albania on their own passports in
    April or June or July 2014 and travelled to Italy where they were given
    false passports. The appellant's false passport was detected by Italian
    security at Milan airport as a result of which she was unable to fly to
    London. After staying in Italy for  one  week,  or  alternatively,  two
    weeks in a house provided by T, the appellant and her daughter (and, on
    one account, her husband) returned to Albania.

10. On 29 July 2014, T and three men came to her home in Albania  demanding
    to be paid E10,000 which they were owed for arranging the  unsuccessful
    trip to Italy. The appellant and her husband were threatened and beaten
    before being put in separate vehicles. Her husband was hit on the  head
    with a rifle butt and became unconscious. This was the  last  time  she
    saw him. The appellant was taken to a house in Albania  where  she  was
    held against her will and forced into prostitution, until January  2015
    when she became noticeably pregnant. She was taken to a hospital  by  T
    for an abortion. On one account, she was helped to escape whilst in the
    operating theatre by the male doctor  who  was  preparing  her  for  an
    abortion. On another account, she was taken to a clinic and  helped  to
    escape by a female nurse through the rear of the clinic.

11. After escaping, the appellant returned to her parents' home  where  she
    was reunited with her daughter and where she told her father  what  had
    happened. There was an inconsistency in the appellant's evidence as  to
    whether a complaint was  then  made  to  the  police.  In  her  witness
    statement, the appellant said that her father was physically  assaulted
    by men who told him that they were looking for her. Her father told her
    he was receiving threatening phone calls. The appellant moved to her in-
    laws' house with her daughter.

12. Arrangements were made for the appellant  and  her  daughter  to  leave
    Albania. They left Albania on 13 February 2015 in the rear of  a  lorry
    and changed lorries a number of times before  arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 25 February 2015. She claimed asylum on the  same  day.  Her
    son was born in the United Kingdom on 24 April 2015.

The judge's decision

13. The judge said that she had  treated  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness in line with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.
    She considered the expert report of a psychiatrist, Dr  Chiedu  Obuaya,
    dated 12 July 2018, which,  she  noted  (at  paras  5  and  37  of  her
    decision),  stated  as  follows  (paras  30,  53,  61  and  64  of  the
    psychiatric report):

         "30.     It was not possible to reconcile the  discrepancies  noted
             in the [refusal letter] (paragraphs 33-44) when they were  put
             to [the appellant]. She stated she was  "very  stressed"  when
             the asylum interview was conducted and  that  there  may  have
             been problems with the interpreter  who  was  apparently  from
             Kosovo."

         "53.     I have not been able to provide a psychiatric  explanation
             for the aforementioned discrepancies in [the appellant's] past
             account of her experiences. I  am  also  concerned  about  the
             explanation she gave about how she discovered she was pregnant
             (paragraph 18) which I struggled to follow."

         "61.     In my clinical opinion ...,  [the  appellant]  is  fit  to
             instruct her solicitors."

         "64.      In  [the  appellant's]  case,  there   is   no   apparent
             disturbance of her mind or brain which impairs her ability  to
             understand and weigh up the relevant information  relating  to
             the proceedings, she was, in  my  clinical  opinion,  able  to
             communicate her views clearly."

14. In view of Dr Obuaya's evidence and opinion, the judge stated that  she
    was satisfied that the  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  accounts
    could not be explained by any mental health condition.

15. The judge then considered the explanation given to Dr Obuaya  that  the
    appellant may have had problems at her interview with  the  interpreter
    who was from Kosovo. In this regard, the judge said, at para 38 of  her
    decision, as follows:

         "38.     As regards the explanation given to the  expert  that  the
             appellant may have had problems with the interpreter  who  was
             from Kosovo, I  note  the  appellant  has  failed  to  mention
             interpreter problems in either of her witness  statements,  as
             part of the comprehensive further submissions  or  during  her
             oral evidence  when  asked  to  explain  inconsistencies.  The
             record of interview states that at  the  commencement  of  the
             interview  the  appellant  accepts  that  she  understood  the
             interpreter. At the end of the interview the appellant  states
             that she has understood all the questions and does  not  state
             that there were any interpreter problems during the interview.
             In these circumstances I have not accepted  that  any  of  the
             inconsistencies are due to interpreter error."

16. The judge then considered the  appellant's  explanation,  in  her  oral
    evidence and in her first statement, that she is uneducated and  has  a
    poor  memory.  The  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant   was
    uneducated. She stated, at para 39 of her decision,  that,  whilst  the
    recollection of dates may be affected by a poor  memory,  she  did  not
    accept that the inconsistency as to whether  or  not  her  husband  had
    travelled to Italy with her and her daughter in 2014 can be  so  easily
    explained.

17.  Having  considered  the  various   explanations   for   the   internal
    inconsistencies, the  judge  took  the  inconsistencies  into  account,
    explaining why they went against the appellant's credibility.

18. The judge considered (para 45) that the core of the  appellant's  claim
    was that she and her husband owed a large sum of money  to  T  for  the
    unsuccessful journey to Italy, following which she returned to Albania,
    and that,  following  her  return  to  Albania,  she  was  forced  into
    prostitution by T and his associates who demanded the money  that  they
    were owed. She considered that the appellant's evidence, that  she  had
    returned to Albania, was undermined by the letter from the British High
    Commission in Tirana which stated that  there  was  no  record  of  the
    appellant or her daughter returning to Albania. She considered that the
    appellant's evidence concerning her method of  return  to  Albania  was
    inconsistent because she said at her interview (question 94)  that  she
    and her daughter returned to Albania by plane whereas her  evidence  in
    her  witness  statement,  which  post-dated  the  respondent's  refusal
    letter,  was  that  she  returned  to  Albania  by  ferry  and  avoided
    immigration control upon return to Albania. The judge considered  that,
    as the appellant  and  her  daughter  were  in  possession  of  genuine
    Albanian passports, it made no sense for them to avoid border control.

19.  The  judge  also   considered   that   there   were   other   internal
    inconsistencies in the appellant's  accounts  which  she  explained  in
    greater detail in her decision.

20. I now quote paras 39-45 of the judge's decision:

         "39.     ... Whilst  the  recollection  of  certain  dates  may  be
             affected by a poor memory, I do not accept  the  inconsistency
             as to whether or not her husband travelled to Italy  with  her
             and her daughter in 2014 can be so easily explained.

         40.      Similarly, the appellant's oral evidence that once back in
             Albania, her father collected her daughter  and  took  her  to
             stay with  him  for  safety  cannot  be  reconciled  with  her
             responses in interview (questions 114/115) that she drove  her
             daughter to her parent's house and returned to Tirana  because
             her husband asked her to return. This account of  driving  her
             daughter to  her  parent's  house  is  inconsistent  with  her
             evidence  that  she  and  her  husband  were  under   constant
             surveillance and unable to  leave  the  house  save  for  food
             shopping.

         41.      I am satisfied these are  material  inconsistencies  which
             serve to undermine the credibility of the appellant's account.
             In addition I find central parts of the appellant's account to
             lack plausibility.

         42.      The appellant claims to have come from a poor  family,  in
             addition, her husband needed to go abroad to  earn  sufficient
             to  support  her.  In  interview  she  also  says   (interview
             questions 11, 18 and 19) that her father was  unemployed,  her
             mother worked as a cleaner and her in-laws "did village  work"
             with greenhouses. I have found this to  be  inconsistent  with
             her account that her father and father-in-law paid an agent to
             take her and her daughter to the UK.  In  any  event,  if  her
             father and father-in-law were able to fund her journey to  the
             UK then I have not found it plausible that they would not have
             paid [T] to stop the threats to their children's lives.

         43.       I  have  considered  the  appellant's  account  that  she
             travelled from Albania to Italy legitimately  on  her  genuine
             Albanian passport yet needed false documents to travel  on  to
             either USA or UK which were  detected  by  security  at  Milan
             airport. She said she was prevented from  boarding  the  plane
             yet she was not arrested or detained.  I  have  not  found  it
             credible or believable that having been discovered  attempting
             to board an international flight with false documents that she
             would be allowed to walk free from the airport, especially  as
             she was not an Italian national. I am satisfied it is far more
             probable that the  appellant  would  have  been  arrested  and
             questioned as to how she obtained the false document  and  her
             intentions in travelling to either the USA or UK.

         44.      The appellant said in  interview  she  travelled  back  to
             Albania by plane. However, information from the  British  High
             Commission in Tirana state there is no record  of  either  the
             appellant or her daughter returning to Albania. In her witness
             statements which post date  the  refusal,  she  gives  a  very
             different account of her return trip to Albania. She says  she
             travelled by Ferry and  avoided  immigration  upon  return  to
             Albania. Not only is this a material inconsistency, I consider
             the  appellant's   claim   to   have   returned   to   Albania
             clandestinely unlikely and implausible. The appellant and  her
             daughter were in possession of genuine Albanian passports  and
             would have been able to pass through Albanian  border  control
             without incident. Therefore it makes no sense to avoid  border
             control. I am satisfied the appellant has given  this  account
             for the purpose of explaining why there would be no record  of
             her re-entering Albania.

         45.      Whether or not the appellant re-entered Albania is at  the
             core of her asylum claim as she claims  to  have  been  forced
             into prostitution in Albania. Given I have not found it likely
             or plausible that having been found with false  documents  she
             would not have been detained and questioned, coupled with  the
             inconsistency as to her mode of travel and the  implausibility
             of her claim to have re-entered Albania without going  through
             customs, I am unable to accept that she did return to  Albania
             from Italy as claimed. This means that I do not accept she was
             in Albania when she claimed to have been trafficked. This goes
             to the core of her account and consequently, I have  dismissed
             her account entirely."

21. The judge then said that she rejected the entirety of  the  appellant's
    account, at para 46 of her decision, which reads:

         "46.     I have considered whether the appellant and  her  children
             face any risk upon return. Given that  I  have  dismissed  her
             account entirely I have discounted a risk of re-  trafficking.
             The appellant is on good terms with her  parents  and  in-laws
             therefore she and her children can return to  family  who  can
             offer the appellant and her children  the  support  needed  to
             reintegrate into Albanian society."

Submissions

22. Ms Sanders relied upon the grounds. The principal ground was  that  the
    judge had not made any reasoned findings on Ms Young's  expert  report.
    The report was relied upon by Counsel for the appellant at the  hearing
    before the judge (Mr James Fraczyk). The report  was  relevant  because
    credibility should always be assessed against the  background  evidence
    which includes expert country  evidence.  On  that  basis,  Ms  Sanders
    submitted that it could not be said that, if the judge had conducted  a
    proper assessment of the appellant's credibility  taking  into  account
    the expert report of Ms Young, her findings would have been the same.

23. I asked Ms Sanders to explain how Ms Young's report could have assisted
    the judge given that the judge found that there were material  internal
    inconsistencies in the appellant's accounts that the  judge  considered
    had not been satisfactorily explained.

24. Ms Sanders submitted that, although the internal  inconsistencies  were
    relevant, they had to be considered against  the  background  material.
    The expert report of Ms Young highlighted the incidence of  trafficking
    in Albania.

25. Ms Sanders stated that she did not suggest that Ms Young's report  cast
    light on the internal inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence.  She
    accepted that  Ms  Young's  report  did  not  deal  with  the  internal
    inconsistencies in the appellant's  accounts  that  had  concerned  the
    judge. Nevertheless, she submitted that the  report  was  an  extensive
    report which considered the appellant's evidence in the context of  the
    country conditions and that it was therefore relevant to an  assessment
    of credibility.

26. Mr Tufan submitted that Ms Young had prepared her report on  the  basis
    that the appellant had given a credible account. The  psychiatrist,  Dr
    Obuaya, had stated, at para 30 of his report, that it  was  simply  not
    possible to reconcile the discrepancies in  the  appellant's  accounts,
    that he had not been able to find a psychiatric  explanation  and  that
    the appellant was able to communicate her views clearly.

27. Mr Tufan reminded me that a central part of the  appellant's  case  was
    that she had returned to Albania one or two weeks after she was stopped
    from boarding  a  plane  for  London  and  that  she  was  forced  into
    prostitution by T after she  returned  to  Albania.  However,  evidence
    obtained from the British High Commission  showed  that  there  was  no
    record of the appellant and her daughter returning to Albania.  It  was
    only after this had been mentioned at para 34  of  the  refusal  letter
    that the appellant had stated in her witness  statement  that  she  had
    returned to Albania by ferry avoiding immigration control.

28. Mr Tufan submitted that the report of Ms Young did not  help  with  the
    internal inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  accounts.  Furthermore,
    credibility was a matter for the judge. At page 54 of  her  report,  Ms
    Young opined that  the  appellant  would  be  placed  in  a  vulnerable
    situation on return to Albania and that she would need to lead a hidden
    life to avoid being discovered whether or not she was  found  credible.
    Although she expressly stated that her opinion was made whether or  not
    the appellant was found credible, it is  clear  that  her  opinion  was
    nonetheless predicated on the appellant's account  being  credible.  At
    page 56 of her report, Ms Young stated that she considered it plausible
    for the appellant  to  fear  for  her  life  and  that  she  found  the
    appellant's descriptions of fear of attack from her former  traffickers
    and/or their associates and potential murder objectively justified.  Mr
    Tufan referred me to the criticism of Ms Young's expert evidence in  MF
    (Albania) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 902.

29. In response, Ms Sanders referred me to page 56  of  Ms  Young's  report
    where she said that the appellant's account was highly consistent  with
    what is known about the situation in Albania.

30. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

Ground 1a and ground 2

31. Mr Tufan referred me to the criticisms of Ms Young's expert evidence in
    the case of MF (Albania). In her report produced for the instant  case,
    Ms Young states, at page 69, that she has considered the comments  made
    concerning her input in MF (Albania) and that she had sought to be more
    objective in her assessment of cases since then.  She  refers  to  five
    other (unspecified) cases in which she says her reports were  found  to
    be fully valid.

32. It is not necessary for me to consider whether, in her  report  in  the
    instant case, Ms Young has indeed addressed the  comments  made  in  MF
    (Albania) about her expert evidence in that case. It is evident, in the
    instant case, that notwithstanding that she states that  the  appellant
    is at risk whether or not she is found credible, the  reality  is  that
    her assessment  of  the  risk  facing  the  appellant  is  nevertheless
    predicated on the appellant's account  being  credible.  This  much  is
    evident from, for example, the following paragraph on page  54  of  her
    report:

         "54.     Whether or not [the appellant] is found  to  be  credible,
             the fact remains that returning her to Albania, a  country  in
             which family members are normally highly inter-dependent,  now
             as a single mother, without the ability to relate to  her  own
             and her in-law families (due to the fact that the  traffickers
             are on the watch for her return there), she would be placed in
             a very vulnerable situation. She would need to lead  a  hidden
             life to avoid being discovered by any  of  those  antagonistic
             towards her".

33. More importantly, it is clear  from  the  judge's  reasoning  that  her
    adverse credibility assessment turned upon the fact that  the  core  of
    the appellant's case, that she was trafficked into  prostitution  after
    she returned to Albania following her unsuccessful attempt to travel to
    London, was undermined by the following:

    (i)    The letter from the British High Commission  which  showed  that
         checks had revealed that the appellant and  her  daughter  had  not
         returned to Albania.

    (ii)   The appellant had given an inconsistent account about her method
         of return to Albania.

    (iii)  The appellant's evidence in her witness statement, that she  had
         avoided border control on returning to Albania, was  advanced  only
         after para 34 of the refusal letter stated that  evidence  received
         from the British High Commission stated that there was no record of
         the appellant and her daughter returning  to  Albania  after  their
         unsuccessful attempt to travel to London.

    (iv)   The appellant's belated explanation, that she and  her  daughter
         had avoided border control on return  to  Albania,  made  no  sense
         given that they  were  in  possession  of  their  genuine  Albanian
         passports.

    (v)    There were other internal  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
         evidence that undermined her credibility, as the judge explained at
         paras 39-44 of her decision.

34. There is absolutely nothing in the  judge's  reasoning  which  suggests
    that she considered that a  claim  by  an  individual  of  having  been
    trafficked into prostitution in Albania was  not  consistent  with  the
    country evidence. There is no reason to suppose that the judge was  not
    aware of the country evidence concerning the incidence  of  trafficking
    of women in Albania and did not take it into account. At para 26 of her
    decision, she specifically referred to the country guidance case of  TD
    and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) in summarising the
    respondent's reasons for refusing the appellant's asylum claim.

35. The difficulty for  the  appellant  is  that  the  judge  rejected  her
    evidence that she had been trafficked into prostitution in Albania  not
    because her claim that she had been  trafficked  into  prostitution  in
    Albania was  inconsistent  with  what  is  known  about  the  objective
    situation  in  Albania  but  because  there  were   material   internal
    inconsistencies and other difficulties in her account, as described  at
    my para 33 above.

36. Accordingly, whilst it would have been preferable if the judge had made
    some specific reference to the report of Ms  Young,  I  do  not  accept
    that, in her assessment of credibility, the judge failed to  take  into
    account the fact that trafficking of women into prostitution does occur
    in Albania.

37. However, even if I am wrong about this, I do not accept that Ms Young's
    report had any material bearing on the assessment  of  credibility.  Ms
    Sanders accepted that Ms Young's report did not deal with the matters I
    have summarised at my para 33 above, nor (it has to be said)  could  it
    have done so since such matters are for assessment by a judge, not  the
    country expert.

38. Para 2(iv)(b) and (c) of the grounds contends that the judge failed  to
    take into account the fact that Ms Young had assessed  the  psychiatric
    report of Dr Obuaya and noted  numerous  features  of  the  psychiatric
    report that were in the appellant's  favour.  This  ground  is  utterly
    hopeless. It was for the judge to assess the  psychiatric  report,  and
    not Ms Young. There is nothing  to  indicate  that  Ms  Young  has  any
    expertise in assessing psychiatric reports.

39. Para 2(iv)(d) of the grounds states that the failure  to  consider  the
    report of Ms  Young  was  material  because  Ms  Young  had  considered
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation. This  ground  simply
    ignores the fact that the judge rejected the appellant's  account  that
    she had been trafficked.

40. I therefore reject ground 1a.

41. Ground 2 does not establish any material error of law  in  the  judge's
    decision. Contrary to ground 2, the judge did give adequate reasons for
    rejecting the appellant's evidence that she had  been  trafficked  into
    prostitution in Albania.

42. Grounds 1b, 3, 4 and 5 were not addressed at  the  hearing  before  me.
    However, as Ms Sanders relied upon the grounds, I shall deal with them.



Grounds 3 and 4

43. Appellants do not have the right to have an unlimited amount of time to
    obtain reports. In the instant case, a pre-hearing review  set  for  19
    April 2018 was adjourned in  order  to  allow  the  appellant  time  to
    produce a psychiatric  report,  a  country  report  and  a  trafficking
    report. The appellant was able to obtain the first two reports. It  has
    not been suggested in the grounds that the judge was provided with  any
    explanation for the failure to  obtain  a  trafficking  report  or  any
    indication of the period of adjournment needed to obtain such a report.
    I do not accept that the judge failed to consider  whether  the  appeal
    could be justly determined. This is an experienced judge who  no  doubt
    would have had in mind the overriding objective in deciding whether  to
    grant the adjournment request.

44. In any event, I cannot see how a trafficking report  (which  still  has
    not been produced notwithstanding that nine months have  elapsed  since
    the hearing took place before the judge) could have made  any  material
    difference given the  difficulties  in  the  appellant's  accounts,  as
    summarised at para 33 above.

45. On the material before me, it  simply  has  not  been  shown  that  the
    appellant  did  not  have  a  fair  hearing.  The  credibility  of  the
    appellant's evidence turned upon the matters I have summarised at  para
    33 above.  It  has  not  been  suggested  that  she  did  not  have  an
    opportunity to address these in her evidence. It has not been explained
    how a trafficking report could have assisted the  appellant  given  the
    judge's assessment of the credibility of her evidence  in  relation  to
    the matters set out at my para 33 above.

46. I therefore reject grounds 3 and 4.

47. Ground 5 is hopeless, for the reasons I have already  given.  It  added
    nothing to the appellant's case and should not have been pleaded, in my
    view.





Ground 1b

48. This contends that Ms Young's report was also material because Ms Young
    analysed the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  children  and  the
    difficulties that the appellant would face in finding employment.

49. However, as I have already said, Ms Young's report was predicated on an
    acceptance of the appellant's credibility. The appellant did not  claim
    that her relationship with her parents and in-laws had broken down.  To
    the contrary, on her evidence, she had a good relationship  with  them.
    The only reason that Ms Young offers for the appellant not  being  able
    to contact her parents and in-laws is that her traffickers would be  on
    the look-out for her.  Given the judge's rejection of  the  appellant's
    evidence that she had been trafficked into prostitution, this aspect of
    Ms Young's report cannot assist her.

50. I therefore reject ground 1b. I draw attention  to  the  fact  that  no
    issue has otherwise been taken in the grounds to the judge's assessment
    of the appellant's Article 8 claim.

51. For all of the reasons given above, I have concluded that the judge did
    not materially err in law. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    is therefore dismissed.

52. Finally, I should say that permission to appeal should  not  have  been
    granted in this case. Given that the judge's assessment of  credibility
    turned upon the matters summarised at my para 33 above, it was  obvious
    that this was not a case in which  expert  evidence  or  a  trafficking
    report could have had any material significance.



    Decision

    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Graham did not make any material error
    of law. Accordingly, her decision to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent decision stands.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill    Date: 21 April 2019
