
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03550/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30th January 2018                 |On 21st March 2018                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MR K.E.A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs. Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday
Reeves Law Firm.
For the respondent:    Ms. Petersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

        1. The appellant is a national of Libya.  He  came  to  the  United
           Kingdom  as  a  dependent  upon  his  wife's  student  visa.  He
           subsequently claimed protection which was refused.

        2. He is a pharmacy graduate from Benghazi. He claimed  his  father
           was fighting extremists and disappeared in 2015 with the  family
           concluding he had been kidnapped or worse.  The  same  year  his
           uncle  was  killed  and  the  following  year  his  brother  was
           kidnapped. Consequently, he feared return because he may  be  at
           risk.

        3. His appeal was dismissed by Judge Manchester of the  First  tier
           Tribunal. The judge did not find him credible. Reference is made
           to aspects of the claim; the fact he returned to  Libya  at  one
           stage; and the delay in claiming. Consequently, at paragraph  54
           the judge found no credence could be attached to his account  of
           events relating to him or his family; the reasons he claimed for
           being at risk or  any  perceived  association  with  the  former
           regime.

        4. The judge went on to consider the 15 (c) risk  and  referred  to
           the country guidance case of AT and others (Article 15(c);  risk
           categories)  (CG)  [2014]  UKUT  318.  The  judge  accepted  the
           appellant could not return to  Benghazi  because  of  conditions
           there but found he could relocate to  other  areas  such  as  Al
           Bayada where the rest of his family continue to live. The  judge
           referred to the appellant and his wife being educated; that they
           had formerly been employed and that they could obtain employment
           again.

    The Upper Tribunal.

        5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  the
           basis the judge erred in dealing with  relocation.  The  refusal
           letter had not identified a potential area and arguably this was
           procedurally unfair because the appellant did not know what area
           to address. Only in submissions was it suggested that  he  could
           relocate to Tripoli or Al Bayada.  At  paragraph  60  the  judge
           commented there had been no reference to the security  situation
           in Al Bayda deteriorating to the level where 15(c)  applied.  It
           was  argued  the  appellant's  representatives  could  not  have
           anticipated having to address this.

        6. It was also argued that the judge erred  from  the  evidence  in
           concluding the appellant was unlikely to end up as an internally
           displaced person. Finally, it was contended the  best  interests
           of his child had not been considered.

        7. The rule 24 response was to the effect that the judge  had  made
           adequate  findings  on  the  appellant's  credibility  and   had
           considered  the  country  background  material   provided   .The
           conclusions on internal relocation at paragraph 53,  60  and  61
           were sustainable.

        8. For the hearing I have  received  a  bundle  on  behalf  of  the
           appellant consisting of 10 items. Notably, the decision  of  ZMM
           (article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 263 is included. First Tier
           Judge Manchester did not have the benefit of this guidance as it
           was not promulgated until 28 June 2017. That decision  concluded
           that the level of violence throughout Libya was at such  a  high
           level that a returning civilian would face a real risk solely on
           account of their presence.

        9. It is clear from the decision that First Tier  Judge  Manchester
           gave the anxious scrutiny required of the claim and has  crafted
           a  comprehensive  judgement.  Clear  reasons  for  the  negative
           credibility findings were given. The refusal letter acknowledged
           that  the  security  situation  in   Libya   had   deteriorated,
           particularly around Benghazi. However, the  situation  in  other
           parts of Libya had not deteriorated to the extent where  article
           15(c) applied. Consequently, the issue of  relocation  was  live
           and it would not have been  beyond  imagination  for  Ms  Adams,
           Counsel, to anticipate this. Al Bayada was where  his  remaining
           family were. Matters have however changed with the  new  country
           guidance decision.

       10. Both parties agree  that  this  decision  alters  the  position.
           Looking at matters in light of this decision the parties are  in
           agreement that the current position is that there exists a 15(c)
           risk throughout. Judge Manchester's conclusion therefore can  no
           longer be sustained.

       11. Both parties  are  in  agreement  that  I  remake  the  decision
           allowing the appeal on the basis  of  article  15(c)  only.  Mrs
           Cleghorn confirms that  she  is  not  challenging  the  negative
           credibility findings made by  the  judge  and  so  the  decision
           dismissing those aspects of the claim stand.

    Decision.

    The decision of First tier Judge Manchester errs in law and  cannot  be
    sustained. This is in light of the subsequent country guidance  on  the
    general risk throughout Libya for civilians.  The  decision  is  remade
    allowing the appeal in relation to article 15(c) only. The rejection of
    the claim for asylum on credibility grounds shall stand.




    Francis J Farrelly
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     19th March 2018
