

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03345/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                        Decision &
Reasons Promulgated
On 5th March 2018                                               On 9th
April 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    MR WW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                              Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The appellant claimed protection on the basis he was an Ethiopian
   national and if returned would be at risk of persecution. He said his
   brother was a member of Ethiopian Patriotic Front and the appellant
   became a supporter. They both were arrested in October 2013 for putting
   up posters. The appellant was detained during which time he was abused.
   He was subsequently taken to hospital and his aunt and uncle were able to
   secure his release through bribery. He then came to the United Kingdom
   and continued to support the Ethiopian Patriotic Front.

2. The respondent refused his claim on credibility ground.

3. His appeal was heard at Taylor House by First-tier Judge B Morron on 3
   May 2017. In a decision promulgated on 31 May 2017 it was dismissed. The
   judge did not find the account credible.

4. Permission to appeal was granted by an Upper Tribunal judge on the basis
   it was arguable the appellant's sur place activities may place him at
   risk on return and this was not adequately considered. Argument on the
   credibility points was also allowed.

The Upper Tribunal

5. There was no appearance by the appellant or by any representative on his
   behalf. The application for permission to appeal had been drafted by
   solicitors on his behalf. The file indicates he no longer has
   representatives. Notice of today's hearing was sent to the appellant at
   his last known address on the 30th January 2018. It is for the appellant
   to notify the Tribunal of any change of address. In the absence of any
   explanation, and in giving effect to the overriding objective, I
   proceeded in the appellants' absence.

6. The grounds criticise the assessment of the appellant's sur plus
   activities by the judge and contends that the evidence in support of his
   activities was not adequately considered. Reference was made to the
   judge's comment at paragraph 53 that it was implausible that the party
   would decline to support a genuine supporter involved since 2010 who
   would be at risk on return. The grounds point out that his membership in
   the United Kingdom was for less than a year.

7. The Ethiopian Patriotic Front reformed and is now known as PG 7. The
   appellant claims that after he arrived here he became involved with that
   organisation and took part in various demonstrations. His bundle
   contained photographs showing him at gatherings in London in November
   2016 and February 2017. There also were photographs dated April 2017
   taken in Leeds and Manchester. He also produced receipts for his
   membership fees.

8. The judge refers to this claim and the documents at paragraph 33
   onwards. At hearing the appellant explained the photographs. The judge,
   at para 37, identifies the appellant in the photographs and there is
   reference to the leader of the London branch in the photographs.

9. Paragraph 39 refers to cross-examination where he was asked why he had
   not produced any confirmation from the organisation of his activities.
   His response was that the party does not provide such material until
   someone has been a member for at least a year.

10. At paragraph 53 the judge recorded Counsel referring to a witness who
   had attended with the appellant and agreed to allow time for a late
   statement to be prepared and the witness called. However, no statement
   was produced and the individual was not called. The decision records the
   appellant stating he had a witness who was a party member seen in some of
   the photographs but they had to leave because of work commitments.

Conclusions

11. The assessment of the evidence was a matter for the judge. At paragraph
   51 the judge commented on the appellant being identifiable in the
   photographs. Potentially they could support his claim of activity in the
   party but also they could be him posing so that this could be used as
   evidence in his appeal. Whatever his motives there was no evidence that
   this would come to the attention of the authorities or that he would be
   perceived as a supporter.

12. The judge displayed an even-handed approach by not drawing an adverse
   inference from an inconsistency in the documentation dates because of
   possibilities of translation errors. The judge did find that the
   explanation about an e-mail submitted lack credibility.

13. It was open to the judge to comment on the absence of evidence which
   could have been anticipated, namely an official in the party pledging
   support for the appellant. I appreciate the appellant's claim is that
   this would not be done until someone had been involved in a year. It was
   open to the judge to consider the reasonableness of this, bearing in mind
   the appellant's claimed background. The judge had attempted to facilitate
   the appellant by agreeing to accept a statement at a late stage from his
   witness but this was not produced.

14. Ultimately, it was for the appellant to demonstrate that his sur plas
   activities endangered him. I see nothing about the decision which
   indicates a material error of law and the appellant has not attended to
   argue the point further.

15. The judge also dealt with the appellant's overall credibility. The
   grounds of appeal in relation to this are generalised. The judge has
   recorded the evidence presented and has made detailed findings of fact.
   The appellant's credibility was central to the claim. It was stated at
   the outset that if he were believed his appeal would succeed.

16. The judge referred to his failure to claim in safe countries but this
   was not determinative. The judge acknowledged that he had displayed an
   awareness of the party and sought to make allowances for discrepancies
   over dates due to the use of different calendars. The judge acknowledged
   as credible that the appellant and his brother would be putting up
   posters together. The judge referred to the absence of any medical
   evidence to support the claimed abuse whilst in detention. The judge
   referred to the country information which indicated an active member
   would be liable to detention and ill-treatment.

17. The judge did not find the appellant's account of the appellant being
   taken to hospital credible given his claim about what had happened
   earlier. The judge also found the account of his escape lacked
   credibility, particularly if he was in as weak a state as claimed.

18. It is for the appellant to demonstrate a material error of law. The
   decision suggests the judge carefully considered the evidence and the
   points for and against the claim. I find no error of law demonstrated in
   the judge's approach.

Decision.

No material error of law has been shown in the decision of First-tier Judge
B Morron. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appellant's appeal
shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                              20th March 2018


