
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/03303/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 February 2018                        |On 20 March 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     rb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, of Counsel instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 4  February  1990.   She
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ghani
    who in a determination  promulgated  on  26  July  2017  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The appellant had initially entered Britain with  her  mother  and  her
    brother in 2011.  They had claimed asylum on the basis that they feared
    the Taliban.  Their applications were refused and the subsequent appeal
    was dismissed.  In March 2016 the appellant submitted a fresh claim  on
    the basis that she was an unmarried woman who had  had  a  relationship
    outside marriage and that she feared an honour killing if she  returned
    to Pakistan as she had received threats from  her  family  there.   She
    stated that she had formed a relationship in Britain with a Muslim  man
    and that she had eventually become pregnant.   Her  boyfriend  had  not
    wished to have anything further to do with  her  and  she  had  had  an
    abortion.  She stated that she had been informed by  other  members  of
    her family that her family were planning to kill her and her mother.

3.     The judge set out her  findings  in  paragraphs  23  onwards  of  the
    determination.  She did not appear to find the  appellant's  claim  was
    credible giving certain reasons for that  conclusion.   Her  conclusion
    reached in paragraph 31 of the determination was:-

         "I find that  in  all  probabilities,  her  relationship  with  her
         claimed boyfriend had been entered into for the purposes of a fresh
         asylum claim.  It is highly likely that  they  would  have  entered
         into an Islamic marriage  as  the  behaviour  which  the  Appellant
         claims they displayed is totally out of character  for  someone  as
         the Appellant who belongs to a very strict Muslim background.  I do
         not find the Appellant's claim to be credible.   The  Appellant  is
         not  a  Refugee  entitled  to  Refugee  status   under   the   1951
         Convention."

4.   She went on to state, however,  that even if  the  appellant's  account
    were to be believed it was appropriate for her to apply the  principles
    in Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702 which had  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    internal relocation.  She also  stated  that  she  had  considered  the
    appellant's documentation in line with the principles in  the  case  of
    Tanveer Ahmed and therefore little weight could be  attached  to  those
    documents.  Again she concluded that the appellant did not qualify  for
    leave to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   Grounds of appeal argued that the conclusions of  the  judge  were  not
    open to her and that the judge did not give  reasons  for  her  various
    conclusions.  Ms Ahmad stated that she did not oppose the appeal.

6.      I  consider  that  there  are  material  errors  of   law   in   the
    determination.

7.   Firstly, the judge stated that she relied on the decision of the  first
    judge who dealt with the appellant's  appeal  when  she  had  initially
    claimed asylum.   In  particular  she  referred  to  the  finding  that
    internal relocation be open to the appellant.  The reality, however, is
    that the decision of the  first  judge  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
    appellant's present claim.   In  that  decision  the  judge  considered
    whether or not the appellant would be able to relocate with her  mother
    and brother and that they were fleeing from the  Taliban.   That  is  a
    completely different situation where  the  appellant  is,  as  she  now
    claims, in fear of her family and would not be accompanied by either  a
    brother or any other family member.

8.   Secondly, it is unclear what  the  judge  meant  by  stating  that  she
    applied the principles of Tanveer Ahmed to  the  documentary  evidence.
    These included:
    . Letter from Birmingham Solihull Women's Aid dated 10 November 2015
    . Letter from BPAS Birmingham Central Clinic dated 11 March 2016
    . Letter from Asian Family Counselling Service dated 2 December 2016
    . Letter from Asian Family Counselling Service dated 17 November 2015
    . Letter from Pearl Medical Centre dated 16 September 2015
       The documentary  evidence  submitted  related  to  contact  with  the
    health service and with the police.  These are not documents  to  which
    the principles in Tanveer Ahmed could apply - the  principles  in  that
    case relate to whether or  not  documents  are  genuine  or  not.   The
    reality is that the documents which the appellant produced on which she
    wished to rely were clearly genuine documents.  While it  may  be  that
    the information contained therein could be questioned, the  genuineness
    of the documents cannot.  Furthermore, the judge's findings  appear  to
    be contradictory.  She appears to state that the  appellant  would  not
    have had sexual relationships with a boyfriend unless they were married
    but then, of course if that were the case, there would be no reason for
    the appellant to have had an abortion.  Moreover, the judge states that
    the relationship was entered into so that  the  appellant  could  claim
    asylum.  That conclusion is unreasoned and unclear.

9.   I consider that Ms Ahmad was correct not to oppose this appeal and  for
    the above reasons I set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Judge.  I direct that the appeal will proceed to a  hearing  afresh  in
    the First-tier.


Notice of Decision

The determination of the First Tier Tribunal is set aside.

Direction

The appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh in the First-tier.


Signed                              Date: 18 March 2018

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

