

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/03966/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 September 2019                    |On 1 October 2019                  |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  XIN HUANG
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Chung,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The SSHD's reasons for refusing the appellant's claims are set out in a
    letter dated 8 April 2019.

 2. FtT Judge Kempton dismissed the appellant's appeal for reasons given in
    her decision promulgated on 17 June 2019.

 3. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  set  out  in  the
    attachment to her application dated 1 July 2019.

 4. Mr Devlin relied upon  the  grounds,  which  are  quite  detailed.   He
    submitted further to the last point in the grounds, regarding section 8
    of the 2004 Act, that the FtT at [17] fell into errors  illustrated  by
    AJ [2011] CSIH 49 at [8 - 9]: compartmentalising the issue, and  taking
    it as seriously damaging to credibility,  which  was  not  mandated  by
    section 8.

 5. Mr Govan replied to the grounds and submissions as follows:

      i) The expression "very convenient" at [21] was not ideal, but it  was
         a shorthand which had to be read in context of discrepancies  found
         and all the reasons given at [19 - 25].

     ii) Read as a whole, the decision showed that reasons  had  been  given
         and material considerations had been taken into account.

    iii) It was plain that the judge understood the appellant's account  was
         that she left through the airport before a warrant was issued,  and
         with the help of snakeheads.

     iv) There was nothing wrong with observing the obvious  convenience  to
         her account of not being able to produce either her old or her  new
         passport, or with drawing an adverse  inference,  when  there  were
         other reasons to find the account incoherent.

      v) The FtT's main section 8 point was not only about not  claiming  in
         Zambia, but about not claiming for nine months in the UK, which was
         well founded.

     vi) It might have been better if the judge had  not  taken  this  point
         first and under a separate heading, but that was a matter of  style
         rather than substance.

    vii) No error was disclosed which would merit justify setting aside  the
         decision.

 6. Mr Devlin made these points in reply:

      i) The UT's jurisdiction concerned error on points of law, rather than
         the underlying merits of the case.

     ii) While it was accepted that the UT also had to consider  materiality
         of error and to look at a decision in the round, this  was  a  case
         where discrete errors required the decision to be set  aside.   The
         correct approach could be taken firstly from R  v  Lewisham  London
         Borough Council, ex parte Shell UK Ltd [1988] 1 All ER 938:
           ... I start with a short passage from the  judgment  of  May  LJ
           in R v Broadcasting Complaints Commission, ex p Owen [1985]  2
           All ER 522 at 533, [1985] QB 1153 at 1177 where he said:
           "Where the reasons given by a statutory body for taking  or  not
           taking a particular course of  action  are  not  mixed  and  can
           clearly be disentangled, but where the court is quite  satisfied
           that even though one reason may be bad in law, nevertheless  the
           statutory body would have reached precisely the same decision on
           the other valid reasons, then this court will not  interfere  by
           way of judicial review. In such a case, looked at  realistically
           and with justice, such a decision of such a body ought not to be
           disturbed".
           But where the two reasons or purposes cannot be disentangled and
           one of them is bad or where, even though the reasons or purposes
           can be disentangled, the  bad  reason  or  purpose  demonstrably
           exerted a substantial influence on  the  relevant  decision  the
           court can interfere to quash the decision....

    iii) Hamden v SSHD [2006] CSIH  57  at  [15]  is  authority  to  similar
         effect:

           We are unable to agree with the Tribunal that the  Adjudicator's
           erroneous conclusion on the school certificate was incapable  of
           "having affected  his  general  conclusion  in  the  case".  The
           inference to be drawn from the certificate was at the  forefront
           of the Adjudicator's reasoning in the critical paragraph  29  of
           his determination. Where a  factor  such  as  this  has  plainly
           coloured the approach of an adjudicator on the credibility of an
           appellant to a material degree, it  is  highly  likely  to  have
           played a significant part in his attachment of  significance  to
           other potential inconsistencies in expression or fact arising at
           other points in the evidence. There is no reason to suppose that
           this has not happened here where the Adjudicator  focuses  first
           on the inference from the existence of  the  school  certificate
           but uses the inconsistency in the descriptions of his  assistant
           in the escape as a  subsequent  make-weight  rather  than  as  a
           central pillar in his thinking on credibility.

     iv) The use  of  the  term  "convenient"  was  not  shorthand,  but  an
         indication of absence of reasoning.

      v) The criticism did not go to  the  structure  and  headings  of  the
         decision, but to that absence of reasoning.

     vi) The errors could not be disentangled from  other  reasoning.   They
         exerted a substantial influence, or coloured the  judge's  approach
         to a material degree.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. I see the following explanations in the decision  for  finding  against
    the appellant on credibility (not being a comprehensive list):

      i) No clear reason why the appellant  would  speak  out  on  Taiwanese
         independence, rather than her Taiwanese friends;

     ii) Impression given in oral evidence of a person quite "savvy", not of
         limited education as claimed;

    iii) Appellant said in oral evidence that  she  moved  in  with  friends
         after being warned, but that was not in her statement;

     iv) Appellant's response to that point struck the judge as  very  weak,
         and thought up on the spur of the moment;

      v) Self-contradiction whether several  family  members  overheard  the
         police, or only her father;

     vi) Deliberate vagueness when caught out on this detail;

    vii) "Very convenient" evidence to explain not having asked for  a  copy
         arrest warrant;

   viii) Leaving the country on her own passport without incident;

     ix) Husband's return to collect son, without  incident,  after  warrant
         issued (although warrant was in her name only);

      x) Leaving China for Zambia on a false work  permit,  not  for  asylum
         purposes but for other reasons, including the chance to seek a visa
         for the UK;

     xi) No claim on arrival in the UK;

    xii) Claim only after breakdown of marriage;

   xiii) Claimed loss of passport, and of noticing this only  in  2017,  not
         credible and "more than a coincidence";

    xiv) Non-production of passports more likely to be in order  to  conceal
         information;

     xv) No evidence of ever speaking in public,  and  certainly  not  to  a
         crowd of 150 - 200 persons on a sensitive issue;  alleged  activity
         "completely out of the blue".

 9. In most of those reasons, no error has been suggested.

10. The correct approach to whether errors require  setting  aside  is  not
    contentious, and is exemplified by the  two  authorities  to  which  Mr
    Devlin referred.  However, in my view the grounds isolate reasons given
    in particular paragraphs, and do not represent the decision fairly  and
    as a whole.  The reasons extracted by the first ground  from  [21]  are
    not the whole story.  The rejection of the claimed  loss  of  passports
    has also to be put in context.

11. The FtT had the advantage of  hearing  the  oral  evidence,  which  was
    obviously  a major factor.   It  is  not  suggested  that  the  Judge's
    observations  are  inaccurate  or  that  she  drew  any   unjustifiable
    conclusions.

12. It is unfortunate, and not good form, to take section 8 first and under
    its  own  heading.   The  matter  is  part  of,  not   separate   from,
    "credibility findings and  reasons".   However,  as  Mr  Devlin  fairly
    accepted, those are points of style rather than substance.

13. The appellant is correct in pointing out that Zambia  is  not  a  "safe
    country" as defined in statute (although it is  party  to  the  Refugee
    Convention, and host to many thousands of refugees).

14. The judge's view of the appellant's travel and immigration history went
    well beyond not claiming in Zambia.  It was based to a large extent  on
    delay in the  UK.   The  extent  of  the  damage  such  delay  does  to
    credibility was a matter for a judge, according to the circumstances of
    the case before her.

15. The appellant's evidence did not satisfy the judge that her account was
    even reasonably likely to be true.  The judge's reasons have been shown
    to include infelicities and minor slips, but no serious  flaw,  and  no
    error which bears significantly on the overall outcome.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      30 September 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




