
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03605/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15th December 2017                 |On 6th February 2018                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     o m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iran born on [ ] 1986.   He  entered
    the UK illegally on 5th October 2016 and applied  for  asylum  on  that
    date.  That application was refused on 29th March 2017 for the  reasons
    given in an Asylum Decision of that date.  The Appellant  appealed  and
    his appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boylan-Kemp  (the
    Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 10th May 2017.  She decided to  dismiss
    the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds
    for the reasons given in  her  Decision  dated  16th  June  2017.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision and  on  27th  September
    2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  a  material
    error on a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Iran  as  someone  who
    had been involved with the KDPI.  The Appellant's father had been  shot
    by the authorities when caught smuggling cattle across the border  with
    Peshmergas.   The  Appellant  had  also  smuggled  livestock,  and   in
    September 2016 he and a colleague had helped two injured Peshmergas  to
    cross the border.  They had been fired upon by the Iranian  authorities
    who had captured his colleague called Q.  Q had given  the  Appellant's
    name  to  the  Iranian  authorities  who  had  then  searched  for  the
    Appellant.

 4. The Judge dismissed  the  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  appeal
    because she found the Appellant's account  of  events  in  Iran  to  be
    wholly lacking in credibility.  The Judge's decision in respect of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights  has  not  been  challenged  in  this
    appeal.

 5. At the hearing, Ms Rutherford referred to the  grounds  of  application
    and argued  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in  respect  of  her
    credibility finding.  The Judge  had  also  erred  by  not  making  any
    finding as to whether the Appellant's father was a member of  the  KDPI
    which in itself would put the Appellant at risk on return.

 6. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response  and  submitted
    that there was no such error of law.  The Judge had considered all  the
    evidence  in  the  round  and  had  given  adequate  reasons  for   her
    credibility finding.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  I agree with the submission of Mrs  Aboni  that  the
    Judge considered all of the evidence in the round and  gave  a  careful
    analysis of it between paragraphs 13 and 18 of the Decision.  The Judge
    identified discrepancies, inconsistencies, and implausibilities in  the
    evidence of the Appellant.  The Judge came to a conclusion  as  to  the
    Appellant's credibility open to her on  the  evidence  before  her  and
    which she fully explained.

 8. It is true that the Judge did not make a specific finding as to whether
    the Appellant's father was a member  of  the  KDPI.   However,  such  a
    specific finding is not necessary as it was a claim  of  the  Appellant
    that is father was a member of the KDPI and as the Judge stated in  the
    Decision, she did not find any part of the Appellant's  account  to  be
    credible.

 9. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the same reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 2nd February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton



