
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03824/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 March 2020                     |On 24 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     PS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, counsel instructed by Danielle Cohen
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

 1. Such a direction was made previously, and is reiterated below, as  this
    is a protection matter and also because  the  appellant  is  vulnerable
    owing to his mental health issues.


Introduction

 2. This is the remaking of an appeal against the decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 8 April 2019, refusing the  appellant's  protection  and
    human rights claim.

 3. In a decision dated 8 October 2019, I found material errors of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  24  June  2019,
    which dismissed the appeal on all  grounds.  While  I  set  aside  that
    decision, the findings of the First-tier Tribunal were  preserved  with
    the exception of the conclusions drawn regarding  the  availability  of
    internal relocation and whether there were very  significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's integration in India.

Background

 4. The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  4  March  2011  as  a
    dependent partner of his former wife. He remained in the  UK  when  she
    returned to India and, ultimately, applied for asylum  on  30  November
    2015. It is the refusal of that claim  that  is  the  subject  of  this
    appeal. The appellant's protection claim is based on  a  fear  that  he
    would be killed by his family because he is a gay man. In addition,  he
    applied for leave to remain owing  to  a  relationship  with  his  male
    partner.

 5. The respondent refused that application by way  of  a  letter  dated  8
    April 2019. The credibility of the appellant's account of being  a  gay
    man was challenged for reasons set out in  the  decision  letter.   The
    respondent did not accept that the appellant's  relationship  with  his
    partner (RS) was genuine and subsisting. In considering  whether  there
    were any exceptional circumstances the respondent noted the appellant's
    mental health issues but concluded that his removal did not  reach  the
    high threshold of severity to breach Article 3 on this basis.

The preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At [35-47] of the decision and reasons the previous judge accepted  the
    following aspects of the appellant's claim:

      i. The appellant was from  a  village  in  India  (which  I  will  not
         identify);

     ii. he was sexually abused by a relative from his teenage  years  until
         his early   twenties and did not  reveal  this  to  anyone  in  his
         family until 2016;

    iii. he had a discreet same sex relationship with a  work  colleague  in
         India;

     iv. he had diagnoses of depression and suicidal intent in  2017  linked
         to his sexual abuse and being  pressured  into  marriage  with  his
         former wife;

      v. he had engaged in same-sex sexual relationships in the UK including
         when he was still married to his former wife;

     vi. he had openly gay relationships in the UK including his present one
         with RS, which had become a committed relationship marked by  full-
         time cohabitation since December 2018;

    vii. his sister in Canada and his mother (who spends extended periods of
         time in Australia with the appellant's brother) are  aware  of  his
         sexuality;

   viii. his wider family has instigated the death of a female relative  who
         was perceived to have dishonoured the family and the appellant  had
         a genuine fear of being harmed and possibly killed by  his  brother
         or male relatives were they to discover his sexuality;

     ix. The appellant would be subjected to violence amounting  to  serious
         harm in his home area from his brother or  male  relatives  if  his
         sexuality became known to them;

      x. A material reason for the appellant living discreetly in  his  home
         area in the past was owing to a fear of persecution.

The hearing

 7. The hearing proceeded by way of submissions only, a  detailed  note  of
    which appears in my note of the hearing and which I  briefly  summarise
    here. I have taken those submissions and all the  documentary  evidence
    before me in reaching my decision,  including  where  not  specifically
    mentioned.  The parties  were  in  agreement  that  the  appellant  had
    established that he had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Refugee Convention reason in  his  home  area,  that  he  had  produced
    evidence regarding his mental health and that he was in an  interracial
    same-sex  relationship.  The  issues  of  country  background  were  in
    contention as regards internal relocation and Article 8, in respect  of
    276ADE(1)(vi).

 8. Mr Fripp clarified that the  partner  Rules  in  Appendix  FM  did  not
    currently form part of the appellant's case because the couple had  not
    been cohabiting for two years. Otherwise, he relied upon  his  skeleton
    argument, submitting, for the same reasons, that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the appellant to relocate in India and that there  were  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration. Those reasons included  the
    appellant's mental state, his relationship and the general position for
    gay men as set out in MD (same-sex orientated  males:  risk)  India  CG
    [2014] UKUT 00065 (IAC), Dr Holden's expert reports and the  background
    material.

 9. Mr Lindsay made the following points. The Country Guidance case  of  MD
    remained good law. He  also  relied  upon  the  CPIT  responses  of  22
    November 2019 and 20 February 2020 to Dr Livia Holden's reports  of  21
    May 2019 and 9 December 2019. He accepted that there was a risk of some
    low-level  discrimination,  albeit  insufficient   to   make   internal
    relocation unreasonable. There was a large and robust  LGBTI  community
    in India, support from NGOs and in MD it was  found  that  it  was,  in
    general, reasonable for a gay  man  to  relocate.  Dr  Holden's  report
    assumed that the  appellant  would  be  returning  to  India  with  his
    partner, whereas RS had stated that he had no intention  of  uprooting.
    Mr Lindsay argued that even if the appellant returned with his partner,
    it would not be unduly harsh for him to relocate with his partner to  a
    major city. In those circumstances, RS would be a  source  of  support.
    There was treatment for mental health issues  available  in  India  and
    therefore this was not a significant and weighty factor.

10. Mr Lindsay argued that the Holden reports conflated the experiences  of
    all LGBT people with those of gay men and that the excerpts  relied  on
    from the Amnesty International report did not refer to gay men at  all.
    He contended that the evidence of violence based on sexual  orientation
    was insufficient, in a country as large as India, to show a substantial
    risk or that relocation would be unduly harsh. As for the case advanced
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  Mr  Lindsay  made  reference  to  Kamara
    [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813  but  otherwise  adopted  and  relied  upon  his
    submissions made on the first  head  of  appeal.  The  appellant  would
    properly be able to reintegrate either alone or with  his  partner.  He
    asked me to uphold the decision under appeal.

Discussion

11. The burden is on the appellant to show there are substantial grounds to
    believe he meets the requirements of  the  Protection  Regulations  and
    that his return to India will cause the UK to be in breach of the  1950
    Convention.

12. In considering whether the appellant has demonstrated that he ought not
    to be expected to relocate away from his home area  in  the  Punjab,  I
    have been guided by the relevant case  law  including  Robinson  [1997]
    EWCA Civ 3090; Januzi [2005] UKHL 5 and AH [2007] UKHL 49. The passages
    from the latter judgment are particularly instructive:

         "20. We are all agreed that the correct approach to the question of
             internal relocation under the Refugee Convention is that set
             out so clearly by my noble and learned friend, Lord Bingham of
             Cornhill, in Januzi and others v Secretary of State for the
             Home Department [2006] UKHL 5, [2006] 2 AC 426, at para 21:

                  "The decision-maker, taking account of all relevant
                  circumstances pertaining to the claimant and his country
                  of origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to expect
                  the claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly
                  harsh to expect him to do so."

             As the UNHCR put it in their very helpful intervention in this
             case,

                  " . . . the correct approach when considering the
                  reasonableness of IRA [internal relocation alternative] is
                  to assess all the circumstances of the individual's case
                  holistically and with specific reference to the
                  individual's personal circumstances (including past
                  persecution or fear thereof, psychological and health
                  condition, family and social situation, and survival
                  capacities). This assessment is to be made in the context
                  of the conditions in the place of relocation (including
                  basic human rights, security conditions, socio-economic
                  conditions, accommodation, access to health care
                  facilities), in order to determine the impact on that
                  individual of settling in the proposed place of relocation
                  and whether the individual could live a relatively normal
                  life without undue hardship."

              I do not understand there to be any difference between this
              approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5 of
              his opinion. Very little, apart from the conditions in the
              country to which the claimant has fled, is ruled out.

         21   We are also all agreed that the test for internal relocation
             under the Refugee Convention is not to be equated either with
             a "well-founded fear of persecution" under the Convention or
             with a "real risk of ill-treatment" contrary to article 3 of
             the European Convention on Human Rights ..."

13. I am also guided by the relevant findings in MD,  as  set  out  in  the
    headnote:

         "e.  It would not, in general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for
             an open same-sex oriented male (or a person who  is  perceived
             to be such), who is able to demonstrate a  real  risk  in  his
             home area because of his particular circumstances, to relocate
             internally to a major city within India.

         f.   India has a large, robust and accessible  LGBTI  activist  and
             support network, mainly to be found in the large cities."

14. I place a moderate degree of weight to the reports  of  Dr  Holden  and
    accept that she is qualified to offer her opinion on the  situation  in
    India likely to face the appellant. I  have  also  attached  weight  to
    comments made on behalf of the respondent, in the CPIT documents, which
    make some valid points regarding Dr Holden's reports.

15. The appellant relies upon two reports, dated 13 February  2017  and  21
    November 2019 from Dr J Hajioff a consultant psychiatrist. There was no
    challenge on behalf of the Secretary of State to Dr Hajioff's expertise
    nor to his opinion and  recommendations.  Having  carefully  considered
    this report as well as the experience of  the  author,  I  can  see  no
    reason to reject its content and  I  attach  a  significant  degree  of
    weight to it because Dr Hajioff was cautious in his  approach  and  had
    access to a range of documents including the decision  under  challenge
    and the appellant's medical records. In summary, when  Dr  Hajioff  saw
    the appellant in 2017, this  followed  a  serious  attempt  at  suicide
    whereby the appellant took an overdose and cut his wrists with a  sharp
    blade  following  which  he  was  admitted,  unconscious,  to  A&E  and
    thereafter to a psychiatric unit, where he was  kept  for  a  week.  Dr
    Hajioff diagnosed the appellant with  a  depressive  illness  in  2017,
    noting that he had lost weight, was withdrawn  and  failing  to  sleep.
    Following the recent examination, Dr Hajioff considered the appellant's
    mental state had improved and he was not depressed but he  was  of  the
    opinion that the appellant continued to suffer from bouts of  low  mood
    and anxiety. Dr Hajioff noted that the appellant had begun  biting  his
    nails and slept for only a few hours a night, albeit with less frequent
    nightmares. Dr Hajioff put the improvements in the  appellant's  mental
    state  down  to  firstly,  the  appellant  having  developed  a  stable
    relationship with RS since he last saw him and secondly,  being  in  an
    environment more accepting of his sexuality. Nonetheless,  the  medical
    view was that the appellant was still in a "vulnerable state" and  that
    there was a "significant probability that there will be a deterioration
    in his mood with a recurrence of depression" should he  be  removed  to
    India. In particular, Dr Hajioff described the appellant  as  a  gentle
    unassertive man who had told the doctor of the "intolerable  pressures"
    which will be put on him in India to marry again. Dr Hajioff  concluded
    his report  by  giving  his  opinion  that  the  likely  recurrence  of
    depression would be accompanied by a "significant risk of suicide."

16. The  appellant's  personal  history,  as  accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge is relevant to the consideration of the availability  of
    internal relocation. The appellant is a survivor of  serious  childhood
    sexual abuse by a relative which continued for a number  of  years.  He
    was also forced into a marriage to a woman which ended  in  divorce  in
    around 2012 when she returned  to  India  without  the  appellant.  The
    appellant  met  RS  in  late  2016,  they  have  been  in  a  committed
    relationship for over three years and have been cohabiting since  2018.
    It was common ground that RS  would  not  accompany  the  appellant  to
    India. In his witness statement,  RS,  who  is  aged  in  his  sixties,
    explains that he wishes to remain in the UK in order  to  maintain  his
    very close relationship to  his  son  and  grandchildren  and  continue
    earning a living. He does not  wish  to  abandon  his  charitable  work
    providing  support  for  gay  men,  his  political  interests  and  his
    important role in the Liberal Jewish synagogue community. I accept that
    the unwillingness of RS to uproot does not mean that  the  relationship
    with the appellant would not continue if the appellant had to return to
    India. Nonetheless, while RS could visit India, he would not  be  in  a
    position to offer the extent of the support  he  currently  offers  the
    appellant (as set out in credible detail in his statement) or  help  to
    prevent the significant risk of suicide mentioned  in  the  psychiatric
    report. Furthermore, while during any visits, RS could be a  source  of
    support, I accept that their relationship is reasonably likely to be  a
    source of danger in India owing to the fact  that  it  is  a  same-sex,
    racially mixed relationship. On the latter point, I place weight on the
    first report of Dr Horden which states at [55]:

         "the fact that the (appellant's) partner is British  is  likely  to
         elicit unwanted attention to the couple if they  will  relocate  to
         India. In my opinion, it is almost certain that they  will  attract
         the curiosity of their neighbourhood and, if the  nature  of  their
         relationship is found out, the mixed-race element of the couple  is
         likely to aggravate the widespread reactions of repulsion, derision
         and violence described by this report."

17. The test in terms of relocation is  whether,  considering  all  factors
    holistically, the appellant would be able  to  establish  a  relatively
    normal life in India, without facing undue hardship. At paragraph 20 of
    his witness statement, the  appellant  explains  that  he  cannot  "see
    himself as being gay in  (his)  village  or  elsewhere  in  India."  At
    paragraph 28 of the same statement, the  appellant  explains  that  has
    told only one friend in India of his sexuality and also  states  "I  do
    not feel that I could tell anyone else in India or that  I  could  live
    openly as a gay man  there."  He  describes  at  paragraph  16  of  his
    statement that he remains under pressure from his family to marry and I
    find that pressure is likely to continue, remotely,  if  the  appellant
    was in India away from his home area and that this would put him  under
    increased mental  pressure.  The  appellant  previously  concealed  his
    sexuality in order to avoid persecution in his home  area  however,  he
    ought not to be expected to do so in a place of relocation, in view  of
    HJ & HT [2010] UKSC 31. I do not depart from the conclusions of MD,  in
    headnote e. as to the general position for openly gay men, in that even
    if there was found to be a real risk of persecution in a home area,  it
    was not unreasonable or unduly harsh to relocate to a major  city.  The
    fact is that the appellant genuinely believes that he will be unable to
    live openly as  a  gay  man  owing  to  his  previous  experiences  and
    knowledge of life in his village  and  this  mindset  will  effectively
    prevent him from being open about his sexuality, including  being  open
    about his relationship with his partner.

18. The appellant's subjective fear of revealing his sexual identity is not
    entirely without foundation, indeed the USSD report 2018 on India  says
    the following

         "Acts of Violence, Discrimination, and Other Abuses Based on Sexual
         Orientation and Gender Identity

         On September 6, the Supreme Court decriminalized same-sex relations
         in a unanimous verdict.  Activists welcomed the verdict but stated
         it was too early to determine how the verdict would translate into
         social acceptance, including safe and equal opportunities at
         workspaces and educational institutions.

         Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI)persons
         faced physical attacks, rape, and blackmail. LGBTI groups reported
         they faced widespread societal discrimination and violence,
         particularly in rural areas. Activists reported that transgender
         persons continued to face difficulty obtaining medical treatment.
         Some police committed crimes against LGBTI persons and used the
         threat of arrest to coerce victims not to report the incidents.
         With the aid of NGOs, several states offered education and
         sensitivity training to police."

19. While MD points to the large, robust LGBT community and  the  existence
    of support groups, the evidence at [170] of MD points to  these  groups
    being of an informal  nature  and  there  is  no  indication  that  the
    appellant could be reassured that they could protect him  from  mob  or
    police violence were he able to attempt to live a  normal  life  as  an
    openly gay man in India, accompanied at times by his partner. While the
    respondent argues that the appellant could  relocate  to  a  city,  the
    background reports do not  suggest  that  societal  discrimination  and
    violence is limited to rural locations.  Similarly,  the  appellant  is
    unlikely to be encouraged to be open  about  his  sexuality  given  the
    reports regarding the frequency of attacks on other minorities owing to
    caste, tribe, religion or gender-based crimes. The above-mentioned USSD
    reports as to the likelihood that a victim of mob violence would obtain
    justice as follows:

         "A lack of accountability for misconduct persisted at all levels of
         government, contributing to widespread impunity. Investigations and
         prosecutions of individual cases took place, but lax enforcement, a
         shortage of trained police officers, and an overburdened and under-
         resourced court system contributed to a small number of
         convictions."

20. The respondent's CPIT refers to evidence that there are over 45 million
    gay people in India and the relatively low level of reported  incidents
    of violence. This calculation assumes that they are all openly gay  and
    that every incident is recorded. Dr Horden refers to the  exclusion  of
    international  investigators  from  India,  including  the  UN  Special
    Rapporteur and  I  accept  that  it  is  unlikely  that  incidents  are
    accurately counted.

21. There are aspects of Dr Horden's report, based on reports in the public
    domain as well as her knowledge of the situation  in  India  which  put
    into perspective the environment likely to greet  the  appellant.   Her
    report references a nuanced consideration of  the  position  and  fully
    acknowledges the decriminalisation of consensual gay sex. At  the  same
    time,  she  refers  to   quotes   from   mainstream   politicians   and
    organisations expressing negative views  regarding  the  Supreme  Court
    ruling, the silence of Prime Minister Modi regarding  that  ruling  and
    that  societal   attitudes   to   homosexuality   have   not   changed,
    notwithstanding the efforts of NGOs.    Dr Horden's  view  is  that  an
    interracial gay couple is likely to aggravate the  situation  owing  to
    the perception that homosexuality is an "import from the West," a  view
    confirmed by the representatives of religious parties.

22. Dr Horden states that wealthy LGBTQ people could  avoid  discrimination
    and mob attacks  by  deploying  wealth  such  as  by  living  in  gated
    communities. There was no  evidence  before  me  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant and RS have that level of financial resources.  In  addition,
    the appellant cannot  access  family  support  owing  to  the  risk  of
    persecution as well as the pressure to remarry  and  he  has  just  one
    close friend in India who is located in his village.

23. Assessing the appellant's personal circumstances in the context of  the
    conditions in India for a gay man in an interracial relationship, I  am
    satisfied that, overall,  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate within India. In summary, his removal  would  put
    him in a position in which  he  would  be  in  fear  of  being  harmed,
    regardless of whether there is a real risk of persecution and owing  to
    that fear he would conceal his sexual identity  and  thus  not  live  a
    normal life. He continues to suffer  from  mental  health  difficulties
    which I accept will be exacerbated  by  his  removal  and  lead  to  an
    increased risk of self-harm or suicide. The deterioration in his mental
    state is likely to reduce his capacity for successfully relocating  and
    negotiating  the  well-evidenced  difficulties  for  LGBT   people   in
    obtaining accommodation and employment.  The  availability  of  medical
    care in India is far from a complete answer to any deterioration in the
    appellant's state because it is not medical treatment in the  UK  which
    brought about an improvement in his symptoms but the loving support  of
    a partner, a feeling of being accepted in the UK and for the first time
    in his life, the ability to live  as  an  openly  gay  man.  Given  his
    partner's understandable reluctance to live in India  and  that  he  is
    still working, the appellant is unlikely to  be  supported  by  him  in
    practical terms for the majority of the  time  following  his  proposed
    removal to India. In summary,  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate in these circumstances.

24. As I have allowed the appeal on asylum grounds, there is no  real  need
    to address Article 8, however, I accept that the reasons provided above
    are also relevant to whether there are very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration as required by paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules. I find
    that the appellant meets the requirements of the Rules and  the  appeal
    is also allowed on this basis.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                                     Date   17   March
2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



