
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03906/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 10 December 2019                 |On: 18 December 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  Mhadi [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, instructed by Tann Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan born on 15 May 1994. He  has  been
      given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge NMK Lawrence dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   2. The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  24  September  2015,
      having left Sudan in June or August 2015 and travelled through  Libya,
      Italy and France. He claimed asylum on 24 September 2015 and his claim
      was refused on 9 April 2019.

   3. The appellant's asylum claim was made on the basis that he feared  the
      Janjaweed and the Sudanese  government  as  he  was  from  a  non-Arab
      Darfuri tribe, the Tama tribe. He claimed that he was from  Naroma  in
      Darfur. In  September  2014  he  was  detained  by  the  Janjaweed  on
      suspicion of being involved with the rebels and was kept in the forest
      for three months until he managed to untie himself and escape. He fled
      to Khartoum and worked there for market stall  owners  and  then  left
      after six months.

   4. In  the  decision  refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  the  respondent
      accepted the appellant's nationality and ethnicity but did not  accept
      his account of his detention by the Janjaweed. The respondent did  not
      accept that the appellant was at risk in Khartoum and considered  that
      his removal would not breach his human rights.

   5. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  on
      27 June 2019  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  NMK  Lawrence.  The
      appellant's representative raised issues about interpretation, both at
      the interview and at the hearing, submitting that  the  appellant  had
      not been provided  with  a  Tama  interpreter  as  requested  and  had
      struggled with  the  Arabic  interpreter  provided.  The  judge  noted
      discrepancies in the appellant's evidence and did not accept that they
      were due to interpreter problems at the interview, nor that there were
      any such problems at the hearing before  him.  He  did  not  find  the
      appellant's account to be credible and did not  accept  his  claim  to
      have been detained by the Janjaweed. The  judge  considered  that  the
      appellant was not at risk in Khartoum  on  the  basis  of  being  non-
      Darfuri and did not consider  that  the  situation  in  Sudan  engaged
      Article 15(c) of the Directive. He accordingly dismissed the appeal on
      all grounds.

   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the  grounds  that  there
      had been procedural unfairness in the judge  failing  to  adjourn  the
      proceedings when he became aware that the interpreter was not  a  Tama
      interpreter and when the appellant made it clear that his  Arabic  was
      poor;  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider   the   appellant's
      representations about problems with the interpreter at the  interview;
      that the judge had failed appropriately to consider the country expert
      report; and that the judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
      departing from  the  country  guidance  in  AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris  -
      relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris)  Sudan  (CG)
      [2015] UKUT 10.

   7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on all  grounds
      and, in response, the respondent filed a Rule 24 opposing the appeal.

   8. At the hearing, Mr Whitwell clarified that the Rule 24 only  addressed
      the first ground since the full grounds  were  not  available  to  the
      respondent at the time. He maintained the challenge to all the grounds
      with the exception of the last ground which he did not oppose.

   9. As Mr Whitwell quite properly observed, the judge's comment at the end
      of page 5 of his decision, that "the appellant does not claim being  a
      non-Arab African is sufficient to engage protection  issues"  was  not
      consistent with the appellant's skeleton argument  at  [17]  and  [50]
      where such a claim was clearly made. In light of  such  a  claim,  the
      judge failed to provide any detailed reasons for  departing  from  the
      country guidance in AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris  -  relocation)  Sudan  CG
      [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10, in which
      it was held that "All non-Arab Darfuris are at risk of persecution  in
      Darfur and cannot reasonably be  expected  to  relocate  elsewhere  in
      Sudan." Mr Whitwell referred to the recent guidance in AAR & AA  (Non-
      Arab Darfuris - return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 282 where it was found  that
      "there is insufficient evidence currently available to show  that  the
      guidance given in AA (non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG  [2009]
      UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10  (IAC)  requires
      revision. Those cases should still be followed." He also observed that
      the latest Home Office CPIN  of  November  2019  instructed  decision-
      makers to follow that guidance.

  10. In the circumstances Mr Whitwell accepted that  the  judge's  decision
      had to be set aside and re-made by allowing the appeal in light of the
      concession, in the respondent's reasons for refusal letter of 9  April
      2019, that  the  appellant  was  a  non-Arab  Darfuri.  Mr  Whitwell's
      concession was entirely appropriate in the circumstances.

DECISION

  11. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside and is
      re-made by allowing the appellant's appeal on  asylum  and  Article  3
      human rights grounds, on the basis that he is at  risk  on  return  to
      Sudan as a non-Arab Darfuri.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  10 December
2019
