
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03026/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 25 August 2021                    |
|On 29 July 2021                      |                                     |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|Written Submissions on 2 August 2021 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     MK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Gunn instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who was born on 18 September
    1963.  She arrived in the United Kingdom in June  2006  as  a  visitor.
    After  her  six  months'  leave  expired,  the  appellant   overstayed.
    Thereafter she made a number of applications between 25 August 2012 and
    September  2016  for  leave  to  remain  based,  inter  alia,  upon   a
    relationship  in  the  UK  and  subsequently  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.  In relation to a  rejected  human
    rights claim on 11 December 2013, the appellant unsuccessfully appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fox).  Her appeal was dismissed on 29
    July 2014 and she was subsequently refused permission to appeal by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal.

 3. Her final claim was made on 21 September 2016 and  26  September  2016.
    The appellant's claim was that she had been subject to  Female  Genital
    Mutilation ("FGM") in or about 1981.  She and her family  were  members
    of the Bondo Society, an all-female secret society that  practises  FGM
    in Sierra Leone.  The appellant's aunt was a Sowei, a local  leader  of
    the Bondo Society.  The appellant did not wish to take over her  aunt's
    role and replace her as a Sowei.  She claimed that after  she  came  to
    the UK, her estranged husband, whom she had discovered  had  bigamously
    married another woman in Sierra Leone, had informed her aunt  that  she
    (the appellant) had divulged the secrets of the Bondo Society in the UK
    and that, as a result, she was at risk on return,  in  particular  from
    her aunt and other family members.

 4. Her claim was, initially, refused on 8  September  2017  and  certified
    without a right of appeal.  However, that decision was withdrawn  on  5
    October 2017.

 5. On 9 March 2019, the Secretary of State  reconsidered  the  appellant's
    application for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of  the
    ECHR.  In a decision on that date, the Secretary of State again refused
    each of the appellant's claims.  The Secretary of  State  rejected  the
    appellant's claim to be at risk on return  to  Sierra  Leone  from  her
    family and members of the Bondo Society.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 19 September 2019, Judge Lever dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
    all grounds.  The appellant was granted permission  to  appeal  against
    that decision and, in a decision  sent  on  6  March  2020,  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Grubb) concluded that Judge Lever had  erred  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal and remitted  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo rehearing.

 7. That remitted  hearing  took  place  before  Judge  Rhys-Davies  on  15
    December 2020.  In a decision sent on  8  February  2020,  Judge  Rhys-
    Davies dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The judge made
    an adverse credibility finding and did not accept  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk on return to Sierra Leone, as she  claimed,  from  her
    family or members of the Bondo Society.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal  against  Judge  Rhys-Davies'
    decision.  Initially, permission to appeal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Beach) on 16  March  2020.   However,  on  renewed
    application for permission to the Upper Tribunal, UTJ Keki? granted the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 9. The respondent did not file a rule 24 response.

10. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice
    Centre on 29 July 2021.  I was  based  in  court  while  Ms  Gunn,  who
    represented the appellant, and Mr Avery, who represented the  Secretary
    of State, joined the hearing remotely by Microsoft Teams.

11. At the hearing, I directed that the parties  should,  if  they  wished,
    make written submissions on ground 1 and, in particular, in respect  of
    the decision of  the  Inner  House  of  the  Court  of  Session  in  HA
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2010] CSIH 28.  Ms Gunn filed written submissions
    on 2 August 2021.  Mr Avery did not file any submissions in response.

12. There is one final preliminary matter.  At the outset of the hearing, I
    drew to the representatives' attention  that  I  have  been  previously
    involved in the appellant's appeal as the Upper Tribunal Judge who  had
    remitted the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  having  identified  an
    error of law in the decision  of  Judge  Lever.   Both  representatives
    indicated that they were content that I should  continue  to  hear  the
    appeal.

The Judge's Decision

13. In relation to the appellant's asylum claim, Judge Rhys-Davies made  an
    adverse credibility finding.  Although  the  appellant  relied  upon  a
    supportive expert report from Ms Conteh regarding the  plausibility  of
    the appellant's account and medical report by  Dr  Battersby  that  the
    appellant had symptoms of PTSD, the  judge  relied  upon  a  number  of
    inconsistencies between the appellant's evidence and her evidence at an
    earlier  appeal  hearing  in  2014  before  Judge  Fox  when  she   had
    unsuccessfully appealed a refusal to grant her leave under Art 8 of the
    ECHR.  The judge relied upon a number of  matters  disclosed  in  Judge
    Fox's determination and also in a witness statement from the  appellant
    which had been part of those proceedings.  Judge Rhys-Davies  concluded
    that the inconsistencies with Judge  Fox's  decision  "causes  material
    damage to the appellant's credibility" (para 81) and  the  omission  to
    mention in a witness statement in those earlier proceedings that  three
    of her children had died and she had suffered grief as a result "causes
    significant damage to the appellant's account" (see para 85).

14. In the result, having discounted both the report of Ms  Conteh  and  Dr
    Battersby, not  least  because  neither  had  a  copy  of  Judge  Fox's
    decision, Judge Rhys-Davies did not accept the appellant's  account  to
    be credible and dismissed  her  international  protection  claim.   The
    judge also went on to dismiss her appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Grounds of Appeal

15. The appellant  relies  upon  four  grounds  of  appeal  which  Ms  Gunn
    developed in her oral submissions and, in relation to ground 1, in  her
    written submissions after the hearing of the appeal on 2 August 2021.

16. Ground 1 contends that the proceedings before  Judge  Rhys-Davies  were
    procedurally unfair.  It  is  contended  that  the  judge  relied  upon
    inconsistencies  between  the  appellant's  evidence  in  Judge   Fox's
    decision in 2014 and in her evidence in this appeal without giving  the
    appellant an opportunity to deal with those inconsistencies.   Further,
    the judge relied upon an inconsistency (an omission) in the appellant's
    evidence in her witness statement before Judge Fox and in her  evidence
    in this appeal.  It is contended that none of these matters were  drawn
    to the attention of the appellant's representatives.  Ms Gunn relied on
    the fact that the determination of Judge Fox had only been provided  to
    her, by email, shortly after the beginning of the appeal hearing.   She
    had not been provided, nor had her  instructing  solicitors,  with  the
    appellant's 2014 witness statement.  That was only  provided  to  them,
    following sight of Judge  Rhys-Davies'  decision,  on  request  to  the
    respondent.  Ms Gunn submitted that  neither  in  the  Decision  Letter
    ("DL"), nor orally at the hearing before  Judge  Rhys-Davies,  did  the
    respondent's  representative  rely  upon  the  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence which Judge Rhys-Davies took into account  as  significant  in
    reaching his adverse credibility finding.  That, Ms Gunn submitted, was
    procedurally unfair.  The case law in support of  that  submission  was
    extensively set out in her written submissions dated 2 August 2021.

17. Ground 2 contends that the judge failed properly to take  into  account
    the country export report, namely that of Ms Conteh, who considered the
    appellant's  account  to  be  plausible  before  reaching  his  adverse
    credibility finding.  Ms Gunn submitted that the judge had fallen  into
    the so-called Mibanga error (see Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367) by
    reaching his adverse finding and then discounting the  expert  evidence
    as being inconsistent with  his  already  reached  adverse  credibility
    finding.

18. Ground 3 contends that the judge wrongly took into account, as damaging
    the appellant's credibility, her delay in disclosing her account to  be
    at risk on return to Sierra Leone.

19. Ground 4  contends  that  the  judge  erred  in  reaching  his  adverse
    conclusion under Art 8, in particular para 276ADE(1)(vi) by failing  to
    take into account the appellant's mental and physical health  problems.



20. I will take each of the grounds relied upon by Ms Gunn in turn.  Ground
    1 is the most significant  because,  if  established,  it  renders  the
    proceedings procedurally unfair and unsustainable.

Ground 1

21. Ms Gunn submitted that the judge had acted  unfairly  in  relying  upon
    inconsistencies between the appellant's evidence and what was  said  in
    Judge Fox's earlier determination in 2014 which, she submitted, had not
    been raised by the Secretary of State in  her  DL,  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal review or at the hearing before the judge.  In  addition,  she
    submitted that the  judge  had  acted  unfairly  in  relying  upon  the
    appellant's witness statement submitted in the 2014 appeal,  but  which
    had not been in evidence  before  Judge  Rhys-Davies,  to  identify  an
    omission in that statement when compared to  the  appellant's  evidence
    given before Judge Rhys-Davies.

    1. The Case Law

22. In her written submissions, Ms Gunn relied upon a number of authorities
    including the case of HA (Iraq) in the Inner  House  of  the  Court  of
    Session which was raised at the hearing.

23. The relevant legal principle is that of fairness, or  as  it  was  once
    known "natural justice".  In R v SSHD ex parte Doody [1994] 1 AC 531 at
    p.560, Lord Mustill (with whom the other Law Lords  agreed)  identified
    six points in relation to "fairness" which he described as "essentially
    an intuitive judgment".  Most significantly for this appeal, and relied
    on by Ms Gunn,  are  points  5  and  6  where  Lord  Mustill  said  the
    following:

         "5.  Fairness will very often require that  a  person  who  may  be
             adversely affected by the decision will have an opportunity to
             make representations on  his  own  behalf  either  before  the
             decision is taken  with  a  view  to  producing  a  favourable
             result; or after it is taken, with a  view  to  procuring  its
             modification; or both.

         6.   Since the  person  affected  usually  cannot  make  worthwhile
             representations
             without knowing what factors may weigh against  his  interests
             fairness will
             very often require that he is informed of the gist of the case
             which he has to
             answer".

24. That was, of course, said in the  context  of  administrative  decision
    making  rather  than  in  the  context  of  judicial  decision  making.
    Nevertheless  the  fundamental,  requirement  of   fairness   that   an
    individual know the "gist of  the  case"  against  them,  resonates  in
    judicial proceedings also (see, e.g. Muhandiramge  (section  S-LTR.1.7)
    [2015] UKUT 00675 (IAC) at [16]).

25. The requirement to know the "gist" of the case, is likely to  encompass
    in a judicial context an opportunity to see and consider  the  evidence
    relied upon by the opposing party (and to the extent done  so,  by  the
    judge) and to comment upon it.  The point was emphatically made by Lord
    Kerr in his judgment in Home Office v Tariq [2011] UKSC  35  at  [102]-
    [105] as follows:
         "102. The right to know and effectively challenge the opposing case
         has long been recognised by the common law as a fundamental feature
         of the judicial process. In Kanda v Government of Malaya [1962] AC
         322, 337 Lord Denning said:
             "If the right to be heard is to be a real right which is worth
             anything, it must carry with it a right in the accused man  to
             know the case which is made against him.  He  must  know  what
             evidence has been given and what  statements  have  been  made
             affecting him: and then he must be given a fair opportunity to
             correct or contradict them. This appears in all the cases from
             the celebrated judgment  of  Lord  Loreburn  LC  in Board  of
             Education v Rice down to the decision of  their  Lordships'
             Board in Ceylon University v Fernando. It follows, of course,
             that the judge or whoever has  to  adjudicate  must  not  hear
             evidence or receive representations from one side made  behind
             the back of the other."
         103. The centrality of this right to  the  fairness  of  the  trial
         process  has  been  repeatedly  emphasised.  Thus,  in In  re   K
         (Infants) [1963] Ch 381 Upjohn LJ at pp 405-406 said:
             "It seems to be fundamental to any  judicial  inquiry  that  a
             person or other properly interested party must have the  right
             to see all the information put before the judge, to comment on
             it, to challenge it and if needs be to combat it, and  to  try
             to establish by contrary evidence that it is wrong. It  cannot
             be withheld from him in whole or in part. If it is so withheld
             and yet the judge  takes  such  information  into  account  in
             reaching his conclusion without disclosure  to  those  parties
             who  are  properly  and  naturally  vitally   concerned,   the
             proceedings cannot be described as judicial."
         104. And in Brinkley v Brinkley [1965] P 75, 78 Scarman J said that
         "for a court to take into consideration evidence which a  party  to
         the proceedings has had no opportunity during trial to see or hear,
         and thus to challenge, explain or comment  upon,  seems  to  us  to
         strike at the very root of the  judicial  process".  In Pamplin  v
         Express Newspapers Ltd [1985] 1 WLR 689 at 691 Hobhouse J expressed
         the principle in similarly forthright terms:
             "The first principle is the principle of natural justice which
             applies wherever  legal  proceedings  involve  more  than  one
             person and one party is asking the tribunal for an order which
             will affect and bind another. Natural  justice  requires  that
             each party should have an equivalent right to be  heard.  This
             means that if one party wishes to place evidence or persuasive
             material before the tribunal, the other party or parties  must
             have an opportunity to see that material and, if they wish, to
             submit counter material and, in  any  event,  to  address  the
             tribunal about the material. One party  may  not  make  secret
             communications to the court."
         105. Exceptions to the rule that a party to the proceedings must be
         informed of every detail of his opponent's case  have,  of  course,
         been recognised. But it is essential to be aware  of  the  starting
         point from which  one  must  embark  on  the  inquiry  whether  the
         principle of equality of arms (which is such a  vital  hallmark  of
         our adversarial system of the trial of contentious issues)  may  be
         compromised. As a general - indeed, basic -  rule,  those  who  are
         parties to litigation need to know what it is that  their  opponent
         alleges against them. They need to have the chance to counter those
         allegations. If that  vital  entitlement  is  to  be  denied  them,
         weighty factors must be present to displace  it.  And  it  is  self
         evident that he who wishes to have  it  displaced  must  show  that
         there are sufficiently substantial reasons that this should happen.
         Put shortly, he who thus avers must  establish  that  nothing  less
         will do."

26. In the context of appeals in international protection, immigration  and
    human rights cases, case law has developed relating to the fairness  of
    proceedings when a judge, often in the context  of  credibility,  takes
    points not relied upon by the opposing party (usually,  therefore,  the
    Secretary of State) in reaching adverse findings against an  appellant.
    Those cases have, in some  instances,  arisen  where  an  appellant  is
    unrepresented (and therefore does not have the assistance of a  lawyer)
    and/or the respondent is not  herself  represented  and  highlight  the
    dangers of a judge 'descending into the arena'  if  he  or  she  raises
    points not taken at the hearing by the parties.  Ms Gunn referred me to
    a number of decisions in her written skeleton  argument  including  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in Maheshwaran v SSHD [2002] EWCA  Civ  173;
    the Court of Session decision in Koca v SSHD [2005] 1 SC 487;  and  the
    IAT decisions in WN (Surendran; credibility; new evidence)  DRC  [2004]
    UKIAT 00213 and AA (Credibility,  Totality  of  evidence,  Fair  trial)
    [2004] UKIAT 152.

27. The relevant  principles  derived  from  the  case  law  are  helpfully
    explored by the Inner House of the Court of Session in HA(Iraq)  (Lords
    Reed, Hardie and Mackay of Drumadoon).

28. At [1] the Inner House identified the legal issue:

         "... the critical question is whether  the  immigration  judge  was
         entitled to base his conclusion to some extent upon a matter  which
         had not been raised during the course of the hearing before him."

29. The Court identified that the applicable principle was 'fairness'.   At
    [4], the Court said this:

         "[4] .... [The  judge]  must  however  act  fairly.  What  fairness
         requires has been considered by the Tribunal and by the  courts  in
         numerous cases, a few of which we shall  shortly  turn  to.  It  is
         however necessary to emphasise, before doing so, the  relevance  of
         certain general observations made by Lord Mustill in R v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department, ex parte Doody [1994] 1 AC 531 at
         page 560, in a speech with which the other  members  of  the  House
         expressed their agreement. As Lord Mustill observed, what  fairness
         requires is essentially  an  intuitive  judgment.  Although  it  is
         possible to identify a number of general principles, they cannot be
         applied by rote identically  in  every  situation:  "what  fairness
         demands is dependent on the context of the  decision".  An  overall
         judgment  must  therefore  be  made  in  the  light  of   all   the
         circumstances of a particular case.  That  said,  guidance  can  be
         obtained from decided cases, provided careful attention is paid  to
         any relevant factual circumstances,  and  judicial dicta are  not
         taken out of context."

30. The Court  recognised  (at  [5])  the  context  in  which  immigrations
    appeals, now before the First-tier Tribunal, took place:

         "[5] In relation to the context in which the Tribunal  operates,  a
         number of salient features were identified by the Court  of  Appeal
         in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Maheshwaran [2004]
         Imm AR 176 at paragraph 3:


              "Those who make a claim for asylum must show  that  they  are
              refugees. The burden of proof is on them. Whether  or  not  a
              claimant is to be believed is frequently very  important.  He
              will assert very many facts in relation to  events  far  away
              most of which no one before the adjudicator is in a  position
              to corroborate or refute. Material is often  adduced  at  the
              last minute without warning. From time to time  the  claimant
              or the Home Secretary are neither there nor  represented  and
              yet the adjudicator carries on with his task.  He  frequently
              has several cases listed in front of him on the same day. For
              one reason or another not every hearing  will  be  effective.
              Adjudicators can  not  be  expected  to  be  alive  to  every
              possible nuance of a case before the oral hearing,  if  there
              is one, starts. Adjudicators in general  will  reserve  their
              determinations for later delivery. They will ponder what  has
              been said and what has not been said, both before the hearing
              and at the hearing. They will look carefully at the documents
              which have been produced.  Points  will  sometimes  assume  a
              greater importance than they  appeared  to  have  before  the
              hearing began or in its earlier stages. Adjudicators will  in
              general rightly be cautious about intervening lest it be said
              that they have leaped into the forensic  arena  and  lest  an
              appearance of bias is given.""


31. The Court acknowledged that a judge is not necessarily limited  to  the
    evidence and the issues relied upon or raised by the parties,  although
    fairness may require the parties (particularly the appellant) be put on
    notice of such 'new' issues.  At [6]-[9]:

         "[6] One factor which has been emphasised in numerous cases is  the
         specialist nature of the Tribunal (see e.g. AH (Sudan) v Secretary
         of State for the  Home  Department [2008]  1  AC  678).  This  has
         implications  for  procedure  before  the  Tribunal:  although  the
         procedure is adversarial (R v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department, ex parte Abdi [1996] 1 WLR 298 at page 301  per  Lord
         Mustill), the Tribunal is not confined to a  consideration  of  the
         evidence and submissions presented to it by the  parties.  In  that
         regard, the observations made by Sedley J and cited in Secretary of
         State for the Home Department v Abdi [1994] Imm AR 402 at page 412,
         in  relation  to  adjudicators   appointed   under   the   previous
         legislation, remain apposite:


              "Adjudicators are not recruited  from  the  Clapham  omnibus.
              They are skilled and specialised office-holders carrying  out
              an independent and, in many respects,  judicial  function  of
              profound importance to the individuals who come  before  them
              ...  From  case  to  case  they  will  build  up  a  fund  of
              information about different  third  countries.  It  would  be
              wrong, of course, for them to decide cases upon the basis  of
              private information of this kind; but it would  also,  in  my
              judgment, be wrong for them to ignore  such  information  and
              close their minds to everything except the evidence that  the
              Home Office chose or the applicant was  able  to  put  before
              them."


         In that case (per Steyn LJ at page 420), and  in  subsequent  cases
         (e.g. Gnanavarathan v A Special Adjudicator [1995] Imm AR 64), it
         was accepted that the adjudicator was entitled to rely  on  matters
         within his own knowledge, provided such matters were  disclosed  to
         the parties so as to afford them a fair opportunity  to  deal  with
         them.

         [7] Similarly, the Tribunal may identify an  issue  which  has  not
         been raised by the parties to  the  proceedings,  but  it  will  be
         unfair, ordinarily at least, for it to base its decision  upon  its
         view of that issue without giving the  parties  an  opportunity  to
         address it upon the  matter.  That  point  is  illustrated  by  the
         decision of this court at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  in
         relation to the first appellant, reported  as HA v Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department 2008 SC 58. As we shall explain, the
         first appellant's claim for asylum is based on an account of having
         had a relationship in Afghanistan with the daughter  of  an  army
         commander, who became pregnant as a result of the relationship.  At
         an earlier stage of the proceedings, an immigration judge  rejected
         the credibility of the first appellant's account in part because no
         evidence had been given of the  precautions  taken  by  the  couple
         against pregnancy: an issue  which  had  not  been  raised  by  the
         respondent, or by the immigration judge himself at the hearing. The
         court stated, at paragraph 30 of its opinion:


              "[T]here is in our opinion force in the  submission  that  it
              was unfair of the immigration  judge,  if  he  found  in  the
              absence  of  evidence  about  precautions  against  pregnancy
              ground for regarding the evidence about the  relationship  as
              implausible, not to put that point to the appellant  to  give
              him an opportunity to put forward evidence on the  point.  If
              he had done so, the appellant might, or might not, have  been
              able to allay his concern, but the procedure would have  been
              fair."


         The court also noted that the immigration judge had speculated,  in
         the absence of evidence, about the way in which  the  couple  would
         have been likely to have acted in relation to  precautions  against
         pregnancy. The court was critical of the immigration judge's  doing
         so, partly because there was no indication that he was alive to the
         possible  relevance  of  cultural  and  other  differences  between
         the United Kingdom and Afghanistan.

         [8] As an expert body, the Tribunal is entitled to reject  evidence
         notwithstanding that the evidence has not  been  challenged  before
         it. Fairness may however require it to disclose its concerns  about
         the evidence so as to afford the parties an opportunity to  address
         them.   That    point    is    illustrated    by    the    decision
         in Kriba v Secretary of State for the Home Department 1998  SLT
         1113, where the applicant had  relied  on  a  letter  from  Amnesty
         International which was not challenged by the respondent and  which
         had been relied on by the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  in  another
         case shortly beforehand. The adjudicator however attached no weight
         to the letter, describing it as anecdotal and inadequately sourced.
         The applicant was not given an  opportunity  to  adduce  additional
         evidence to support what was stated in the  letter.  Lord  Hamilton
         granted an application for judicial review, stating at page 1116:


              "The weighing of the evidence before him is a matter for  the
              special  adjudicator  and   the   fact   that   evidence   is
              unchallenged by the presenting officer  does  not  of  itself
              oblige the special adjudicator to accept it. In  the  present
              case, however, where the evidence was not  only  unchallenged
              and uncontradicted but came from  an  apparently  responsible
              source  and  was  a  vital  element  in  this  part  of   the
              petitioner's case, it was, in my  view,  procedurally  unfair
              wholly to reject it without first affording to the petitioner
              an opportunity to adduce support for it."


         In the particular circumstances of that case, the  applicant  could
         reasonably proceed on the basis that there was no need for  him  to
         adduce evidence on this vital point besides the letter, given  that
         the letter was unchallenged  and  came  from  a  source  which  was
         generally treated as reliable (and had  recently  been  treated  as
         reliable in relation to that very letter), unless  he  was  put  on
         notice of the adjudicator's concern.

         [9] Even where a point is expressly  conceded  by  one  party,  the
         Tribunal is not obliged to  accept  the  concession;  but  in  that
         situation, as was observed in Maheshwaran at paragraph 4,


              "... it will usually be unfair to decide the case against the
              other party on the basis  that  the  concession  was  wrongly
              made, unless the Tribunal indicates that it is minded to take
              that course.""


32. However, the Court concluded that there was no 'general obligation'  to
    give notice to the parties but, nevertheless,  fairness  might  require
    it.  At [10]-[13] the Court said this:

         "[10] There is, on the other hand, no  general  obligation  on  the
         Tribunal to give notice to the parties during the  hearing  of  all
         the matters on which it may rely in  reaching  its  decision.  That
         point is illustrated  by  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
         in Sahota v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [1995] Imm AR 500, where
         the applicant sought asylum on the basis that he had been  arrested
         and tortured on a number of occasions by the police of  his  native
         country. He stated in evidence that the police had wanted  to  know
         the whereabouts of  his  brother,  who  belonged  to  a  proscribed
         organisation. His brother had eventually been killed by the police.
         He (the applicant) feared  that  he  too  would  be  killed  if  he
         returned. The adjudicator  accepted  the  applicant's  account  but
         refused his appeal on the basis that there was  no  evidence  of  a
         continuing risk to the applicant following his brother's death. The
         applicant sought leave to apply for judicial review  on  the  basis
         that there  had  been  a  breach  of  natural  justice,  since  the
         adjudicator had not asked the applicant why he  continued  to  fear
         persecution following  his  brother's  death.  Leave  was  refused.
         Kennedy LJ, with whose judgment Sir Thomas Bingham MR  and  Millett
         LJ expressed agreement, said (at pages 504-505):


              "I for my part can see no reason why the  adjudicator  should
              have done more than she did. The  applicant  was  seeking  to
              persuade her, the onus being on him, that  he,  at  the  time
              when the decision fell to be made, had a well-founded fear of
              persecution. He pointed to the fact  that  in  the  past  his
              brother was a member of a proscribed organisation,  but  that
              did not answer the problem which he had to face,  namely  why
              the fear should exist after the brother was no longer  alive.
              I do not see why the adjudicator should have asked  him  more
              specifically. Apparently he dealt with the matter himself  in
              evidence in relation to this particular  matter.  Of  course,
              there are cases, and there are authorities which show, that a
              determining body such as an adjudicator should not decide  an
              issue on some matter which has not been properly canvassed in
              evidence.  But  this  whole  question  of  the  fear  of  the
              applicant, and the basis  of  that  fear,  was  in  fact  the
              subject matter of proceedings before the adjudicator. ..."


         The  court  thus  accepted  that  the  applicant  had  had  a  fair
         opportunity to present his case. There was  no  unfairness  in  the
         adjudicator's concluding that the evidence led was insufficient  to
         discharge the onus, without raising its insufficiency in the course
         of the hearing.

         [11] Another decision  which  is  of  assistance,  as  it  concerns
         another type of situation  which  frequently  arises  in  practice,
         is R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Williams [1995] Imm AR
         518. In that case, the adjudicator had  made  adverse  findings  on
         credibility on the basis of discrepancies between  the  account  of
         material events which the applicant had given in evidence  and  the
         account which he had given in his asylum  application  and  in  his
         asylum interview. Leave to apply for judicial review was sought  on
         the basis  of  procedural  impropriety:  it  was  argued  that  the
         adjudicator should have  reminded  the  applicant  of  his  earlier
         accounts. Leave was refused. Harrison J noted  that  the  applicant
         had been represented by counsel at the  hearing  and  had  had  the
         opportunity to deal with discrepancies between  his  oral  evidence
         and what had  been  said  in  his  asylum  application  or  in  his
         interview. The adjudicator was not bound, as a  matter  of  natural
         justice, to point out the inconsistencies.

         [12] There is in general no unfairness in proceeding in  that  way,
         since an applicant can generally be expected to be aware  that  the
         Tribunal will have to assess his credibility, and  the  consistency
         of the account he has given in evidence with any previous  accounts
         contained in the documents before  the  Tribunal  will  plainly  be
         relevant to that  assessment.  As  the  Court  of  Appeal  observed
         in Maheshwaran at paragraph 5:


              "Where much depends on the credibility of a  party  and  when
              that party makes several inconsistent  statements  which  are
              before the  decision  maker,  that  party  manifestly  has  a
              forensic  problem.  Some  will   choose   to   confront   the
              inconsistencies straight on and make evidential  or  forensic
              submissions on them.  Others  will  hope  that  'least  said,
              soonest mended' and consider that forensic  concentration  on
              the point will only make matters worse and that it  would  be
              better to try and switch the  tribunal's  attention  to  some
              other aspect of the case.  Undoubtedly  it  is  open  to  the
              tribunal expressly to put a  particular  inconsistency  to  a
              witness because it considers that  the  witness  may  not  be
              alerted to the point or because it fears  that  it  may  have
              perceived something as inconsistent with  an  earlier  answer
              which in truth is not  inconsistent.  Fairness  may  in  some
              circumstances require this to be done but this  will  not  be
              the usual case. Usually the  tribunal,  particularly  if  the
              party is represented, will remain silent and see how the case
              unfolds."

         [13] Given the judicial nature of the Tribunal's  function,  it  is
         generally inappropriate for it to become  involved  in  challenging
         the evidence placed before it. As Moses J observed in R v Special
         Adjudicator, ex parte Demeter [2000] Imm AR 424 at page 430:


              "The appeal should be, and is, adversarial. It  is  important
              that the  special  adjudicator  should  avoid,  if  possible,
              giving  any  appearance  of  entering  into  the   arena   by
              challenging the account that the applicant gives himself."

         There are however circumstances where, as a matter of fairness, the
         Tribunal cannot remain silent in the face of the evidence presented
         to it. One example of such circumstances has already been given, in
         the case of Kriba v Secretary of State for the Home  Department.
         Other examples can be found amongst the reported decisions, and  we
         shall refer to some  in  a  moment.  It  is  however  necessary  to
         emphasise that such circumstances are fact-sensitive. The  Tribunal
         is not under a general obligation to air  its  concerns  about  the
         evidence presented to it, even if the evidence is unchallenged. The
         point  is  illustrated,  in  relation  to  an  adverse  finding  on
         credibility based on discrepancies between an applicant's  account,
         by such decisions as Ex parte Williams and R (Hyseni) v Special
         Adjudicator [2002] EWHC 1239 (Admin). It is also  illustrated,  in
         relation to a finding based on  the  vagueness  of  an  applicant's
         evidence,  by  the  decision  in Hassan v Immigration  Appeal
         Tribunal [2001] Imm AR 83, in which Buxton LJ remarked at paragraph
         18:



              "Particular complaint is made that the adjudicator should not
              have concluded  that  the  applicant's  evidence  was  vague,
              without in some way warning him that he was going to come  to
              that conclusion and asking him to improve matters. I have  to
              say I simply cannot understand that  complaint.  The  finding
              that the adjudicator made, that the evidence was  vague,  was
              one  that  he  came  to  having  heard  everything  that  the
              applicant and his representative wished him to hear.  It  was
              the sort of conclusion that anybody who has to adjudicate  on
              evidence is entitled to come to. The idea that the  applicant
              not having satisfied the adjudicator in  the  course  of  the
              hearing, the adjudicator was under some obligation to ask him
              to start again is, in my view, plainly unfounded."


         This general approach is consistent with that adopted by the courts
         in relation to other types of adversarial procedure. In the context
         of  criminal   proceedings,   for   example,   the   court   stated
         in Hunt v Aitken 2008 SCCR 919 at paragraph 17:


              "Counsel's final argument was that it had  been  procedurally
              unfair for the justice not to disclose his doubts  about  Mrs
              Hunt's  evidence:  since  the  Crown   had   not   challenged
              specifically  that  aspect  of  her  evidence  (although  her
              credibility and reliability in general had been  challenged),
              the complainer's solicitor had had no opportunity to  address
              the issue in his closing submissions. We are unable to accept
              that contention. A judge hearing a case  is  not  obliged  to
              interrupt the proceedings whenever he has  doubts  about  the
              credibility or reliability of a piece of evidence; nor is  he
              obliged to provide the parties with a list  of  his  concerns
              about the evidence so  that  they  can  be  addressed  during
              submissions."


         We also note the remarks made by Lord Diplock, in a  different  but
         not  entirely  unrelated  context,  in Hoffmann  La  Roche  &  Co
         AG v Secretary of State for Trade & Industry [1975] AC 295 at page
         369."


33. The Court then (at [14]) considered the issue in the context of a  case
    where points were taken by a judge in a decision which were not  raised
    at the hearing where the respondent was unrepresented:

         "[14] As we have indicated, however,  circumstances  can  arise  in
         which the Tribunal cannot fairly adopt the  passive  role  which  a
         judge or a jury would  ordinarily  adopt.  Such  circumstances  are
         particularly apt to arise in  situations  where  the  Secretary  of
         State is unrepresented at the  hearing  before  the  Tribunal.  The
         difficulties which can arise in securing a  fair  hearing  in  such
         circumstances have long been recognised  by  the  Tribunal  itself:
         see MNM v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] INLR
         576. They were also recognised by this court in Koca v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department 2005 SC 487. That was a case in which
         the adjudicator had rejected the credibility of an  aspect  of  the
         applicant's account on the basis  of  what  she  considered  to  be
         discrepancies between the evidence given by the  applicant  at  the
         hearing and his earlier statements. The court quashed the  decision
         on  the   ground   that   the   reasoning   was   inadequate,   but
         added obiter remarks in relation to procedural fairness on  which
         reliance was placed in  the  second  of  the  present  appeals.  In
         particular, the court said at paragraph 20:


              "It is, we consider, an important feature of this  case  that
              the respondent was not represented at the hearing before  the
              adjudicator. There was no cross-examination as  such  whereby
              any such  inconsistencies,  contradictions  or  discrepancies
              might well have been highlighted. ... On one reading  of  the
              material before  the  adjudicator  ...  it  does  not  really
              involve any contradiction on the  reclaimer's  part  but,  as
              counsel  for  the  respondent   himself   described   it,   a
              'development of his evidence'. Again, with regret, we have to
              say that the reasoning of the adjudicator in relation to this
              matter is somewhat opaque. In any event if, as  seems  to  be
              the case, any perceived contradiction or inconsistency in the
              reclaimer's position was going to form a  significant  reason
              for  rejecting   his   appeal   then,   in   the   particular
              circumstances of this case, it appears to  us  that  fairness
              required that, prior to the issue of her decision,  she  gave
              the reclaimer or his representative an opportunity to comment
              upon, or seek to explain, it."


         In that passage, and later in the same paragraph, the court made it
         clear that its observations reflected the particular  circumstances
         of the case, which included the fact that the  respondent  had  not
         been represented at the hearing and the fact that the matter  which
         occasioned  the  adjudicator's  concern   might   be   capable   of
         clarification or explanation. The dicta in that case  should  not
         therefore  be  understood  as  laying   down   any   general   rule
         inconsistent with the approach adopted in Maheshwaran and in  the
         present appeals."


34. I would identify a number of points from HA and the cases  referred  to
    by the Inner House:

       1. Fairness is a fact-sensitive, and context specific,  issue  which
          requires a court or tribunal to make an intuitive judgment.   The
          obligation to act fairly arise in respect of both parties in  IAC
          proceedings.

       2. As a general rule, a party has a right to know the 'gist' of  the
          case against them including what evidence is being relied upon by
          the opposing party in their case and by the judge in  reaching  a
          decision.

       3. A judge is not absolutely prohibited from taking into account  in
          their decision issues raised by the evidence which has  not  been
          relied upon, or raised by  either  party,  prior  to  or  at  the
          hearing.

       4. However, in doing so the judge must act fairly.  That may  entail
          giving the parties notice of  the  issues  which  the  judge  has
          identified in order to give them an opportunity to deal with  the
          issue, including through submissions and leading other evidence.

       5. There is no general rule, however, that  a  judge  must  do  this
          because the proceedings may nevertheless be fair, for example, if
          the issues are obvious on the evidence.  It is more likely to  be
          unfair if the judge relies on a substantial issue which  has  not
          previously been raise, e.g. doubting the appellant's  credibility
          for the first  time  or  the  reliability  or  genuineness  of  a
          document.

       6. However, in raising issues  at  the  hearing  not  taken  by  the
          parties, it may be unfair for a judge to raise those  matters  if
          to do so places the judge 'in the arena', in effect  taking  over
          the role of the advocate for the opposing party.  If to  raise  a
          new matter would result in unfairness, it may be  more  difficult
          for a judge to rely upon, those unraised matters, in the decision
          adversely to one party.

    2. Discussion

35. Ms Gunn accepted that a number of matters relied upon  by  Judge  Rhys-
    Davies in reaching his adverse  credibility  finding  had  been  raised
    either in the DL or in the FtT review by the respondent.  Consequently,
    the finding by Judge Fox in 2014 that the appellant's relationship with
    her partner in the UK was not genuine was relied on in para 81  of  the
    DL and by  the  judge,  for  example,  at  para  89  of  his  decision.
    Likewise, in the FtT review, the respondent relied on the fact that  in
    the 2014 determination Judge Fox had found  the  appellant  not  to  be
    credible in respect of her Art  8  claim  on  two  points,  namely  her
    evidence in the past  determination  that  her  daughter  died  due  to
    pregnancy problems, and that she had been sacked  from  her  job  as  a
    police officer which were inconsistent with her evidence in the present
    appeal.  Those were referred to, and relied on by, Judge Rhys-Davies at
    para 86 of his decision.  Ms Gunn accepted that the judge was  entitled
    to rely upon these matters.

36. However, Ms Gunn submitted that the  reliance  upon  three  matters  in
    paras 87, 88 and 90-91 of his decision were matters that had never been
    relied upon by the Secretary of State  either  in  her  DL  or  at  the
    hearing before Judge Rhys-Davies.  They were inconsistencies as to  (1)
    when the appellant had lost contact with her children (para 87  of  the
    decision); (2) whether the appellant had been estranged  from  or  lost
    contact with her children (para 88 of the decision); and (3)  that  the
    appellant's previous evidence was that she had  been  asked  about  re-
    employment in the police force in Sierra Leone whereas in  the  current
    case she said she had been in contact with  her  colleagues  since  she
    left (paras 90-91 of the decision).  Ms  Gunn  submitted  that  it  was
    unfair for the judge to rely upon these points which were not "obvious"
    and went beyond the content of the credibility  points  raised  by  the
    respondent in the Decision letter and FtT review and the appellant  was
    not on notice as to their relevance to the appeal.

37. Further, Ms Gunn submitted that at para 85 the judge had been wrong  to
    rely on the omission in the appellant's 2014 witness statement that she
    had made no mention  of  the  deaths  of  three  of  her  children,  of
    suffering with grief as a result, and of the visit  being  arranged  to
    help her recuperate at all.

38. Ms Gunn submitted that the judge had  found  the  inconsistencies  with
    Judge Fox's determination was such that it "causes material  damage  to
    the appellant's credibility" and that the omission in  the  appellant's
    2014 witness statement "causes significant damage  to  the  appellant's
    account as it goes to the heart of why she came to the UK in the  first
    place".  Ms Gunn submitted that as regards the  latter,  that  evidence
    had not been part of the case.

39. In response, Mr Avery submitted that the judge  had  been  entitled  to
    rely upon the inconsistencies with  the  evidence  derived  from  Judge
    Fox's earlier determination.  He submitted that that determination  had
    been referred to in the DL and, as regards the 2014 witness  statement,
    he submitted it was wrong to say that was not part of the  evidence  in
    the appeal as it had been part of the evidence before Judge Lever  when
    the international protection appeal was first heard in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Mr Avery submitted that  the  2014  determination  had  been
    provided to the appellant's counsel during the hearing and she had  not
    sought an adjournment.  The discrepancies in the  evidence  were  clear
    and had counsel,  on  reading  Judge  Fox's  determination,  wished  to
    address those inconsistencies by evidence  or  submissions,  she  could
    have done so but had not.

40. There is no doubt that the judge had an obligation to act  fairly.   In
    principle, that meant that the appellant should have had  a  reasonable
    opportunity to deal with points which the  judge  relied  upon  in  his
    decision in reaching an adverse credibility finding.  It is significant
    that none of the three points raised by Ms Gunn and relied upon by  the
    judge in paras 87, 88 and 90-91 were relied upon by the  respondent  in
    the DL or at the hearing.  Mr Avery did not suggest otherwise.

41. Judge Fox's 2014 determination was not available to counsel  until  the
    course of the hearing when it was emailed to her.  However, she did not
    seek an adjournment and was content to proceed with the  appeal  having
    considered  it.   Of  course,   in   doing   so,   counsel   was,   not
    unsurprisingly, perhaps lulled into a 'sense of  false  security'  that
    its relevance at the hearing was no greater than that  relied  upon  by
    the respondent both in the DL and FtT review.

42. This was not, however, a case where an issue, for example  credibility,
    was raised for the first time in  the  decision  by  the  judge.   Both
    parties were well aware that the credibility of the  appellant  was  in
    issue.  As the case law makes plain, it is  not  necessarily  incumbent
    upon a judge to raise with the parties (in  particular  the  appellant)
    points which concern the judge and which may form part of his reasoning
    but are not relied upon by the respondent at the hearing.   Of  course,
    good practice would be to do so.  As the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    noted in WN at [28]:

         "As we have said elsewhere, it is a matter of judgment  whether  to
         omit [to put points of  concern  to  an  appellant]  is  unfair  or
         whether to do so risks appearing to be unfair as a form  of  cross-
         examination.  On balance, the Adjudicator's major points of concern
         are better put, especially if they are not obvious".

43. Of course, the first point concerns the role  of  a  judge  in  a  case
    where, if the judge does not put the points to the  appellant,  in  the
    absence of a representative on behalf of the respondent,  those  points
    will not be  drawn  to  an  appellant  or  his  legal  representatives'
    attention.  That danger is altogether less potent  where  both  parties
    are represented at the hearing.  A judge  can  much  more  easily,  and
    without the appearance of 'descending into the arena', raise points  of
    concern with the legal representatives who will  then,  if  they  wish,
    have an opportunity to  deal  with  them  either  through  evidence  or
    submissions.

44. In this appeal, there is  a  very  real  danger  that  the  appellant's
    counsel was unintentionally misled into  believing  only  points  being
    taken by the respondent were relevant to the judge's  consideration  of
    the appellant's credibility.

45. As Lord Mustill  identified  in  Doody,  what  is  fair  or  unfair  is
    "essentially an intuitive judgment".  Here, Judge  Rhys-Davies  took  a
    number of points previously not raised, or relied upon at any time,  by
    the respondent.  He did so despite the fact  that  the  respondent  did
    rely on those points arising from Judge  Fox's  determination  and  the
    appellant's evidence at the hearing.  These were points which the judge
    clearly considered to be "material" to the appellant's credibility  (as
    he said in para 81 of his  decision).   It  is  not,  in  my  judgment,
    determinative of whether these points - on a full and considered  basis
    - would be "obvious".  Further, it  would  not  have  resulted  in  him
    'descending into the arena' had he raised these issues with counsel and
    the Home Office Presenting Officer.

46. For reasons that are unclear, the appellant's counsel did not have  the
    2014 determination until the day of the hearing.  Of course, as I  have
    said, she did not seek an adjournment but that was, no  doubt,  on  the
    basis that she felt able to deal with the points being relied upon, and
    arising out of,  that  2014  determination,  by  the  respondent.   The
    additional points were significant for the judge and, in  my  judgment,
    it was unfair to  rely  upon  them  without  giving  the  appellant  an
    opportunity to deal with those points, through counsel, by way of other
    evidence or submissions.

47. As regards the 2014 witness statement, that was a  document  which  the
    appellant's counsel did not have at the hearing.  It  appears  that  it
    had been provided to the First-tier Tribunal  together  with  the  2014
    determination.  It was not, however, sent to counsel on the day of  the
    hearing with the 2014 determination.  Indeed, and Mr Avery did not seek
    to argue to the contrary,  it  would  appear  that  its  contents  (and
    perhaps  even  its  existence)   was   unknown   to   the   appellant's
    representatives until it was referred to by Judge  Rhys-Davies  in  his
    determination.  As I understand it, the legal representatives sought  a
    copy of it at that point and it formed part of the appellant's  grounds
    of appeal.  It is not entirely clear to me how  this  train  of  events
    occurred given that the appellant's legal representatives were also her
    representatives at least at the hearing before Judge Lever.   It  would
    appear, from Judge Lever's decision, that he had both a copy  of  Judge
    Fox's decision and the appellant's witness statement of 18  March  2014
    (see para 4 of his decision) but the  latter  does  not  seem  to  have
    formed any part of the appellant's evidence or to have been relied upon
    by the respondent at the remitted appeal eventually heard by Judge Rhys-
    Davies.  It may be that the Judge Rhys-Davies believed (albeit wrongly)
    that the 2014 witness statement was part of the case before him as  put
    forward by the parties.  However, in fact, it was not.

48. Principally, a judge should determine an appeal based upon the evidence
    presented by the parties (subject to the possibility of taking judicial
    notice of evidence or relying fairly on other evidence).  As the  Upper
    Tribunal said in AM (fair hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 656 at [7(ii)]:

         "If a judge is cognisant of certain evidence which  does  not  form
         part of either party's case, for example as a  result  of  having
         adjudicated in another case or cases, or  having  been  alerted  to
         something in the news media, the judge must proactively bring  this
         evidence to the attention of the parties at the  earliest  possible
         stage, unless satisfied it has no conceivable bearing on any of the
         issues to be decided.  If  the  matter  is  borderline,  disclosure
         should be made.  This duty may extend beyond the date  of  hearing,
         in certain circumstances".

49. In my judgment, those words fall to be applied to the judge's reliance,
    in this appeal, upon the appellant's 2014  witness  statement  and  the
    absence from that statement of certain aspects of her account which she
    now relied  upon.   The  judge  treated  that  omission  as  "caus[ing]
    significant damage" to the appellant's account as it went to the  heart
    of the reason why she came to the UK (see para 85 of the decision).  In
    my judgment, if Judge Rhys-Davies wished to rely upon this point, based
    upon the 2014 witness statement, fairness required  him  to  raise  the
    matter at the hearing with the parties (or  after  the  hearing  if  it
    occurred to him subsequently) in order that  they  (in  particular  the
    appellant) had a fair opportunity to deal with it.  Not only was it  an
    evidential point not relied upon by the respondent in the course of the
    appeal, the witness statement itself was  not  relied  upon  by  either
    party.

50. For those reasons, in my judgment, the judge materially erred in law in
    dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  (in  particular  in  reaching  his
    adverse credibility finding) by unfairly depriving the appellant of  an
    opportunity to deal with a number of points which were material to  his
    credibility finding.

    3. Conclusion

51. In my judgment, the unfairness of the proceedings makes  the  decision,
    as  a  whole,  unsustainable.   The   judge's   unsustainable   adverse
    credibility finding cannot  be  isolated  so  as  to  affect  only  his
    decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.  The risk that it had
    an adverse impact upon his decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8 cannot be properly discounted.  The judge made a number  of
    adverse findings, not accepting evidence put forward by the  appellant,
    at paras 118 and 120  for  example.   In  the  light  of  that,  in  my
    judgment, the decision as a whole must be  set  aside  and  re-made  de
    novo.

Grounds 2-4

52. Strictly, therefore, it is not necessary to address  the  substance  of
    the remaining grounds relied upon by the  appellant.   It  should  not,
    however, be assumed that I would necessarily have accepted  that  those
    grounds were established.

53. I would only make the following observations on ground 2.  The  Mibanga
    point relied on in ground 2 presents considerable difficulties for  the
    appellant.  The vice identified in Mibanga is that  a  judge  must  not
    'compartmentalise' the issue of credibility by reference to  only  some
    of the evidence and exclude consideration of other  evidence  (such  as
    medical or expert evidence).

54. The Upper  Tribunal  helpfully  summarised  the  case  law  and  proper
    approach in QC (verification of documents; Mibanga duty)  China  [2021]
    UKUT 33 (IAC) at [39]-[57].  At [57], the UT said this:

         "To sum up, the judicial fact-finder has a duty to make his or  her
         decision by reference to all the relevant  evidence  and  needs  to
         show in their decision that they have done so.  The actual  way  in
         which the fact-finder goes about this task is a  matter  for  them.
         As has been pointed out, one has to start somewhere.  At the end of
         the day, what matters is  whether  the  decision  contains  legally
         adequate reasons for the outcome.  The greater the apparent cogency
         and relevance of a particular piece of evidence, the greater is the
         need for the judicial fact-finder to show that they  have  had  due
         regard  to  that  evidence;  and,  if  the  fact-finder's   overall
         conclusion is contrary to the apparent thrust of that evidence, the
         greater is the need to explain why that evidence  has  not  brought
         about a different outcome."

55. The judge plainly, in form, dealt with evidential credibility issues at
    paras 81-93, the medical and expert evidence  at  paras  95-101,  other
    documentary evidence put in evidence by way of support at paras 102-106
    and then, finally, at paras 107-111 the delay in the appellant making a
    claim for asylum under s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  As I pointed out  to  Ms  Gunn  during  her
    submissions if (looking at the structure of the judge's  decision)  she
    was correct that the judge made an adverse credibility finding at paras
    81-93 and only then considered the relevance (to discount) the  medical
    and expert  evidence,  that  could  equally  be  said  of  the  judge's
    consideration of the relevance of the delay in  the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum which he did not deal with until  paras  107-111.   However,
    that was clearly a relevant  factor  for  the  judge  in  reaching  his
    ultimate adverse credibility finding.




56. What the judge did in this case was identify  at  paras  81-93  reasons
    why, looking at the appellant's evidence, there were inconsistencies in
    it damaging of her credibility.  At paras 95-101, the judge dealt  with
    the medical evidence of Dr Battersby and  the  expert  evidence  of  Ms
    Conteh gave detailed reasons why it did not  assist  the  appellant  to
    establish that her evidence was credible,  not  least  because  neither
    expert had been provided with Judge Fox's decision.  As  the  case  law
    identifies, a judge has to  start  somewhere  and  conclude  ultimately
    whether an appellant's evidence is to  be  accepted  based  upon  their
    credibility.  Providing the judge does not reach a  final  decision  on
    credibility without taking  into  account,  so  far  as  relevant,  the
    medical and other expert evidence relied upon, the judge will not  fall
    into error if he or she identifies issues in  an  appellant's  evidence
    which call into question its credibility.  The Mibanga error,  if  any,
    lies in the "artificial separation amounting to a  structural  failing,
    and not just an error of  appreciation,  in  dealing  with  credibility
    entirely separately from the medical evidence" (see Mibanga per  Buxton
    LJ at [30] and S v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1153 at [23]-[24] per Rix  LJ).
    I am satisfied that the judge did not fall into that error.

57. Nevertheless, I accept ground 1 and, for the reasons I have given,  the
    judge materially erred in law in dismissing the appellant's appeal,  in
    particular, in reaching his adverse credibility finding.  His  decision
    cannot stand.

Decision

58. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

59. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other  than  Judges  Lever  and  Rhys-
    Davies.  None of Judge Rhys-Davies' findings are preserved.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              16 August 2021

