

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/03693/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on 14 November 2019                           |On 20 November 2019          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               CHRISTELLE [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms H McFadzean, of Rutherford Sheridan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Cote d'Ivoire, or Ivory  Coast,  born
    on 14 January 1981.  The respondent  refused  her  asylum  claim  by  a
    letter dated 2 April 2019.  FtT Judge J C Grant-Hutchison dismissed her
    appeal by a decision promulgated on 22 July 2019.

 2. The appellant has permission to appeal to the UT on grounds set out  in
    her application dated 11 September 2019, (i) - (vi).

 3. At [13] of her decision the judge observed that if the business of  the
    appellant's ex-partner was as extensive as she claimed, there would  be
    no reason for the appellant not to provide some evidence.   Ground  (i)
    is that the judge failed to consider the appellant's ability to  obtain
    such evidence "given that she was a victim  of  domestic  violence  who
    fled her home".  Ms McFadzean submitted that there was  also  an  error
    here of requiring corroboration.

 4. Mr Clark said that judge was entitled to expect  evidence  which  might
    obviously  be  forthcoming,  referring  to  paragraph   339L   of   the
    immigration rules.  He also pointed  out  that  the  reference  was  to
    information in the public domain, not  personal  information  from  the
    appellant's former home.

 5. Ms McFadzean responded that although the  judge  referred  at  [13]  to
    company shares, there had been no evidence  that  the  appellant's  ex-
    partner held his business interests in that way, or  that  shareholding
    information was available from public registers in Ivory Coast, and  it
    was obviously easier for the appellant to obtain  personal  information
    such as the medical records she produced.

 6. I do not find  that  this  ground  establishes  any  error,  for  these
    reasons:

      i) Nothing in the decision suggests that the judge  thought  that  the
         appellant's case was conditioned on corroboration - which would  be
         an egregious error for any judge to make.


     ii)  Asylum  applicants  are  obliged  to  make  a  genuine  effort  to
         substantiate  their  claim,  to  submit  all  materials  at   their
         disposal, and to offer a satisfactory explanation for any  lack  of
         relevant material.  Rule 339L is one authority.  The  principle  is
         also in the Qualification Directive and  in  well-established  case
         law.


    iii)  The  judge  expressly  noted  the  distinction  between   personal
         documents and public information.


     iv) The judge's expectation was not of burrowing in public registers.


      v) It was well within reason to expect some  evidence  of  a  business
         "prominent and widespread throughout Ivory Coast", in a case  which
         turned on the influence and reach of the appellant's ex-partner.


 7. At [14] the judge said that the appellant's country expert report  gave
    no evidence of the appellant's ex-partner's links to Mr Bakayoko  (said
    to be his powerful colleague).  Ground (ii) is that the judge failed to
    consider that the expert would not have the  knowledge  or  ability  to
    provide evidence of such links.

 8. Mr Clark submitted that this ground makes no clear point.

 9. Ms McFadzean responded  that  the  expert's  instructions,  which  were
    before the judge, showed no request for a report on links, and  it  was
    unreasonable to think a report could have been provided.

10. The judge's comment is accurate.  She does not go on to  say  that  she
    would have expected the expert to report on  links,  if  they  existed.
    She says in the same paragraph that even if the appellant's  ex-partner
    had the claimed business contracts, she does not  see  how  that  would
    enable him  to  identify  her  return.   The  paragraph  ends  with  an
    observation about no other names being  given,  which  relates  to  the
    appellant not to the expert.

11. Ground (ii) tends to misread the decision, and discloses  no  error  at
    [14].

12. Ground (iii) is directed against [16 e].  Ms McFadzean  said  that  the
    point was that the judge did not explain the relevance of  Mr  Bakayoko
    "sprucing up his image".

13. The thrust of [16 e] is that the judge found no good explanation for Mr
    Bakayoko not acting on behalf of the appellant's  ex-partner,  and  did
    not see what the appellant suggested he was  being  asked  to  do.   No
    criticism is made of those parts of  the  reasoning.   The  observation
    which is challenged appears to be an incidental reason for thinking  it
    unlikely that Mr Bakayoko would have any sinister involvement.  That is
    not shown to involve any error.

14. Ground (iv), as Mr Clark accepted, discloses an error at [16  e].   The
    appellant could not be at fault for  not  disclosing  at  interview  in
    March 2019 a matter of which she said she was informed  only  in  April
    2019.

15. Ground (v) is, as Mr Clark submitted, a  generalised  disagreement  and
    not a proposition of error on a point of law.   To  say  that  a  judge
    failed  "to  properly  consider"  the  expert  report  and   "objective
    evidence" leads nowhere.  Ms McFadzean's development of this point  did
    not add anything to the other grounds.

16. Ground (vi) raises a legitimate issue over  whether  the  claim  should
    properly be analysed as falling within the Refugee Convention  category
    of particular social group.  However, as Ms McFadzean acknowledged, the
    point is academic, unless on different findings of fact.

17. The appellant's case depended on showing, to the lower  standard,  that
    her ex-partner is a person  of  influence,  and  likely  to  trace  and
    persecute her if she returns.  The  judge  gave  numerous  reasons  for
    finding against her on that matter.  Most of her reasons have not  been
    challenged.  Only one challenge has been  established.   The  point  in
    ground (iv) was given adverse significance.  It is the  express  reason
    for not accepting that the appellant's ex-partner knows  she  has  left
    the country.  However, its excision goes only to that point, and leaves
    all other reasons  standing.   The  decision  remains  a  comprehensive
    explanation to the appellant why her case  has  failed.   The  slip  is
    relatively minor and not such as to require  the  decision  to  be  set
    aside.  The decision shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]
      14 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
