
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03995/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow                                                  Decision
& Reasons Promulgated
On 1st February 2018                                               On 10th
April 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     GB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Loughran and Co, Solicitors.
For the respondent:  Mr Miles Mathews, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. Although it is the Secretary of State who is appealing in these
      proceedings for convenience I will continue to refer to the parties
      hereinafter as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The appellant claimed protection in July 2016 on the basis he was an
      ethnic Oromo who would be at risk from the Ethiopian State if
      returned. He said since a child he grew up in an atmosphere conscious
      of the position of the Oromo people. He said when he was around 11
      years old government officials attempted to detain his father for his
      support of the Oromo Liberation Front (the OLF).His mother intervened
      and officials shot her and then shot his father. His sister arranged
      for him to stay with a friend of their mothers in a different area.

   3. About a month after his parents killing he attended a small
      demonstration in support of the OLF along with other schoolchildren.
      He was detained for a few days during which time he was ridiculed and
      then released.

   4. For several years he carried out unpaid work at a compound where he
      was living .He then he began distributing leaflets about the Oromo
      .His  sister thought it advisable he leave the country. By this stage
      he had married. He left using an agent, going to Sudan and then Italy
      and France. His wife met him here and they now have a child.

The refusal

   5. The respondent accepted he was Ethiopian but did not accept that he
      was Oromo. He was asked about Oromo traditions and some answers were
      considered vague or incorrect. He was asked to explain the Gadaa
      system and again his answers were considered vague or incorrect at
      times. He said men and women were members but the country information
      indicated it was only men. He said he spoke Oromo but his interview
      was carried out in Armaric.

   6. His account of the activities of his parents and siblings with the OLF
      was considered vague or contradictory. His account of his own
      involvement was considered unsatisfactory. He was asked about becoming
      a member and could not describe the process.

   7. His account about taking part in the demonstration was considered
      inconsistent. For instance, he claimed the demonstration was in Arsi
      where he had been living but had said he had moved to Sululenta after
      his parents died. He then amended his account to say he only moved to
      Sululenta several months after the death of his parents.

   8. Section 8 was raised in the assessment of his credibility. He had not
      claimed protection for several weeks after being in the United Kingdom
      and had passed through France and Italy where he could have claimed.




The First tier Tribunal

   9. His appeal was allowed by First-tier Judge David Clapham SSC following
      a hearing on 11 August 2017. At paragraph 49 the judge said he was
      prepared to accept his evidence that when he was 11 his parents were
      killed by the authorities. He was also prepared to accept that after
      this he was detained because of his involvement in a demonstration. He
      also accepted he was warned against any OLF involvement. The judge
      referred to the country information which indicated human rights
      abuses by the authorities.


  10. At para 24 the judge said it was difficult to be wholly satisfied the
      appellant's profile meant he would be of interest to the authorities.
      The killing of his parents was some time ago as was his own detention.
      Nevertheless, the judge accepted his parents having been killed and
      the appellant having been detained, albeit only for a few days, and
      concluded there was a real risk for him on return. The judge
      acknowledged a discrepancy in the appellant's account as to whether he
      left his parents home after a few days or months. The judge felt this
      did not detract from the truth of his account.


   The Upper Tribunal.


  11. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the basis the reasoning
      of the judge was inadequate and had not engaged with the respondent's
      reasons for refusal. There was no finding as to the appellant's
      ethnicity; the fact he gave his account in Amharic; and the judge's
      acceptance without explanation of the discrepancies of his account.
      Permission was granted on this basis.


  12. I have received a rule 24 response from the appellant's
      representatives. It refers to paragraph 54 and 55 of the judge's
      decision where the judge accepted the appellant's evidence and his
      reference to the low standard of proof. There was also reference to
      the Tribunal decision of Shizad (sufficiency of reasons : set aside )
      [2013] UKUT 00085 where it was  stated that a judge's reasons need not
      be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense.


Consideration

  13. I have considered the decision in the round. It is my conclusion the
      judge has not given adequate reasons for his conclusions and has not
      addressed the respondent's concerns. The judge has made findings but
      has not given reasons behind the findings nor has he assessed the
      evidence and dealt with the concerns of the respondent in any
      meaningful way.


  14. The judge at paragraph 48 did not attach any weight to the delay in
      claiming asylum or the failure to claim in third countries on the
      basis an agent was directing travel. His reasons there are rational
      and have not been challenged.

  15. At paragraph 31 the judge poses the question of whether the appellant,
      having been detained on a single occasion when he was a child, can be
      said to be at real risk. The judge is posing a relevant question
      assuming the underlying claim is true. The judge then refers to
      country information about human rights abuses. However, this does not
      answer the question posed. At paragraph 54 the judge acknowledged
      difficulties in finding the account would have rendered him of
      interest to the authorities. However, the judge then concludes having
      accepted his parents had been killed and that he was briefly detained
      he would be at risk. The judge has not engaged with the fundamental
      questions: whether he is in fact Oromo or if so why there would be a
      risk given the passage of time and the nature of the incidents
      claimed.

  16. At paragraph 55 the judge acknowledges discrepancies in the
      appellant's chronology. The judge then rationalises by a non-sequitar
      that a consistent account could be fabricated whereas an account with
      discrepancies could be true. This does not properly address the issues
      in this case. The judge appears to acknowledge on the claim made there
      is a possibility he is being unduly generous. The fact there is a low
      standard of proof, as the judge mentions, does not mean any account
      must be believed and this does not explain the conclusion.

Conclusions


  17. The judge has not engaged with the fundamental questions raised by the
      respondent about the appellant's ethnicity and the truth of the claim.
      Aside from this, he has not properly assessed on the facts he found
      whether a real risk exists. It is not sufficient to simply state
      findings or conclusions without explaining them.


  18. My conclusion therefore is that this inadequacy of reasoning means
      there is a material error of law in the decision. Consequently it
      cannot stand.

Decision.

The decision of First-tier Judge David Clapham SSC materially errs in law
and cannot stand. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a de
novo hearing.

Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 2nd April 2018









Directions

   1. Relist for a de novo hearing before any First-tier Tribunal except
      First-tier Judge David Clapham SSC.


   2. The appellant's representatives are to advise whether the interpreter
      should be one conversant in Amharic or Oromo.

   3. A chronology and skeleton argument should be provided by the
      appellant's representatives.

   4. A time slot of one and a half hours can be anticipated.


Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 2nd April 2018





















