
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03799/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 15 February 2018                 |On: 9 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     PR
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:      Mr J Howard, Counsel instructed by Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Whitcombe in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a  citizen
    of Cambodia, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum
    and issue removal directions.

 2. The application  under  appeal  was  refused  on  5  April  2017.   The
    Appellant exercised her right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is the appeal which came before Judge Whitcombe on  16  June  2017
    and was dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The application was granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Martins on 27 September 2017 in the following terms

         "The grounds assert that the  judged  erred,  in  not  setting  out
         clearly, the evidential basis for rejecting the  finding  that  the
         significant discrimination the Appellant would  encounter,  reached
         the level of persecution or serious harm and that  it  could  cross
         the threshold from mere discrimination to persecution.

         Further it is unclear what the judge meant, when he made the  order
         for Anonymity, that the  appellant  might  suffer  harm  and  might
         reasonably fear  harm,  as  such  a  person  or  persons  were  not
         specified.

         The assertions made in the grounds are evident on the face  of  the
         decision.

         They disclose an arguable error of law."

 3. By a rule 24 response dated 8 November 2017 the Respondent opposed  the
    appeal arguing that the Judge  directed  himself  appropriately  giving
    adequate reasons for his decision.



Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Appellant is a citizen of Cambodia born on  10
    May 1985. She is a  transgender  woman.  The  Appellant  left  Cambodia
    arriving in the United Kingdom on 5 October 2014. She did  not  have  a
    visa and on arrival was issued with a transit visa valid for 24  hours.
    The Appellant was encountered on 11 July 2015  and  removal  directions
    having been set for 21 July 2015 she claimed asylum on  19  July  2015.
    The basis of her claim was that she faced persecution in Cambodia as  a
    transgender woman and also feared her father, a person to whom she owed
    money and traffickers who  brought  her  to  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had a genuine fear of  her
    father or the person to whom she owed money and did not accept that she
    had been trafficked.  The  Respondent  accepted  the  Appellant  was  a
    transgender woman and that discrimination existed in Cambodia  but  did
    not accept that this amounted to persecution.

 5. In dismissing the appeal, the Judge found that there was no  real  risk
    to the Appellant from her father or the former owner of  the  salon  to
    whom she owed money. The Judge found her account  of  being  trafficked
    credible but found that there  was  no  real  risk  of  harm  from  her
    traffickers. The Judge found that despite the fact that  the  Appellant
    would face significant discrimination existing in Cambodia this did not
    amount to persecution or a risk of serious harm.



Submissions

 6. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Howard represented the Appellant.  Mr  Howard
    said that  the  issues  were  limited.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's  account  was  credible.  The  issue  was  whether   as   a
    transgender woman the Appellant faced  discrimination  or  persecution.
    The state authorities are the agents of persecution or are unwilling to
    provide protection. Mr Howard referred to the expert's report  from  Dr
    Tran and Cambodian  Centre  for  Human  Rights  (CCHR)  report  in  the
    Appellant's bundle. The  CCHR  report  (page  109  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle) shows that in some cases the treatment of transgender women  by
    the police  is  likely  to  amount  to  cruel,  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment. The Judge accepts (at paragraph 49-51) that the Appellant is
    credible throughout.  At paragraph 20 of her  statement  she  gives  an
    account  of  suffering  verbal  abuse,  intimidation   and   occasional
    violence. The Judge has not adequately reasoned why the  discrimination
    suffered does not amount to persecution.

 7. For the Respondent Mr Richards said this is a  detailed  determination.
    The Judge sets out a large amount of the background material considered
    and comes to a reasoned conclusion. He has not shied away from the fact
    that there are difficulties.  This  is  dealt  with  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 63. The Judge does not ignore  the  difficulties.  The  Judge
    directs himself appropriately as to the law. He  finds  that  there  is
    serious discrimination  but  that  it  does  not  reach  the  level  of
    persecution or serious harm. What is being pleaded is a disagreement as
    to where the balance should lie. The Judge was fully entitled to  reach
    the conclusion that it does not reach the threshold of persecution.

 8. Mr Howard responded to say that the challenge was not  just  about  the
    reasons given. It should have been clearly shown why  the  contents  of
    the CCHR report are not accepted. Mr Howard referred to page 100 of the
    Appellant's  bundle.  The  police  and   authorities   are   committing
    violations of trans women's' rights.  There  a  significant  background
    evidence to show more than mere discrimination.

 9. I reserved my decision.



Decision

10. The issues involved in this appeal are limited. The First-tier Tribunal
    dismissed  the  appeal  finding  that  the  Appellant  would  not  face
    persecution or serious harm from her father, the  person  to  whom  she
    owed money or her traffickers and that whilst she may face  significant
    discrimination  as  a  transgender  woman  this  would  not  reach  the
    threshold of persecution or serious harm. The grounds of appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal (at paragraph 4) specifically limit the  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal to the last of these findings asserting that  the  Judge
    has not  given  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the  significant
    discrimination faced by the Appellant as a transgender woman would  not
    amount to persecution or serious harm.

11. I have carefully read the two reports referred to  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal which were relied upon by Mr Howard in his submissions.  I  have
    also read the other background evidence contained  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle. The statement of reasons makes it  clear  the  that  First-tier
    tribunal Judge was alive  to  and  considered  these  reports  and  the
    background evidence.

12. The complaint is that the Judge, having found  the  Appellant  credible
    and having found that the Appellant as a transgender woman  would  face
    significant discrimination on a return  to  Cambodia  found  that  this
    discrimination would not reach the threshold of persecution or  serious
    harm. His reasoning is articulated in paragraphs 61-64 by reference  to
    the background evidence. At paragraph 61 the Judge  notes  the  reports
    but observes "a large majority of transgender  women  were  happy  with
    their lives". This is taken from page 25 of the CCHR Report which shows
    86.57% of transgender women surveyed said that  they  were  happy  with
    their current life. Referring to the prevalence of hate crimes  against
    transgender women the Judge noted that the figures came from a study of
    transgender women involved in  the  sex  industry  in  Phnom  Penh  and
    observed that the Appellant does not propose to work in  that  industry
    or to live in that city. This finding is not challenged.

13. The Appellant's account, accepted as credible by the Judge, was not  an
    account of having faced persecution  in  Cambodia  or  of  having  left
    Cambodia fearing persecution. Having left home the  Appellant  gave  an
    account of living what appears to have been a moderately  settled  life
    for many  years  and  of  working  in  before  buying  a  beauty  salon
    (paragraphs 26-30 of her statement). The only description given by  her
    of harm faced in Cambodia is of suffering  verbal  abuse,  intimidation
    and occasional violence (paragraph 20 of her statement). There  are  no
    specific examples given other than one occasion when the Appellant  was
    slapped in the face and had her hair pulled by  a  man  with  whom  she
    declined to dance. I asked Mr Howard if there were any  other  specific
    examples when this was raised during submissions he was unable to  give
    any. The Appellant left Cambodia to earn money abroad (paragraph 32  of
    her statement).

14. In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal has demonstrated  that  it  took
    the background evidence including the expert's and  CCHR  reports  into
    account  and  considered  this   against   the   Appellant's   personal
    circumstances including both her account of what had  happened  in  the
    past and her intentions for  the  future.  Having  done  so  the  Judge
    reached the conclusion that the discrimination that the  Appellant  was
    likely to face on a return to Cambodia did not reach the  threshold  of
    serious harm and did not amount  to  persecution.  It  was  a  reasoned
    conclusion that was manifestly open to him  and  indeed  one  that  was
    inevitable on the evidence presented. There is in my judgment no  error
    of law.

15. A separate ground of appeal is raised  in  respect  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's anonymity direction. It is asserted that it is unclear  what
    the judge meant when he referred in the direction to the possibility of
    the Appellant suffering harm. In my judgement this ground of appeal has
    no merit. The anonymity direction needs to be read in  the  context  of
    the appeal as a whole. This is a standard anonymity  direction  of  the
    kind normally made in protection appeals to which the Judge has added a
    sentence because of the 'highly personal information' involved.



Summary

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.  The  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:     Date: 8 March 2018

[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
