
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V2

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/03263/2015
                                                               PA/03218/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th December 2016                          |On 20th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                          Mr MSM (first appellant)
                          Mr ASS (second appellant)
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr G O'Ceallaigh, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Afghanistan born on 13th April 1950  and
    1st January 1993.  They are father and son.   Between  them  they  have
    three family members who are also in the  UK  who  are  dependent  upon
    their appeals namely the first Appellant's wife and  mother  of  second
    Appellant and the second Appellant's two children born on  3rd  January
    1998 and 25th May 2001.  The Appellants left Afghanistan  on  1st  June
    2015 and arrived in the UK by lorry  on  14th  June  2015  and  claimed
    asylum on 29th June 2015.  The Appellants' claim for  asylum  is  based
    upon  a  fear  that  if  returned  to  Afghanistan  they   would   face
    mistreatment by an individual known as Ahmed and his sons  due  to  the
    Appellants being  Sikhs  whilst  Ahmed  and  his  family  are  Muslims.
    Further they fear that their family would be recruited  into  Jihad  or
    their  daughters  married  off  to  Jihad  fighters.   The  Appellants'
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal issued by the Home  Office
    on 19th November 2015.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Brookfield sitting at Manchester on 11th July 2013.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  28th  July  2016  the  Appellants'
    appeals were dismissed on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  and  the
    Appellants were found not to be in  need  of  humanitarian  protection.
    Judge Brookfield made an anonymity direction.  No application  is  made
    to vary that order and that order remains in place.

 3. On 10th August 2016 the Appellants lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:-

      a) that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to have regard to the
         country  guidance  in  TG  and  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)
         Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC) in assessing the  plausibility
         of the Appellants' account of being targeted by Ahmed;

      b) that the judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  country  guidance  in
         considering the issues that were relevant to destitution in respect
         of the whole family; and

      c) the judge failed to have regard to the relevant country guidance in
         considering the best interests of  LKM,  the  minor  child  of  the
         second Appellant born on 25th May 2001 and aged 15 who had lived in
         the UK since arrival on  14th  June  2015  and  been  in  education
         therefore since September 2015.

 4. On 25th August 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page  granted
    permission to appeal.  That permission concentrated on  the  suggestion
    that the judge had failed to have regard to the country guidance in  TG
    and Others.  Judge Page  noted  that  the  judge's  decision  makes  no
    reference to TG and Others and that  therefore  it  followed  that  the
    application  had   raised   arguable   errors   that   wanted   further
    consideration.

 5. On 15th September 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  That reply  noted  that  the  judge  properly
    considered the Appellants' asylum claim and found that they  would  not
    be at risk on return to Afghanistan.  The Rule 24 states that the judge
    did make reference to the country guidance authority of TG  and  Others
    and applied it to the facts of the case as set out at paragraph  10(xv)
    of the determination.  Further the Rule 24  response  states  that  the
    judge also considered the best interests of the child  as  set  out  at
    paragraph 10(xxiv), (xxv) and (xxvi).

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellants appear by  their  instructed
    Counsel Mr O'Ceallaigh.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Bates.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Mr O'Ceallaigh submits that there are two principle errors of law  upon
    which he wishes to concentrate.  Firstly he submits that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has failed to apply the country guidance authority of TG
    and Others albeit that he accepts that the headnote to  that  authority
    has been mentioned within the decision  and  secondly  that  the  judge
    failed to make material findings.   He  submits  it  is  actually  very
    unclear as to what findings the judge made, if any, for example  as  to
    whether Mr Ahmed, the alleged perpetrator of the persecution,  actually
    exists or not or as to what would happen to the Appellants upon  return
    i.e. as to what they would use for financial support  and  where  would
    they go to live.  Further the judge he submits has failed  to  consider
    whether they would be targeted and has  failed  to  apply  the  country
    guidance as to whether the sort of thing that occurs as set out in  the
    country  guidance  of  TG  actually  happens.   He  submits  that   the
    harassment of the Sikh and Hindu communities is dealt with  extensively
    within the country guidance authority i.e. it is a documented point and
    that the judge has failed to address this.  He submits  that  there  is
    evidence which is corroborative to the Appellants'  claim  provided  by
    family members and that this is key to the credibility  assessment  and
    that the judge has failed to take this into  account.   For  all  these
    reasons he submits there are material errors of law.

 8. He takes  me  to  some  of  the  findings  of  the  judge.   Whilst  he
    acknowledges that there are extensive  paragraphs  he  emphasises  that
    they do not address the  initial  issues.   He  notes  the  finding  at
    paragraph 10(ii) where the judge states "It seems to me that  if  local
    Muslims had problems with the first Appellant and his family because of
    their religion, it is highly improbable that they would  patronise  his
    shop when they had an alternative option to  purchase  the  same  goods
    from a Muslim."

 9. Mr O'Ceallaigh emphasises that if the  country  guidance  authority  is
    scrutinised it is clear that this sort of persecution does  happen  and
    had the judge applied country guidance she  would  have  come  to  that
    conclusion.  He emphasises that it does not mean that all Muslims would
    behave in the way contended by the alleged perpetrators in this appeal.

10. He points out that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  failed  to  take
    into account that their account is  consistent  with  country  guidance
    thus following the principles originally set out  in  Horvath  and  has
    failed to take into account what the Appellants' core of their case  is
    namely that they have been harassed.  He submits that the findings  are
    contradictory to country guidance  and  as  such  constitutes  material
    errors of law.

11. He further takes me to the findings of the judge at paragraph (xix) and
    submits that the judge's conclusions on sufficiency of  protection  are
    inadequate and that the reality is  that  the  judge  when  making  her
    findings did not have the country guidance authority in mind  and  that
    the whole point of country guidance is that Sikhs  are  at  risk  as  a
    result of the way that they are treated.

12. In response Mr Bates points out that the judge's findings are  detailed
    and that Mr  O'Ceallaigh  in  his  submissions  has  cherry-picked  the
    judge's findings on credibility, that there are other  paragraphs  (iv)
    and (v) which all address the issue  of  credibility.   The  judge  has
    referred, he submits, to a specific incident in May 2015 and found that
    the Appellants' evidence lacks credibility and that  the  incident  was
    spurred by trade jealousy.  He submits that the judge has engaged  with
    the  specific   credibility   account   and   given   cogent   reasons.
    Consequently when looked at as a whole the judge has taken  all  issues
    into account and the arguments with regard  to  business  rivalry  have
    found to be not credible and that the findings made were  open  to  the
    judge.

13. He further submits that the judge has not merely set out  the  headnote
    to the country guidance authority but has applied the facts  (paragraph
    (xvi)) and that this is a fact-sensitive case and  therefore  that  the
    judge has addressed the issues and  found  that  two  adult  males  can
    provide protection.  He notes that it would be possible  for  the  male
    Appellants to set up another  business  and  that  the  Appellants  had
    access to substantial funds.  At paragraph (xviii) the judge has  noted
    that there are Gurdwaras operating in Kabul  and  that  the  Appellants
    would be able to continue their religion and their schooling in  Kabul.
    He submits that the judge was entitled to conclude that the  Appellants
    would be able to re-establish a self-employed  business  within  Kabul.
    He contends that the judge's findings were open to  her  based  on  her
    findings on credibility.

14. Further he submits the judge has gone on to consider  the  minor  child
    and stated at paragraph (xxiii) that the Appellants did  not  pursue  a
    claim under Article 8.  Considering the best interests of the child  he
    states the judge made a finding that there was  no  reason  to  suggest
    that family life could not continue.  He points out that  just  because
    other judges may have come to a different decision does not  mean  that
    there is a material error of law and  he  asks  me  to  find  that  the
    decision is sound and to dismiss the appeal.

15. Mr O'Ceallaigh  in  brief  response  indicates  that  the  judge  makes
    credibility findings on  the  facts  and  then  looks  at  the  country
    guidance.  He submits that the error is that there is a  risk  in  that
    the judge has failed to make findings which  are  not  consistent  with
    country guidance and that overall the judge has failed to consider  TG.
    He points out the  judge  has  made  no  findings  on  the  Appellants'
    financial position, only noted that the family used to have  money  and
    that in such cases decisions are fact-sensitive and much depends on the
    resources.  He submits that there are no findings on this aspect and of
    how the family would live.

16. He takes me again to paragraph (xvi) of the judge's findings, which  is
    the only paragraph that  addresses  the  financial  circumstances,  and
    points out that guidance given  with  regard  to  how  they  should  be
    addressed within TG has not been considered.  He points out  there  had
    been no findings made on family support and he asked me  to  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Law

17.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

18. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

19. The starting point in this matter is the way in  which  the  judge  has
    given due consideration to the country guidance  authority  of  TG  and
    Others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 595  (IAC).
    The judge has set out the headnote at paragraph (xv).  I agree with the
    submissions thereafter of Mr O'Ceallaigh that the judge has  failed  to
    apply that country guidance to the facts of this case.  As  a  starting
    point  it  is  necessary  for  the  judge  to  consider  the  issue  of
    credibility.  A proper approach to credibility requires  an  assessment
    of the evidence and of the general claim.  In asylum  claims,  relevant
    factors will consist of firstly the internal consistency of the  claim;
    secondly the  inherent  plausibility  of  the  claim  and  thirdly  the
    consistency of the claim with external factors of  the  sort  typically
    found in country guidance.  I acknowledge it is  theoretically  correct
    that a claimant need do no more than state his or her  claim  but  that
    claim  still  needs  to  be  examined  for  consistency  and   inherent
    plausibility.  In nearly every case external information against  which
    the claim could be checked will be available.

20. In this case that external evidence consists of  the  country  guidance
    authority, objective evidence and the evidence of the parties.   It  is
    not a case where the evidence of the Appellants is disbelieved but  one
    where the basis behind the alleged persecution is found by the judge to
    be a neighbour dispute over business rather than persecution.

21. The judge should consider the evidence in the light of country guidance
    rather than merely recite it.  The judge has made no  findings  on  the
    availability of family support and has failed  to  give  full  and  due
    proper consideration to the religious differences and persecution  that
    arises as set out in TG concentrating on a business rivalry.

22. The judge made no findings as to whether the family would be  destitute
    on return to Jalalabad and no findings on whether the Appellant a  year
    after leaving  Afghanistan  would  have  any  assets  in  Jalalabad  or
    elsewhere.  Further the judge  made  no  findings  as  to  whether  the
    Appellants had any family  in  Afghanistan.   There  is  no  indication
    within country guidance authority that the Sikh businesses are  shunned
    by Muslim customers and the judge was in  error  with  this  regard  at
    paragraph 10(ii).  Further the  judge  clearly  departed  from  country
    guidance in her conclusions on sufficiency of protection  at  paragraph
    10(xix).  I accept the submission made by Mr O'Ceallaigh that  that  is
    relevant as to Ahmed's motives i.e. as to whether this is a case  of  a
    Muslim seeking to exploit the weak  position  of  a  Sikh  minority  as
    against  a  neighbour  dispute.   Further  I  accept  Mr  O'Ceallaigh's
    submission that the judge fell into error in looking  for  specifically
    religious motivation on behalf of Ahmed and doubting  the  plausibility
    of the Appellants' account on that basis i.e. being a Sikh and having a
    valuable business are clearly risk factors in themselves and the  judge
    failed to take this into account

23. In such circumstances there are material errors of law in the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The correct approach is to remit the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing with none of the
    findings of fact to stand.  I emphasise that that is not  to  say  that
    another judge would not come to exactly  the  same  conclusion  but  in
    doing so it would be necessary to give due and  full  consideration  to
    the position in which the Appellants as a  whole  find  themselves  and
    apply TG and Others accordingly.



Notice of Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge contains a material  error  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereafter for the  rehearing  of
this matter:-

 1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester
    to be heard before any Immigration Judge other than  Immigration  Judge
    Brookfield on the first available date 28 days hence  with  an  ELH  of
    three hours.

 2. None of the findings of fact are to stand.

 3. That there be leave to either party to file at the Tribunal  and  serve
    copies on the other party an  additional  bundle  of  objective  and/or
    subjective evidence upon  which  they  seek  to  rely  along  with  any
    additional skeleton arguments and authorities at least seven days prior
    to the restored hearing.

 4. That  the  Appellants  do  attend  court  for  the  purpose  of  cross-
    examination.

 5. That a Punjabi interpreter is required.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


