
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03209/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 February 2018                  |On 26 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                  MUOSA [H]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Boyle, Solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who sought international protection.
    His application was refused and he appealed and  following  a  hearing,
    and in a decision promulgated on 17 July 2017, Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hands dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    but on a renewed application granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey  in
    a decision dated 23 November 2017. His reasons for the grant are: -
         "It is arguable that the judge's treatment of the CSID issue is not
         consistent with the Court of Appeal guidance in AA [2017] EWCA  Civ
         944 and that the  judge  failed  to  correctly  apply  the  country
         guidance in BA (Returns to Baghdad) [2017]  UKUT  00018  especially
         given the judge's finding in para 32 that the situation in  Baghdad
         has not changed significantly since."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Mr Boyle relied upon the grounds seeking permission to  appeal  arguing
    that the Judge inadequately reasoned the findings made in  relation  to
    the Appellant's "unreliable" evidence in respect of family in  Baghdad.
    That the Judge also materially erred in failing to follow the  guidance
    in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and that given to "the CSID" as
    detailed in the Annex to the decision at Section C paragraph 9, 10  and
    11. Finally that the Judge had erred in relation to the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's kidnapping risk which departs  from  the  country  guidance
    contained within BA (Returns to Baghdad  Iraq  CG)  [2017]  UKUT  00018
    (IAC).

 5. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the  Respondent's  Rule  24  response  dated  21
    December 2017 and urged me to accept that the Judge  had  distinguished
    the Appellant within these proceedings from those within both AA and BA
    and appropriately directed herself resulting in the decision containing
    no material error of law.

 6. I find that not to be the case. The grounds  relied  on  show  material
    errors  as  argued  and  that  the  treatment  of  the  CSID  issue  is
    inconsistent with the Court of Appeal guidance in AA and that there  is
    a failure to correctly apply  the  country  guidance  in  BA.  This  is
    particularly so considering the Judge's own findings in relation to the
    situation in Baghdad.

 7. Albeit that the Appellant attended the hearing late he was  present.  I
    was told that he was unable to give evidence without an interpreter.  I
    considered whether I could resolve the competing issues today. However,
    I am persuaded that further evidence is needed with  reference  to  the
    issue of the Appellant's family in Baghdad. I  am  satisfied  that  the
    relevant evidence has not properly been considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that there has been therefore a deprivation of opportunity
    for the Appellant to put his case properly. In the circumstances I have
    decided to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de
    novo.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judges  Hands  and  S  T
Fox.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 21 February 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
