
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/03598/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 November 2018             |On 29 November 2018              |
|Prepared on 26 November 2018    |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    C. Z.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally on an unknown
           date. He claimed asylum when identified as an  illegal  entrant,
           asserting that he was a citizen of Iran and that he faced a real
           risk of harm at the hands of the Iranian authorities as a result
           of the political opinions he was perceived to hold.
        2. The Appellant's protection claim was refused by  the  Respondent
           on 1 March 2018. That refusal  challenged  his  account  of  his
           experiences as  untrue.  The  Appellant's  appeal  against  that
           decision was heard on 12 April 2018, and dismissed by First Tier
           Tribunal Judge Cope in a decision promulgated on 29 May 2018.
        3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal from the  FtT  on  the
           basis the Judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
           conclusion that the Appellant had not told the truth  about  his
           experiences in Iran, or  his  political  beliefs.  It  was  also
           argued that the Judge's findings were  inconsistent.  Permission
           was granted by First tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 20 June 2018.
        4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      The challenge
        5. Ms Brakaj (who did not  draft  the  grounds,  or  appear  below)
           advanced the appeal on the basis that the Judge's findings  were
           inconsistent,  rather  than  that  they  were  unreasoned.   She
           accepted that to advance the latter challenge would be  somewhat
           difficult in the face  of  46  paragraphs  of  analysis  of  the
           evidence and reasoning.
        6. One further argument that Ms Brakaj initially sought to  advance
           was abandoned once she accepted that it was not contained within
           the grounds.
        7. Thus Ms Brakaj advanced the Appellant's challenge on  the  basis
           that the Judge's findings in paragraphs 39 and 47 of the Judge's
           decision were inconsistent and incompatible. There is  no  merit
           in that argument. The Judge is entitled  to  have  his  decision
           read as a whole,  and  paragraphs  45-7  must  clearly  be  read
           together. Indeed it is only a feature  of  the  Judge's  writing
           style that has caused this passage to  be  split  between  three
           paragraphs. Moreover paragraph 39 contains no acceptance of  the
           Appellant's evidence, and cannot sensibly be read as  doing  so.
           On the other hand paragraphs 40-3, 45-7, 48-51,  and  55-7  give
           clear and cogent reasons as to why the Judge found four  aspects
           of the Appellant's account to be a fiction.
        8. Contrary to Ms Brakaj's submissions  before  me  the  Judge  did
           reconcile the evidence, and, stand back to look at  the  picture
           in the round. The mere fact (if indeed  it  were  true  in  this
           case) that a claimant has given a  consistent  account,  is  not
           conclusive of whether he has given a truthful  account.  A  well
           rehearsed, but untrue, story is likely to be consistent.
        9. It was in my judgement well open to the Judge  on  the  evidence
           that was placed before him  to  reach  the  adverse  credibility
           findings that he did. He gave more than adequate reasons for his
           conclusion that  the  Appellant  had  not  told  the  truth;  MD
           (Turkey)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1958.  Contrary  to   Ms   Brakaj's
           submissions, it is plain that the Judge did stand back and  look
           at the evidence in the round, and place the Appellant's evidence
           in its proper context.
       10. In the circumstances, and as set out above, I am satisfied  that
           the Judge did not err in law in concluding  that  the  Appellant
           could return to Iran without facing persecution, or a breach  of
           his Article 3 rights. He failed to establish that he  faced  any
           Article 15(c) risk of harm in his home  area.  Accordingly,  and
           notwithstanding the terms in  which  permission  to  appeal  was
           granted, the grounds fail to disclose any material error of  law
           in the approach taken by the Judge to the appeal  that  requires
           his decision to be set aside and remade.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 29
   May 2018 contained no material error of law in the decision  to  dismiss
   the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside  and
   remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 26 November 2018
