
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03329/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12 May 2017                        |On 8 June 2017                        |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                    [a a]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay of Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal, with  permission,  against
    the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters  promulgated  on
    20  December  2016  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against   the
    Secretary of State's refusal of his  protection  claim  on  21st  March
    2016.



Background history

 2. The appellant is a national of Somalia born on [ ] 1966. He entered the
    United Kingdom on 22 January 1994 and claimed asylum at Heathrow on the
    basis that he was Somalian  and  that  claim  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused.  After some protracted litigation his asylum claim  was  again
    refused but the appellant was granted Exceptional Leave to Remain on 28
    August 1997.

 3. On 1 May 1995, shortly after his arrival, the appellant  was  convicted
    at  Bristol  Crown  Court  of  rape  and  sentenced   to   30   months'
    imprisonment.  On 19 March 1999 the appellant committed an  offence  of
    assault occasioning actual bodily harm for which he was sentenced on 19
    March 1999 to a hospital order at Southwark Crown Court.

 4. On 15 March 2000 at  Middlesex  Guildhall  Crown  Court  the  appellant
    received a further sentence of five years' imprisonment  varied  to  42
    months' imprisonment on  appeal,  having  been  convicted  of  unlawful
    wounding.

 5. The Secretary of State proceeded to issue a  notice  of  liability  for
    deportation which was served  on  the  appellant  on  8  February  2008
    because of his conviction for rape  in  1995  and  his  conviction  for
    wounding in 2000.

 6. In June 2003 the  appellant  was  convicted  of  failing  to  supply  a
    specimen and was disqualified from driving and fined.  In July 2003  he
    was convicted of criminal damage and  given  a  12  months  conditional
    discharge.

 7. The appellant appealed a notice of liability for deportation dated  8th
    February 2008 and a First-tier Tribunal Judge in a decision promulgated
    on 6 October 2008 (upheld on appeal) rejected the  appellant's  refugee
    claim that he would be persecuted as a minority clan member finding  in
    fact that he was a majority clan member - Isaaq.  The judge also  noted
    the  appellant  suffered  from  mental  health  problems  and  HIV  but
    considered that some treatment for HIV and mental illness was available
    in Somalia.  Nonetheless it was found that his  family  life  with  his
    wife/partner a British citizen, (a  relationship  which  is  no  longer
    extant), was such that his removal would breach his  Article  8  rights
    even though they  did  not  live  together.   It  was  found  that  the
    appellant's wife would  face  insurmountable  obstacles  in  moving  to
    Somalia.  The judge also found that the appellant had  apparently  been
    rehabilitated.

 8. The appellant was then granted discretionary  leave  on  2  March  2010
    until 2 September 2010.  On 12 October 2010 the  appellant  was  served
    with notice of liability for deportation following  his  conviction  on
    the same date for destroying or damaging property.  He was convicted of
    affray and received a total of twelve months'  imprisonment  concurrent
    for both offences.  During the  course  of  the  twelve  months  prison
    sentence imposed on 12 October 2010, the appellant was  remanded  to  a
    psychiatric hospital but was arrested on the same date for  threatening
    and intimidating behaviour  against  female  nurses.   The  appellant's
    licence was revoked and he was transferred to HMP Ranby on  14  January
    2011 to complete his original sentence.

 9. The appellant made an application for a further period of discretionary
    leave on 22 March 2011 but on 4  February  2013  a  further  notice  of
    liability for deportation was issued whereupon  the  appellant  applied
    for asylum on 11 December 2013.

10. Finally, on 21 April 2015 a decision to deport the appellant was made.

11. During the period of May to December 2015 the  appellant  breached  his
    tagging  curfew  and  failed  to  allow  EMS  Officers  access  to  the
    appellant's property and failed to report.

12. In July 2015 the appellant was arrested on suspicion of affray  and  on
    18 September the appellant was sectioned under the  Mental  Health  Act
    and admitted to St. Anne's Hospital in London until he  was  discharged
    on 11 November 2015.

13. On 23 November 2015 a Section 72 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 notice was sent to the appellant's representatives  and
    in the same month his Section 4 Support was discontinued as  he  failed
    to report to the Home Office and failed to be at his authorised address
    during curfew times and failed  to  use  the  funds  available  on  his
    'Azure' card.

14. Finally, on 21 March 2016  the  Secretary  of  State  made  a  decision
    refusing the appellant's protection and human rights claim which was in
    turn dismissed by Judge Walters.  His decision was the stimulus for  an
    application for permission to appeal by the appellant.

Permission to Appeal

15. The grounds of challenge were that the judge

                      i) took an irrational  approach  to  the  Section  72
                         certification;

      ii) failed to apply rationally the country  guidance  case  of  MOJ  &
          Others (return to Mogadishu) CG [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC;

     iii) failed to have regard to material evidence of the risk to  someone
          with  a  mental  illness  of  a  specific  type  suffered  by  the
          appellant;

      iv) erred in treating of  the  Article  3  and  Article  8  claims  as
          coterminous

       v) failed to consider the appellant's case under Article 15(c) of the
          Qualification Directive.

      vi) Failed to apply the Ravichandran principle

16. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted permission on the  grounds  (ii)
    to (vi) but refused to grant permission  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    approach to the Section 72 certification.



The Hearing

    Ground (i) Section 72

17. Permission to appeal on the Section 72 ground was renewed to the  Upper
    Tribunal and apparently refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman.   That
    application was renewed before me at the oral hearing by  Mr  Lay.   It
    was submitted that in the ten years preceding the date  of  the  appeal
    the appellant had been convicted of only one offence of affray and  had
    been living in the community for over  four  years  without  attracting
    another conviction.  It was submitted that the  judge's  finding,  that
    there  was  a  real  risk  of  the  appellant  stabbing  someone,   was
    insufficiently grounded and irrational.  Admissions to  hospital  under
    Section 3 of the Mental Health Act 1983 to mental institutions were for
    the protection of the patient and the judge had not properly considered
    the evidence.

18. At  the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Lay  submitted  that  there  was  no
    consideration of Dr Lorenz' report by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    It was not that the appellant had taken himself outside the  Convention
    but merely that he had undergone a mental health crisis.

19. Mr Jarvis resisted the arguments advanced in relation to the Section 72
    ground.  The statute, the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
    was clear.   Although it was argued  that  the  appellant  was  violent
    because of his mental crisis, he was still a  risk  to  the  community.
    There  was  nothing  in  the  papers  to  indicate  that  his  personal
    culpability in committing offences was only a consequence of his mental
    health and the judge had not erred in his approach.

20. I am not persuaded  that  the  first  ground,  renewed  before  me,  is
    arguable in light of the decisions of Judge Ford and  Freeman.    Judge
    Walters at paragraph 50 of his determination, and at the outset of  his
    decision, directed himself appropriately, clearly setting  out  Section
    72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.    It  is  also
    clear from the statutory framework that the presumption that the person
    has been convicted of a particularly serious crime  and  constitutes  a
    danger to the community derives from the  basis  of  the  sentence  the
    appellant received. That is the premise from which it is  important  to
    start. The appellant had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    at least two years albeit that such a sentence was some years previous.
     Nothing in Section 72 precludes the Secretary of State from relying on
    an elderly conviction.  The judge noted that the presumption  could  be
    rebutted and took into account all the relevant evidence including  the
    history of his more recent and  continuing  offending  and  his  mental
    health.  The judge specifically stated at paragraph 91 that:

         "91.     Having considered all the medical evidence in relation  to
             the Appellant on the question  of  whether  he  constitutes  a
             danger to the community I find that there is a  real  risk  of
             him committing a particularly serious crime, that is  stabbing
             a member of the public."

    The judge proceeded:

           "It was not disputed by  Mr  Lay  that  the  Appellant  has  two
           convictions for particularly serious crimes, that is rape  on  1
           May 1995 and wounding on 15 March 2000".

21. Having rehearsed the history of the appellant and the medical evidence,
    the judge specifically referred to the report of  Dr  Lorenz,  did  not
    accept that the appellant had rebutted the presumption. It was open  to
    the judge to conclude that even if the appellant did experience  mental
    illness and crises, the appellant remained a risk to the community  and
    to conclude that,  on  the  evidence,  the  presumption  had  not  been
    displaced.

22. In my view the judge did not err in his  conclusions,  particularly  in
    the light of the history of the appellant carrying knives.   The  judge
    did not misunderstand the law and this ground is not arguable.

23. I turn to the remaining grounds presented by Mr Lay.

    Ground (ii): Failure to rationally apply the country guidance in MOJ:

24. It was accepted that the judge was obliged  to  follow  and  apply  the
    country guidance in MOJ & Others (return to Mogadishu) CG  [2014]  UKUT
    442 (IAC).  It was contended, however, that the judge  failed  to  have
    regard and integrate into his analysis the factors which the  appellant
    had put forward which militated against him living in  Mogadishu,  that
    being his 22 years' absence from the city, the absence of his relatives
    and his severe and enduring mental health problems.   It  was  accepted
    that country guidance stated there needed to be a careful assessment of
    the circumstances.

25. Mr Lay submitted that the evidence, regarding  the  appellant's  mental
    health gave compelling reasons why the appellant would not be  able  to
    subsist in Mogadishu and he referred  to  the  medical  evidence  which
    suggested the appellant's mental health  would  relapse.   It  was  not
    sufficient to assume that there would be  family  remittances  or  that
    they would be a complete answer to the Article 3 claim.  This was not a
    normal 'return' case and the question was  not  whether  the  appellant
    could be supported at some minimal level but whether his mental  health
    profile would require special support.

26. Paragraph 127, in Mr Lay's submission, was insufficient in that  regard
    as there was no analysis of  why  it  was  deemed  to  be  possible  or
    affordable for such events to take place in Mogadishu at the behest  of
    the family in the UK.

    Ground (iii): failure to have regard to material expert evidence:

27. The appellant had put forward an international protection claim on  the
    basis of his individual symptoms of the  enduring  and  serious  mental
    health problems with which he had been affected for many  years;  there
    was the  likelihood  on  the  background  evidence  that  he  would  be
    ostracised and worse, enchained.  The judge  did  not  have  sufficient
    regard to the expert report of Dr Markus Hoehne dated 28  October  2016
    and did not sufficiently analyse the evidence from Dr Hoehne which  was
    identified in the written grounds of appeal specifically that:

         "(i)     Mental health personnel in Somalia are ill  qualified  and
             poorly trained [AB/40 para 27-28]; equipment is outdated;  and
             psychotropic   medication    is    irregularly    unavailable,
             uncontrolled and maladministered. [AB/40 para 29];

         (ii)     None of the medication of which AA is in  receipt  appears
             on a list of the 23 psychotropic drugs said to be available in
             Somalia [AB/41 para 33-34];

         (iii)    The only modest assistance programmes for mental health in
             Somalia exist in Somaliland;  'there  is  no  stable  existing
             assistance for mental health institutions in southern  Somalia
             including Mogadishu [AB/40 para 30];

         (iv)     A person showing aggressive  behaviour,  linked  to  their
             mental health, is likely  to  be  imprisoned  where  the  most
             likely treatment is chaining [AB/42 para 36];

         (v)      Admission to hospital  for  those  suffering  with  mental
             illness routinely comprises exposure  to  inhumane  conditions
             including chaining.  [AB/42 para 36];

         (vi)     Somali nationals who are mentally  ill-treatment  and  not
             hospitalised  are  treated  with   either   traditional/herbal
             medicine  or  subject  to  various  forms  of  exorcism   and,
             invariably, chained.  [AB/41 para 32]."

28. The judge was obliged to have regard to these arguments  in  evaluating
    whether the appellant faced a real risk of harm on return owing to  the
    possible infliction of enchainment and the response of the  remittances
    did not "do the  job".   The  erred  in  his  failure  to  address  the
    evidence.

    Ground (iv):  The judge erred in his treatment of  the  Article  3  and
    Article 8 claims as being coterminous when they were in fact distinct

29. Article 3 entailed a consideration of whether there  would  be  a  real
    risk of serious harm on return whilst in Article  8  the  question  was
    whether  on  the  balance  of  probabilities   deportation   would   be
    disproportionate in all the circumstances.  Paragraphs 116-122  of  the
    decision did not represent a rational approach to  the  proportionality
    assessment or a comprehensive analysis of the evidence  which  included
    the appellant's mental health, his HIV status, and the secondary mental
    health support structures available in Mogadishu and the loss of family
    members and ultimately whether those factors provided  very  compelling
    circumstances.   There  was  insufficient  reasoning  for  the   weight
    attached to the factors. The judge  was  entitled  to  give  particular
    weight to the purported risk of re-offending but that  did  not  remove
    the obligation to weigh appropriately all other factors potentially  in
    the appellant's favour.  The  appellant,  Mr  Lay  submitted,  had  two
    decades of lawful residence and the judge had not  taken  that  or  all
    relevant factors into account.

30.  There  must  be  a  wide-ranging  consideration  of  the   appellant's
    circumstances but there was no test of exceptionality and Huang v  SSHD
    [2007] UKHL 11 remained good law in the sense that the  Rules  did  not
    strike a comprehensive balance.

    Ground (v) failed to consider the appellant's case under Article  15(c)
    of the Qualification Directive.

31.  This was set out in the written grounds.

    Ground (vi): Failed to apply the Ravichandran principle

32. This ground related  to  the  principle  enshrined  in  Ravichandran  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [1996] Imm AR 97 that  human
    rights claims should be determined in the light of the circumstances as
    they stood at the date of the hearing.  At  that  date  the  judge  had
    recognised the appellant was in hospital having been sectioned and  his
    current mental health was one which the Tribunal should integrate  into
    an evaluation of the hypothetical risk to him of being returned.  There
    was speculation that the appellant would be stable when he was returned
    and it may be the case that he would not be removed until he was fit to
    fly, and this could not be pleaded, but  the  role  of  the  judge  was
    nonetheless to assess the circumstances as they pertained at  the  date
    of the hearing.  The  judge  had  not  given  adequate  regard  to  the
    precarious mental health and physical health of the appellant.

    Mr Jarvis' response

33. In response to the various submissions, Mr Jarvis  submitted  that  the
    case was not advanced on the basis of N v UK [2005] UKHL 31 or D  v  UK
    (1997) 24 EHRR and he remarked that GS (India)  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2015] EWCA Civ 40 was still binding  law.   The  appellant  could  not
    succeed on health grounds  and  there  was  no  error  in  the  judge's
    assessment.  The judge clearly found  the  possibility  of  remittances
    being sent at paragraphs 109 and 110 and that was open to him.  In line
    with TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  40  the  burden  was  on  the
    appellant to show that if he returned he would be at  serious  risk  of
    serious harm.  There was a distinct lack  of  oral  evidence  from  his
    family members in the UK such that the  judge  was  able  to  find  the
    appellant had not made out that he would be without adequate  financial
    resources on return.

34. Secondly, the judge did consider the circumstances of the appellant and
    the medical care available on return.  It was not contested that  there
    was a hospital clinic in existence in Mogadishu and although there  was
    some evidence of ostracism and chaining there was evidence of  hospital
    care which did not entail the use of  such  chaining.   The  judge  had
    taken into account at paragraph 127  the consequences of family support
    which he was entitled to do and  there  was  nothing  unlawful  in  the
    judge's finding in that paragraph.  The judge was not saying that there
    was family there but there was nothing to stop the family  from  making
    arrangements for the appellant on his return.

35. I was referred to the judgment in Said v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 422 where it was  emphasised  that  the
    courts had drawn a proper distinction between  humanitarian  protection
    and Article 3 and recognised the need for the individual  circumstances
    of the person to be considered.  Paragraph 31 stated:

         "An appeal to Article 3 which suggests that  the  person  concerned
         would face impoverished conditions of living on removal to  Somalia
         should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated in Sufi and Elmi at  para
         282,  be  viewed  by  reference  to  the  test  in  the   N   case.
         Impoverished conditions which were the  direct  result  of  violent
         activities may be viewed differently as would cases where the  risk
         suggested is of direct violence itself."

    That was  not  the  case  here.    The  appellant  could  not  rely  on
    destitution and as indicated in Said, the correct reading of MOJ  could
    be discerned at paragraph 42 of that decision.  The grounds set out  by
    Mr Lay were really a discussion of destitution which  was  specifically
    addressed in Said.

36. The First-tier Tribunal judge did look at all of the evidence including
    chaining and ostracism and the possibility of arrest  or  chaining  was
    not the  same  as  whether  it  was  reasonably  likely  which  is  the
    applicable standard of proof.  The judge dealt with the  Hoehne  Report
    at paragraphs 104 to 106.

37. The judge was clearly aware that the appellant was seriously ill.   The
    judge had laid out the serious mental health problems of the  appellant
    and dealt with the suicide risk.

38. In relation to the Article 8 factors the test was  whether  there  were
    very compelling circumstances which would outweigh the public  interest
    in deportation.  I was referred to NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ
    662 which confirmed that the approach should not just be a sideline  to
    the relevant 399 findings but  the  judge  had  already  made  relevant
    findings on the assistance and the availability of medical care and had
    dealt with the substance of the claim.  The appellant's integration  in
    any society was going to be limited wherever he was,  bearing  in  mind
    his mental health.  The judge applied the  correct  legal  schemes  and
    made proper findings regarding the evidence.

Conclusions

          Ground (i)

39. I have set out above my reasons for  rejecting  the  challenge  to  the
    findings by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in relation to the Section 72
    certification.   The  judge  clearly  set  out  the  history   of   the
    appellant's offending. The appellant has had a history  of  convictions
    for violent offences involving rape and  wounding,  albeit  that  these
    date from 1995 and 2000.  He has also had  subsequent  convictions  for
    affray for which he received a nine month sentence and  was  discharged
    from HMP Leicester in September 2012.  Judge Walters also set  out  the
    more recent offending.

40. It was rationally open to the judge to conclude that the appellant  had
    not rebutted the presumption.  As the judge found the appellant through
    his offending constitutes a continuing danger to the  community.   That
    is axiomatic to the decision and to be  weighed  into  the  factors  in
    relation to the public interest.  As Mr Jarvis submitted there  was  no
    evidence that his offending was solely as a result of his mental health
    difficulties and it is clear as  the  judge  recorded  that  there  had
    already  been  extensive  mental  health  treatment  afforded  to   the
    appellant and the appellant experienced periods of lucidity  such  that
    he was for example able to marry and live independently of  his  family
    in the UK.

    Ground (ii)

41. In response to ground (ii), that the judge failed to have regard to the
    country guidance, I was referred to the country guidance head  note  in
    paragraphs (vii) to (ix) but I record the whole of the  head  note  for
    convenience:


        i) The country guidance issues addressed in this determination  are
           not identical to those engaged with by the Tribunal in  AMM  and
           others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)  Somalia
           CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore, where country guidance  has
           been given by the Tribunal in  AMM  in  respect  of  issues  not
           addressed in this determination then the  guidance  provided  by
           AMM shall continue to have effect.


       ii) Generally, a person who is  "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
           associated with the security forces; any aspect of government or
           official   administration   or   any   NGO   or    international
           organisation) on  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
           absence will face no real risk of persecution or  risk  of  harm
           such as to require protection under Article 3  of  the  ECHR  or
           Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. In particular,  he
           will not be at real risk simply on account of having lived in  a
           European location for a period of  time  of  being  viewed  with
           suspicion either by the authorities as a possible  supporter  of
           Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose
           Islamic integrity has been compromised by living  in  a  Western
           country.


      iii) There has been durable change in the sense that the  Al  Shabaab
           withdrawal from Mogadishu is  complete  and  there  is  no  real
           prospect of a re-established presence within the city. That  was
           not the case at the time of the country guidance  given  by  the
           Tribunal in AMM.

       iv)  The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding   non-military
           casualties that clearly fall within  Al  Shabaab  target  groups
           such as politicians, police officers, government  officials  and
           those associated  with  NGOs  and  international  organisations,
           cannot be precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence
           which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it  is  established
           by the evidence considered as a whole  that  there  has  been  a
           reduction in  the  level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
           largely due to the cessation of confrontational  warfare  within
           the city and Al Shabaab's  resort  to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
           carefully selected targets.  The  present  level  of  casualties
           does not amount to a sufficient risk to ordinary civilians  such
           as to represent an Article 15(c) risk.

        v) It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu to reduce further
           still his personal exposure to the risk of  "collateral  damage"
           in being caught up in an Al Shabaab attack that was not targeted
           at him by avoiding areas and  establishments  that  are  clearly
           identifiable as  likely  Al  Shabaab  targets,  and  it  is  not
           unreasonable for him to do so.

       vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to  Al  Shabaab  for
           civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for  recent  returnees
           from the West.

      vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence  will
           look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the  city,
           for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing   a
           livelihood. Although a returnee may also  seek  assistance  from
           his clan members who are not close relatives, such help is  only
           likely to be forthcoming for majority clan members, as  minority
           clans may have little to offer.

     viii) The significance of clan membership in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
           Clans now provide, potentially, social  support  mechanisms  and
           assist  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of   a
           protection function than previously. There are no clan  militias
           in Mogadishu, no clan violence, and no clan based discriminatory
           treatment, even for minority clan members.

       ix)  If it is accepted that a person facing a  return  to  Mogadishu
           after a period  of  absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
           relatives in the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself
           on return, there will need to be a careful assessment of all  of
           the circumstances. These considerations will  include,  but  are
           not limited to:

            . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
            . length of absence from Mogadishu;
            . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
            . access to financial resources;
            . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
              or self employment;
            . availability of remittances from abroad;
            . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
            . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
              enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.


        x) Put another way, it will be for  the  person  facing  return  to
           explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
           opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
           especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are
           taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.


       xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or family support
           who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and  who
           have no real prospect of securing  access  to  a  livelihood  on
           return who will face the prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
           falling  below  that  which  is   acceptable   in   humanitarian
           protection terms.

      xii)  The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those  who
           originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to  live
           in the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk  or
           facing a real risk of destitution. On the other hand, relocation
           in Mogadishu for a person of a minority  clan   with  no  former
           links to the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,
           family or social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the
           absence of means to establish a home and some  form  of  ongoing
           financial support there  will  be  a  real  risk  of  having  no
           alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP
           camp where there is a real possibility  of  having  to  live  in
           conditions   that  will  fall  below   acceptable   humanitarian
           standards.

42. Evidently  each case is fact specific and the  various  and  particular
    circumstances of the appellant need to be taken into  account.   It  is
    not evident from the determination of Judge  Walters  that  he  treated
    this as a "normal return case". I refer to the head  note  cited  above
    (ix) for the key factors which should be taken  into  account  together
    with other relevant evidence.

43. A careful reading of the decision reveals that  the  judge  did  indeed
    take them into account.  Most importantly, there is no doubt  that  the
    judge paid careful attention to appellant's  mental  health  condition,
    and indeed set out the reports and addressed them in detail in relation
    to  the  appellant's  health  between  paragraphs  54  and  91  of  the
    determination.  The judge  recorded  the  history  of  the  appellant's
    mental illness as described by Dr Kloocke in a report dated 8  November
    2013.  This report from  Dr  Kloocke,  as  recorded  at  paragraph  58,
    referred in turn to a report from a consultant psychiatrist dated 6 May
    2011 which states:

         "That  it  has  proved  impossible  to   effectively   manage   the
         appellant's condition in the community or mitigate  existing  risks
         to self or others.  The appellant has been  admitted  to  a  mental
         hospital on many occasions in  Leicester  since  2005.   He  had  a
         history of carrying knives and offensive weapons.  He reported that
         the appellant then lived in a flat in Leicester  but  in  spite  of
         having no recourse to public funds due to his immigration status it
         was unclear how he funded his accommodation".

    At paragraph 59:

         "Dr Kloocke commented on a report by a consultant  psychiatrist  at
         HMP Ranby on 3 June 2011 which stated that there was a considerable
         risk of escalation of violence to others."

    At paragraph 62:

         "62.     Dr  Kloocke  reports  that  there  was  an  extended  home
             treatment team intervention lasting from  October  2012  until
             March 2013 and during that  period  a  diagnosis  of  paranoid
             schizophrenia was made.  Dr Kloocke reports on the Appellant's
             drug and alcohol history and that the Appellant stated that he
             started to drink  alcohol  at  about  age  16  and  has  begun
             drinking excessively since he moved to the UK.  He has said he
             consumes between 60 and  80  units  between  a  Friday  and  a
             Sunday.  There are reports of aggressive and violent behaviour
             under the influence of alcohol.

         63.      The Appellant used khat for several  months  in  1998  and
             then intermittently  used  cannabis  for  a  period  of  three
             years."

44. The judge engaged in an extensive assessment of the evidence  including
    the references above and  noted  at  paragraph  90  that  although  the
    medical records did not state the precise number of hospital admissions
    the general picture was that he was admitted on average  twice  a  year
    with the exception of a  period  between  2012  and  2015.   The  judge
    confirmed that he was satisfied that the majority of  those  admissions
    had been made under Section 3 of the Mental Health  Act  (it  is  clear
    from the recording of Section 3 of the Mental Health Act 1983  that  it
    is not just for the health  and  safety  of  a  patient  but  also  for
    protection of others that someone may be detained under this  Section).
    The judge clearly addressed his mind to the factors mentioned in the GS
    & EO (Article 3 - health cases) India  [2012]  UKUT  00397  and  as  Mr
    Jarvis pointed out this case was not advanced on the  basis  of  health
    grounds alone.

45. The judge was clearly aware that the appellant had lived  in  Mogadishu
    as an adult until he was nearly 30 years old and could speak Somali and
    indeed took cognisance of the fact that the appellant was a member of a
    majority clan. The judge recorded that a previous asylum clam had  been
    rejected before the Tribunal.  The judge was clear that  the  appellant
    had been in the UK for 22 years and further addressed and assessed  the
    support that he would be expected to receive on return.

46. It was for the appellant to put forward evidence  in  relation  to  his
    inability to access support and as pointed out by Mr Jarvis the  family
    did not attend and indeed there was no up to  date  evidence  from  his
    family or friends.  The judge cannot be criticised for his treatment of
    the appellant's relationship with his family.  He clearly recorded that
    the appellant does not live with any of them.

47. As set out in Said  destitution  is  not  sufficient  save  in  extreme
    circumstances to reach the threshold required for Article 3  protection
    and it is clear to me that the judge did address the evidence.

48. I find there is no failure to rationally apply the country guidance  in
    MOJ.  The judge made a finding at paragraph 110 that  it  is  clear  in
    Somali society families are regarded as being primarily responsible for
    the care of family members who are ill-treatment and it  was  illogical
    but not irrational to find that it could  be  reasonably  expected  the
    appellant's family members in the UK would support him.

    Ground (iii)

49. In relation to ground (iii), on an overall reading I cannot agree  that
    the judge failed  to  assess  adequately  the  mental  health  evidence
    including that from Dr Hoehne or failed  to  have  regard  to  material
    expert evidence.   It is a matter for the judge as  to  the  weight  he
    places on that  evidence.  The  determination  clearly  references  the
    expert report by Dr Hoehne at paragraph 105 which records that

    "it states that there is no free medical care, but some  hospitals  get
    support from the Somali diaspora.  On average a hospital has two nurses
    and two doctors".

    Further at paragraph 106 the judge recorded that  Dr  Hoehne  confirmed
    that psychotropic drugs are available in Somalia  although  the  supply
    was not guaranteed, nonetheless medical care  and  drugs  available  in
    Mogadishu.  The challenge in relation to the factoring in of the expert
    evidence in this regard is not borne out by a careful  reading  of  the
    determination.

50. The judge made careful and specific assessments of the reports  on  the
    appellant's mental health  throughout  the  decision  and  specifically
    between paragraph 97 and 111, not least the report from Professor David
    Curtis dated 26 May 2015 noting that the appellant had a  diagnosis  of
    paranoid  schizophrenia  and  that  if  he  was  not  in   receipt   of
    antipsychotic medication and could not access healthcare  professionals
    then his schizophrenia would deteriorate and he would  become  floridly
    psychotic.  The judge also noted that the reports identified that there
    was a significant possibility that he would fail to take his medication
    properly.

51. The judge also painted into the picture the reports of Dr Stefan Lorenz
    such that if the appellant would be threatened with  removal  he  would
    become more stressed and more likely to act in a way  to  harm  himself
    and that the appellant had responded well to ARV treatment for his HIV.

52. Having comprehensively assessed the reports on the  appellant's  mental
    health the judge turned to assess the medical facilities.  The decision
    at paragraph 100  that  there  were  three  mental  health  centres  in
    Mogadishu to where  the  appellant  would  be  returned  and  that  the
    appellant was not a child that would not receive discriminatory  denial
    of medical treatment.  He also noted  that  there  was  no  absence  of
    resources in Mogadishu because of the civil war.

53. The judge was fully aware of the WHO article which  stated  that  there
    was a practice in Somalia of detaining mentally ill persons  in  chains
    but also noted that the Habib Hospital in Mogadishu did not follow this
    practice.   There  was  inconclusive  evidence   therefore   and   only
    generalised evidence in relation to this practice.  The  judge  made  a
    finding which was open to him that the  appellant  was  not  reasonably
    likely to be exposed to this.  Mr Lay considered that this was a matter
    of speculation which the judge was not entitled to make but  rather  it
    was an assessment and weighing of the evidence of Dr Hoehne,  which  as
    can be seen from the decision, was comprehensively  factored  into  the
    analysis.  I find the conclusions were open to the judge.

54. The judge clearly addressed the issue of the chaining  but  noted  that
    the appellant at paragraph 109 was in fact a  member  of  the  majority
    clan on return to Mogadishu which would afford him some protection  and
    of the improvement in the conditions in  Mogadishu  and  that  not  all
    hospitals adopted such practices.

55. Specifically the judge took account of the fact that the appellant  had
    family in the UK who could be expected to financially  support  him  on
    his return there.  I find it was open to the judge to conclude that the
    appellant would be returned with some drugs which is  the  practice  of
    the NHS and the finding at paragraph 110 that it  could  be  reasonably
    expected that the appellant's family  members  in  the  UK  would  send
    regular remittances to him  in  Somalia,  which  would  further  afford
    protection despite Dr Hoehne's bleak outlook. The judge noted that  the
    medical evidence was such that the appellant himself stopped  complying
    which his medication in August 2016 and  started  drinking  again  (see
    paragraph 80).  There was therefore no confirmation that the  appellant
    would experience durable medical treatment even if in the UK.

    Ground (iv)

56. In relation to ground (iv) I do not accept the argument that the  judge
    treated Articles 3 and 8 as being coterminous.  It is quite clear  that
    the judge made a separate finding in relation to Article 3 at paragraph
    111 and many of the factors and the evidence relevant  in  this  appeal
    were material to both the Article 3 and the Article  8  considerations.
    As Mr Jarvis pointed out, the case was not put on the basis of N  or  D
    and GS (India) v Secretary of State [2015] EWCA  Civ  40  remains  good
    law. Foreign nationals may be removed from  the  UK  even  where  their
    lives will be drastically shortened to due lack of health care in their
    own states.

57. The judge clearly set out the fact that the  appellant  had  no  family
    life to speak of with  his  ex-partner  who  did  not  attend  to  give
    evidence.  He  did  take  into  account  the  appellant's  ex-partner's
    witness statement dated 4 February  2016  and  the  judge  specifically
    identified that he considered the appellant's  HIV  status  and  mental
    health within Article 8.

58. Notably the judge applied the exceptions in relation to paragraph  399A
    of the Immigration Rules and although Mr  Lay  made  criticism  of  the
    judge's  failure  to  consider  his  lawful  residence  that   is   not
    substantiated.  The judge was aware of the length of time the appellant
    had been in the UK but made crystal clear he did not  accept  that  the
    appellant was either socially or culturally  integrated  into  the  UK.
    At paragraph 117 the judge did not accept that the appellant  had  been
    lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life  and  found  that  his
    only periods of leave had been approximately 1994 to 2001 and  for  six
    months in 2010.  Indeed a considerable portion of his time between 1994
    and 2001 had been spent in prison.

59. Of relevance is that the judge found that the appellant  was  28  years
    old when he arrived in the UK and is now 50.  More than half  his  life
    had clearly been spent in Somalia and the appellant spoke Somali.   The
    judge was candid in his finding that the appellant would face obstacles
    on his return but with the help of regular remittances from his  family
    those obstacles could be overcome.  There was much  criticism  made  of
    the paragraph 127 which I set out in full for consideration:

         "127.    In the present case the Appellant would not suffer any ill-
             treatment by the state on return to  Somalia.   As  previously
             stated, with financial support from his family, the  Appellant
             need not be destitute nor find himself in a position where  he
             would be enchained.  No doubt he would be supplied by the  NHS
             with a limited amount of ARVs and psychotropic drugs.  If  his
             family in the U.K. is properly notified, no doubt it would  be
             possible for them to make private arrangements for him  to  be
             met at the airport and possibly be admitted  if  necessary  to
             the mental health hospital in Mogadishu."

60. I find it was open to the judge to consider that  private  arrangements
    for the appellant could be made for him to be met at  the  airport  and
    admitted if necessary to the mental health hospital in  Mogadishu.   Mr
    Lay considered that this did  not  answer  the  extensive  evidence  in
    relation to the possibility that the appellant  would  be  chained  and
    mistreated on return but I found that the judge had  adopted  a  lawful
    and  rational  approach  to  the  medical  evidence   and   facilities,
    considered the various and relevant factors and considered overall that
    the appellant had not shown that there was a real risk bearing in  mind
    he had taken into account the expert and country evidence  in  relation
    to the hospitals in Somalia and the treatment of the medically ill that
    the appellant would be so treated.

61. It is correct that at paragraph 128 the judge slips into a reference of
    Article 3 threshold being particularly  high  in  relation  to  inhuman
    treatment  but  nonetheless  overall  the  judge  had  considered   the
    relevance of the mental health treatment in the factors  considered  in
    Article 8 in a way which was  open  to  him.   There  was  wide-ranging
    consideration of the appellant's circumstances in line with  HA  (Iraq)
    [2016] UKSC  60  and  clearly  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  very
    compelling reasons were shown following his rejection of the exceptions
    under the Immigration Rules.  Nowhere is  the  test  of  exceptionality
    applied and  it  is  quite  clear  at  paragraph  122  that  the  judge
    considered that the factors  in  relation  to  the  appellant  did  not
    outweigh the most important fact that the appellant's  presence,  as  a
    foreign national, in the United Kingdom poses and continues to  pose  a
    real risk and danger to the members of the public.

    Ground (v)

62. I am not persuaded that there was any material failure to consider  the
    appellant's case in relation to Article 15(c).  Humanitarian protection
    is excluded, owing to the finding that  the  judge's  findings  on  the
    Section 72 certificate and he addresses this at [94].

63. Even if this were not the  case,  the  appellant  does  not  reach  the
    threshold which is still extant in  relation  to  medical  cases,  that
    being established in  N  and  D  and  although  there  was  a  distinct
    criticism of the judge's approach, in the light of his findings of  the
    possibility  of  mental  health  treatment   in   Mogadishu   and   the
    availability of drugs and the possibility of financial support from his
    family and being a member of a majority clan  although  he  would  face
    undeniable hardships on return, did not reach the high level  necessary
    for him to succeed on asylum grounds or in relation to Article  3.   As
    stated destitution per se  is  insufficient  to  found  a  claim  under
    Article 3 and as confirmed in Said and MOJ at paragraph [407] generally
    speaking an ordinary person on returning to Mogadishu after a period of
    absence will face no real risk of persecution or risk of harm  such  as
    to require protection  under  Article  15(c)  or  Article  3.   It  was
    confirmed that there has been durable change  in  Mogadishu  since  the
    withdrawal  of  Al-Shabab  and  there  has  been  a  cessation  in  the
    confrontational warfare within the city.  As noted in MOJ 'the  present
    level of casualties does not amount to a sufficient  risk  to  ordinary
    civilians such as to represent an Article  15(c)  risk.   Against  this
    background and the detailed findings  in  respect  of  the  asylum  and
    Article 3 claim there can be no material error of law.

    Ground (vi)

64. Finally, in relation to the last ground, there was criticism  that  the
    judge had not taken into account the fact that the appellant was ill as
    at the date of the hearing.  It was quite obvious that  the  judge  was
    aware that the appellant was not present at the hearing because he  had
    indeed been sectioned and he had referred to the report  of  Dr  Stefan
    Lorenz dated 20 October 2016 which confirmed  that  the  appellant  had
    been admitted on 24 September 2016 after he threatened to kill  someone
    who lived in the same house as him with a knife two days ago.

65. There is no doubt that the judge had taken cognisance of the fact  that
    the appellant was presently admitted  and  indeed  refers  to  that  at
    paragraph 88 of the determination.

66. On a careful reading of the decision as a whole I find that  the  judge
    has addressed all the  relevant  evidence,  expert  and  otherwise,  in
    relation to this appeal and made findings which were open to him.

67. There is  no  error  of  law  in  this  decision.   The  judge  clearly
    considered grounds of appeal, that were open to the appellant,  finding
    that the level of severity necessary for a breach of Article 3 was  not
    reached and nor indeed were there compelling  circumstances  such  that
    the decision to remove him was disproportionate in view of  the  public
    interest.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made no error of law and the decision shall stand.


Signed           Helen Rimington                         Date 6th June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
