
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/03312/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2019                   |On 10 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 LOVERT [T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                DETERMINATION

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Russia, born  on  3  June  1977.   He  is
    originally from Cameroon.  He is divorced from his wife,  through  whom
    he acquired Russian citizenship.  She lives in Russia  with  their  two
    daughters.  He sought asylum in the UK on 23 November  2018,  based  on
    risk from his wife's family and from Russian society in general because
    he is gay.

 2. The salient points of the respondent's refusal of the claim on 22 March
    2019 are these:

         [25]     "accepted that LGBT persons form a particular social group
         ... in Russia";

         [50]     "not accepted you are  gay",  "your  claim  to  have  been
         beaten as a result of being gay is also not accepted";

         [51-52]  no risk of persecution on racial grounds.

 3. FtT Judge Kempton  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 June 2019.  She  found  that  the  appellant  is  gay.
    However, she also found that if returned he would live discreetly,  and
    would not be at risk.

 4. The appellant appealed to the UT on 3 grounds:

         [1]      misapplication of the HJ (Iran) principle, or  failure  to
         assess very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  terms  of
         immigration rule 276ADE(1)(vi);

         [2]      error on internal flight, as risk to  gay  men  is  state-
         wide; and

         [3]      misconstruing or misunderstanding the evidence  about  the
         appellant living discreetly.

 5. On 3 September 2019 permission was granted  on  all  grounds,  although
    with the observation that the point about rule 276ADE(1)(vi)  had  less
    apparent merit.

 6. On 18 September 2019 the SSHD responded to the grant of permission:

         "... [2] The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application
         for permission to appeal and invites the tribunal to determine  the
         appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing to consider why  the
         appellant would be discreet on return to Russia."

 7. The case firstly came before the UT on 31 October 2019.  It was  common
    ground that the FtT erred in law by misapplying the  principles  of  HJ
    (Iran), although its favourable credibility findings  should  stand  as
    the starting point for further decision.

 8. In terms of a decision promulgated on 4 November 2019, the decision  of
    the FtT was set aside.  The case was listed again on 5 December 2019.

 9. The appellant adopted his further statement,  and  was  cross-examined.
    The statement of [RV], who  was  in  attendance,  was  treated  as  his
    evidence-in-chief, and there was no cross-examination.

10. Having heard submissions, I indicated that the appeal would be allowed.

11. It was common ground that the appellant is gay, and that he would  live
    discreetly, as he has done in the past, if returned to Russia.

12. The crucial question, as defined by the respondent, is why.

13. Mr Clark referred  to  evidence  in  a  "Home  Office  Response  to  an
    Information Request, Russia, LGBT and African Communities",  at  4.2.7,
    of a "Queerfest" event held in St  Petersburg  annually  for  11  years
    which has not been impeded by the authorities for the  last  4.   That,
    however, is an isolated example rather than the  general  gist  of  the
    evidence.  Mr Clark accepted that 4.3.1 of the same source says that  a
    similar event is not permitted in Moscow, where  the  appellant  lived,
    despite an ECHR ruling in 2010.  The appellant has attended such events
    in the UK, but he said that he would not do  so  in  St  Petersburg  or
    anywhere else in Russia, for fear of identification and reprisals.

14. There is no reason not to  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  on  that
    point.

15. The evidence establishes, to a level well above the lower  standard  of
    proof, that a material reason for the appellant  living  discreetly  on
    his return would be a fear of the persecution which would follow if  he
    were to live openly as a gay man.

16. The case thus reaches the stage which Lord Rodger held at  [82]  of  HJ
    (Iran) to be sufficient:

         "Such a person has a well-founded fear of  persecution.  To  reject
         his application on the ground that he could avoid  the  persecution
         by living discreetly would be to defeat the very  right  which  the
         Convention exists to protect - his right to live freely and  openly
         as a gay man without fear  of  persecution.  By  admitting  him  to
         asylum and allowing him to live freely and  openly  as  a  gay  man
         without fear of persecution, the receiving state  gives  effect  to
         that  right  by  affording  the  applicant  a  surrogate  for   the
         protection from persecution which his country of nationality should
         have afforded him."

17. Even if the respondent had not conceded that it remained to be  decided
    only why the appellant would choose to live discreetly,  I  would  have
    had no difficulty in reaching the same conclusion.  The evidence  shows
    that a person electing to  live  openly  to  the  same  extent  as  the
    appellant has in the UK would be at risk;  and  while  the  appellant's
    case was not put simply on racial grounds, as a gay black man in Russia
    he would be particularly conspicuous.

18. The appeal, as originally brought to the FtT, is allowed.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      31 October 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




