
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/03437/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9 November 2017                    |            On 28 November 2017       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   mr i K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, Counsel instructed by Tower Hamlets Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr IK, a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1  January  1998
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent, dated 20 November 2015, to refuse the appellant asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.  In a decision promulgated on  1  March  2017,
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  O'Garro  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds, on humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  on
    human rights grounds.

Background

 2. The appellant originally appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  in  2016
    and in a decision promulgated on 25 May 2016, Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Pears allowed the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.  The Upper  Tribunal,  a  decision  promulgated  on  18
    August 2016, set aside that decision and remitted  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing,  as  there  were  inadequate
    reasons given for departing from the country guidance MK (duty to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 and Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:
    set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) applied.

 3. The case was heard de novo by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  O'Garro
    on 16 February 2017.  The appellant appeals with  permission  from  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The permission dated 12 September 2017  Judge  of  the
    Upper Tribunal Jordan accepted that grounds of appeal do not  challenge
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings  that  the  appellant  is  not
    credible.  However, Judge Jordan referred to the submissions of 17  May
    2016 and made the grant of permission solely on the basis that  further
    enquiries should be made as to whether that document was the subject of
    argument before First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro and  whether  it  was
    served on the Home Office.  Judge Jordan noted that  had  he  not  seen
    this document he would not have granted permission.

 4. It was not disputed before me that  the  document  dated  17  May  2016
    comprised a post-hearing submission submitted to Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Pears, at his suggestion, as referred to by Judge  Pears'
    decision.  Mr Halim confirmed that further written updated  submissions
    were submitted for the fresh hearing before Judge O'Garro,  essentially
    updating the  material  included  and  referred  to  in  the  May  2016
    submission.  The updated submission is dated 15 February 2017.  It  was
    not disputed before me that this updated submission was also served  on
    the Secretary of State.

 5. For the reasons set out below I am  not  satisfied  that  any  material
    error of law has been disclosed.

Grounds of Appeal

 6. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal submitted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal refused to depart from the findings made in the
    country guidance case of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT
    163 and placed significant reliance upon  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in R (on the application of Naziri &  Others)  v  SSHD  [2015]
    UKUT 00437 and HN & SA Afghanistan [2016] EWCA  Civ  23  upholding  the
    decision of Naziri 'and the references to country references  therein'.
    It was submitted that Naziri was not a country guidance case  and  that
    more importantly this case looked specifically  at  the  events  up  to
    March 2015 and the First-tier Tribunal was provided with significant up-
    to-date evidence which postdated that evidence which was  indicated  in
    Naziri.  Mr Halim took the Upper  Tribunal  through  this  evidence  in
    considerable detail at the oral hearing:-

      a) UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines, April 2016;

      b) EASO (European Asylum Support Office), November 2016 - an agency of
         the European Union set  up  by  Regulation  (EU)  439/2010  of  the
         European Parliament and of the Council,  .acting  as  a  centre  of
         expertise on asylum.

 7. It was submitted that it was incumbent upon the Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal to consider  this  up-to-date  evidence,  particularly  as  it
    emanated from the UNHCR and EASO  and  that  the  judge's  reliance  on
    Naziri and HN & SA and AK provided no answer to the evidence relied  on
    which post-dated all of those cases.  It was submitted that  the  judge
    was required to  give  reasons  as  to  why  the  evidence  before  her
    attracted little weight or was insufficient to cross the Article  15(c)
    threshhold.  It was submitted that no reasons were provided because  no
    examination of that evidence took place.

Error of Law Discussion

 8. The First-tier Tribunal, at [62], indicated that Mr Halim had submitted
    that the appellant should be granted humanitarian protection  and  that
    she should depart from the country guidance case of  AK  'in  light  of
    UNHCR Guidelines from  April  2016  and  other  more  recent  objective
    material, to which she refers  in  her  skeleton  argument'  (sic).   I
    accept that the judge was referring to the written submissions document
    dated 15 February  2017  (updating  the  document  dated  17  May  2016
    referred to by Upper Tribunal Jordan in his grant of  permission).   It
    is patently incorrect of Mr Halim to claim, as he did, that  the  judge
    failed to consider the up to  date  information  from  UNHCR  and  EASO
    (which Mr Halim  had  extracted  in  his  written  submissions/skeleton
    argument  as well as providing the original documents which were before
    both the Upper and First-tier Tribunals).

 9. The judge specifically noted that the UNHCR guidelines and 'other  more
    recent  objective  material'  was  referred  to  in   the   appellant's
    representative's skeleton argument.  The judge went on to find that  at
    paragraphs [63] and [64]:-

         "63. I find that it cannot be disputed that the security  situation
             is fluctuating in Afghanistan from one month to the  next  and
             objective information in this regard appears to be outdated as
             soon as it is published, I have however  considered  not  only
             the documents referred to but also the cases of R (on the  app
             of  Naziri  &  Others)  v  SSHD  2015  UKUT  00437,  HN  &  SA
             (Afghanistan (2016) EWCA Civ 23 and the references to  country
             information therein.

         64.  Most importantly, I have taken into account  the  decision  of
             the Upper Tribunal in Naziri in which he did not  depart  from
             the decision of AK notwithstanding the material  before  them.
             Whilst it is clear that the  situation  remains  volatile,  in
             line with that decision, I am not persuaded that the situation
             had deteriorated to such an extant that I should  depart  from
             the country guidance case."

10. A country guidance case retains its status until overturned or replaced
    by subsequent country guidance.  However, it is uncontroversial that  a
    judge may depart from existing country guidance  in  the  circumstances
    described in the relevant Practice Direction and  accompanying  Chamber
    Guidance Note.   In SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940, the Court of  Appeal
    made it clear (paragraph 47) that decision makers are required to  take
    country guidance into account and to follow  them  unless  very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence, are adduced, justifying not doing
    so.  To do otherwise would amount to an error of law.

11. It was open to the judge to find, as she did, including at  [64],  that
    there was insufficient evidence to justify in this case departing  from
    AK.  I am not persuaded, even in  light  of  the  extensive  background
    evidence produced by the appellant, that the judge needed to expand  on
    the reasons given. Although the reasons the judge  gave  at  paragraphs
    [62] to [64] were brief, the judge  specifically  mentioned  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines and other more recent objective material.  The  judge  found
    at [63] that it could not be disputed that the  security  situation  in
    Afghanistan is 'fluctuating' from  one  month  to  the  next  and  that
    material appears to be 'outdated as soon  as  it  is  published'.   She
    summarised her view of the material before her in finding, at [64] that
    it was 'clear that the situation remains volatile' and in going  on  to
    find that she was not persuaded by that material that the situation had
    deteriorated to an extent that she should depart from AK.  Although  Mr
    Halim pointed to the extent  of  the  material  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal he was unable in my view to point to anything materially wrong
    in that overall conclusion.

12. It also could not be properly said that the judge made any error in her
    consideration of Naziri.  At [64] it is evident  that  the  judge  took
    into account the material which post-dated Naziri.  There was no  error
    in Tribunal relying on Naziri, albeit that Naziri and HN & SA  referred
    to judicial review proceedings.  However it was  clear  in  both  cases
    that the judges were mindful  of  the  limitation  of  judicial  review
    proceedings, including at paragraph 75 of  Naziri  where  the  Tribunal
    reminded that the principle (that judicial review  is  not  a  suitable
    vehicle for resolving disputed facts) was not an inflexible  one.   The
    Tribunal was presented with extensive updating material in  Naziri  and
    reviewed that material, finding at paragraph 95 that there was  nothing
    to warrant departure from AK and that  the  evidence  'falls  short  of
    satisfying the stringent Article 15(c) test'.  There was  no  error  in
    the Judge of First-tier Tribunal taking account of that approach, given
    the scrutiny of the background material undertaken in Naziri.

13. The judge had in mind the evidence before her which post-dated 2015 and
    Naziri  which  is  implicit  in  her  findings  as  to  the  continuing
    volatility and fluctuation of  the  situation  and  I  note  that  much
    (although I accept not all) of the material cited in the  footnotes  of
    both the EASO and the UNHCR reports relied on by the  appellant  refers
    to events in 2015.

14. It is incumbent on the Tribunal to consider both the background and the
    general level of violence together with the individual circumstances of
    the appellant.  Naziri confirmed the existing guidance on  how  Article
    15(c) should be applied and concluded at that stage that there was  not
    such a general breakdown of law and order 'as  to  permit  anarchy  and
    criminality occasioning the serious harm referred to in the  Directive'
    that would indicate that the violence was indiscriminate.

15. I am of the view  that  the  judge  properly  took  into  account  this
    appellant's particular and individual circumstances including from [66]
    to [70].  The judge considered that there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant has any  disabilities  and  that  he  will  be  returning  to
    Afghanistan as a 'fit and well young person'.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    went on to consider that the appellant's family are alive and  that  he
    would be given some support in  assisting  him  in  reintegrating  into
    Afghanistan and considered that although an adult the findings  of  the
    Tribunal in HK and others (minors - indiscriminate  violence  -  forced
    recruitment by Taliban - contact with family  members)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC) were relevant to this appellant.

16. Taking all this into account together with the additional evidence, the
    judge was entitled to reach  the  conclusion  that  she  did  that  his
    removal would not expose him to a risk of serious  harm  under  Article
    15(c).

17.  Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85
    (IAC) refers:

         "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge".

18. On a careful reading of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  its
    entirety I am satisfied  that  there  were  adequate  reasons  for  the
    findings given and for not departing from  the  country  guidance.   In
    conclusion, there is no material error of law in that decision  and  it
    shall stand.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date:  27 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

