

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/03830/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 November 2017                        |On 15 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     GR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Draycott, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as GR.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

       1. The appellant, a citizen of Iran, has appealed against a  decision
          dated  4  February  2016  in  which  the  respondent  refused  his
          protection and human rights claim and maintained the  decision  to
          deport him.  In so  doing  the  respondent  certified  the  asylum
          claim pursuant to section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
          Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').


   2. In a decision dated 15 August 2017 I identified errors of law  in  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup dated 26  November  2016.
      It was agreed that the decision should be remade by me and at the  end
      of the re-hearing on 8 November 2017,  I  indicated  that  the  appeal
      would be allowed on Refugee Convention grounds.  I now give my reasons
      for this decision.

Background

   3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom, when he was 17 years old,
      in April 2003, at which time he claimed asylum.  His asylum claim  was
      refused and an appeal to an Adjudicator  was  unsuccessful.   However,
      Adjudicator Axtell made  important  positive  findings  of  fact:  the
      appellant was 17 at the time, as claimed; he worked for  his  brother,
      who was involved in anti-government  activity;  he  was  detained  for
      reasons relating to this and "would have been subject to  some  degree
      of ill-treatment", and; he "was very much affected by  the  experience
      he had undergone".


   4. Between 2004-7 the appellant was convicted of a number of offences  in
      the United Kingdom.  In 2007, he was transferred from HMP YOI  Feltham
      to Manchester Royal Infirmary due to mental  health  concerns,  before
      being released.

   5. In 2008 the appellant applied  for  an  EEA  Residence  Card,  as  the
      unmarried partner of a Portuguese national, who had  completed  gender
      realignment surgery.  His appeal against the respondent's  refusal  to
      grant him a residence card was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal in a
      decision dated 15 November 2010, which accepted that the appellant had
      been in a genuine durable relationship with his  EEA  citizen  partner
      since 2004. The appellant was granted a  residence  card  valid  until
      2020.

   6. The appellant was detained under the Mental Health Act 1983 ('the 1983
      Act') on 17 November 2010 after a series of serious violent incidents.
       He attacked his community psychiatric nurse and a student nurse  with
      a knife when they attended his home for a pre-arranged visit.  He  was
      an outpatient being treated for a  recognised  schizophrenic  disorder
      manifesting with delusional ideas relating to the government spying on
      him.  When the nurses ran away, he pulled a female from  a  stationary
      car, stabbing at her several times before driving off  with  the  car.
      He hit an elderly lady with the car and when police officers  attended
      the scene he struggled  violently  and  attacked  two  of  the  police
      officers.

   7. On 19 September 2011 the appellant was convicted of  three  counts  of
      wounding with intent to do grievous bodily  harm,  dangerous  driving,
      two counts of assault occasioning actual bodily  harm  and  aggravated
      vehicle taking.  He was sentenced to  a  hospital  order  pursuant  to
      sections 37 and 41 of the 1983 Act.  The sentencing remarks note  that
      the appellant was not complying with his medication  regime  and  this
      led to catastrophic consequences: an attack on two nurses, which could
      have easily been a case of murder.


   8. The appellant was originally  admitted  to  the  Edenfield  Centre  in
      November 2010 but was transferred to Ashworth in 2011.  Whilst waiting
      for his transfer to Ashworth, the  appellant  assaulted  a  member  of
      staff in the belief she was an actor in the  employment  of  MI5.   At
      Ashworth he became stabilised on clozapine and was transferred back to
      the Edenfield Centre in 2013.  The  reports  describe  him  as  having
      tolerated the less structured and physically secure environment  well,
      and that he was successfully using  escorted  leave  without  incident
      from 2015.

   9. The appellant was sent a liability to deportation notice in May  2014,
      which he returned claiming to fear for his life, if returned to  Iran.
      He undertook a substantive asylum interview in October 2014.  In March
      2015, his residence card was revoked as his relationship with the  EEA
      national had broken down in 2010 upon being hospitalised.

  10. After a hearing on 29 July 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (HESC)  Mental
      Health ('MHT') decided that a conditional discharge should be directed
      but  that  the  necessary  practical  arrangements  to  implement  the
      necessary conditions needed to be finalised.   Having  heard  from  Dr
      Sanderson and other members of the clinical team, the MHT  found  that
      the appellant had reached the point in his treatment at which  he  can
      be safely discharged, provided  that  discharge  is  conditional,  the
      purpose of which is to support his recovery  and  with  the  power  to
      recall him to hospital should his mental health deteriorate.  The  MHT
      found there to be "clear, compelling and entirely persuasive evidence"
      in support of the following uncontested propositions, inter alia:  the
      appellant has  schizoaffective  disorder  which  is  now  successfully
      treated; he has been stable for some time and is  fully  accepting  of
      and compliant with his treatment; there is a clear nexus  between  his
      mental health and the risk to others and it is therefore necessary for
      there to be conditions in place, including  the  power  to  recall  to
      hospital.


  11. On 21 November 2016, the appellant was conditionally  discharged  into
      the community.  These conditions  include  the  following:  reside  at
      supported accommodation as approved by the responsible  clinician  and
      to abide by the rules of such accommodation;  comply  with  medication
      and treatment; allow access to the accommodation by the clinical team;
      abstain from alcohol and illicit drugs and submit to random  drug  and
      alcohol testing as  directed  by  the  responsible  clinician;  attend
      appointments with the clinical team.


  12. Since his conditional discharge  the  appellant  has  resided  at  the
      Lighthouse, a supported accommodation  placement,  where  he  benefits
      from a detailed programme and regular reviews  by  Dr  Sanderson,  his
      forensic community psychiatric nurse and his  care  co-ordinator.   He
      regularly attends blood tests as part of his treatment with  clozapine
      and these have all been normal.


  13. The appellant maintains that he has a well-founded fear of persecution
      in Iran for reasons  relating  to  an  anti-regime  political  opinion
      likely to be attributable to him by reason of  a  combination  of  his
      particular characteristics and history including his past treatment in
      Iran, his time in the United Kingdom and relationship history and  his
      religious views.

Hearing and issues in dispute

      14. At the beginning of the hearing the representatives  narrowed  the
          issues in dispute considerably.  Mr  McVeety  confirmed  that  the
          relevant facts underpinning the asylum claim are not disputed,  in
          particular he  accepted:  the  appellant  was  detained  and  ill-
          treated  before  exiting  Iran  illegally;  the  appellant  is  an
          atheist; the appellant had  a  longstanding  relationship  with  a
          woman who had gender reassignment surgery and numerous "same  sex"
          sexual relationships; the appellant has  not  undertaken  military
          service.  It was therefore accepted on behalf of  the  respondent,
          as it was before the First-tier Tribunal, that there was  no  need
          to call the appellant to give evidence as he would not  be  cross-
          examined.

      15. Both representatives also agreed  that  that  the  only  remaining
          disputed issue for the purposes of the section 72  certificate  is
          whether  the  respondent  displaced  the  burden   upon   her   of
          establishing as at the date of hearing that  the  appellant  is  a
          "danger to the community" and that Dr Sanderson,  the  appellant's
          treating consultant forensic  psychiatrist,  and  the  responsible
          clinician for the purposes of the MHT, would  give  oral  evidence
          about this issue.  Dr Sanderson  was  taken  to  his  reports  and
          provided further detailed oral evidence  both  in  examination  in
          chief and under cross examination.

      16. I then heard helpful submissions from  both  representatives.   Mr
          McVeety dealt with the section 72 certificate very briefly  before
          inviting me to find that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  of
          persecution when interviewed upon return as an  illegal  departee.
          I refer to his submissions in more detail  below  when  making  my
          findings.   After  Mr  Draycott  completed  his   submissions   in
          relation  to  the  applicability  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  I
          indicated that I  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  not  a
          "danger to the community" and I would be allowing  the  appeal  on
          Refugee Convention grounds.

      17. Both representatives agreed that having provided my decision  that
          the appellant's deportation would breach the  Refugee  Convention,
          it was unnecessary, given the particular factual  matrix  of  this
          case and all the circumstances, to go on to assess  Article  8  of
          the ECHR in the alternative.   The  analysis  below  is  therefore
          restricted to a consideration of whether: (i) the appellant  is  a
          danger to the community, and; (ii) he has a well-founded  fear  of
          persecution for a Convention Reason.

Legal framework

      18. The  applicable  legal  framework  is  not  disputed  and  can  be
          summarised.  The exercise of the power under the  Immigration  Act
          1971 to make a deportation order is governed by  sections  32  and
          33 of the United Kingdom Borders Act 2007 ('the 2007  Act').   The
          appellant is a "foreign criminal"  for  the  purposes  of  section
          32(1) because he is not a British citizen, who has been  convicted
          in the United Kingdom of an offence and sentenced  to  a  hospital
          order - see section 38 of the 2007  Act  and  SSHD  v  KE(Nigeria)
          [2017] EWCA Civ 1382 at [15] to [16].   The  respondent  exercised
          her power to make a  deportation  order  when  the  appellant  was
          still under a hospital order.


      19. In considering  the  appeal  against  the  decision  to  make  the
          deportation order,  the  representatives  agreed  that  the  first
          question that arises is whether Exception 1 applies  i.e.  whether
          removal of the appellant in pursuance  of  the  deportation  order
          would breach the United Kingdom's  obligation  under  the  Refugee
          Convention, or alternatively the appellant's ECHR rights.


      20. An individual's removal will only breach  the  Refugee  Convention
          if: (i) he is a refugee (usually because Art 1A(2)  applies);  and
          (ii) his removal is prohibited by  Article  33(1).   Removal  will
          not be prohibited if Art 33(2) applies.  For the purposes of  this
          appeal, the effect of Art 33(2) is that a person who is a  refugee
          may be refouled if  he  has  been  convicted  of  a  "particularly
          serious crime"  and  constitutes  a  "danger  to  the  community".
          Section 72 of the 2002 Act  creates  statutory  presumptions  that
          the requirements of Art 33(2) are met and, as a  consequence,  the
          prohibition   against   refoulement   will   not   apply.    These
          presumptions are rebuttable by evidence - see  section  72(6)  and
          EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 630.

Art 33(2) - "danger to the community"

      21. For the reasons set out in my decision dated  15  August  2017  at
          [9] to [11] the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find that  the
          appellant was convicted of a "particularly serious crime"  because
          section 72(11) applies and the statutory presumption had not  been
          rebutted.


      22.  Mr  McVeety  accepted  that  the  respondent  has  the  onus   of
          establishing that as at the date of hearing  the  appellant  is  a
          "danger to the community".  Mr McVeety did not seek  to  discredit
          Dr Sanderson's evidence  or  qualifications  and  experience,  and
          acknowledged  that  he  faced  an   "uphill   battle"   given   Dr
          Sanderson's clear and cogent evidence.  He however submitted  that
          although  the  appellant's  current  compliance  is  good,   there
          remains the risk that this will cease  as  it  has  in  the  past,
          which led to the serious criminal offending.

      23. I entirely  accept  the  careful,  detailed  and  cogent  evidence
          provided by Dr Sanderson in the documentation  and  orally  before
          me.  This evidence was not disputed. I summarise  the  significant
          aspects of Dr Sanderson's evidence relevant to the  assessment  of
          whether the appellant is a danger to the community.

                    i) In a report dating back to December 2015 Dr Sanderson
                       stated that the appellant could be safely  discharged
                       into the community.  The appellant has been regularly
                       reviewed and this has been repeated many times since.


                   ii) The MHT accepted Dr Sanderson's evidence and  granted
                       a  conditional  discharge.   The  MHT  accepted   and
                       endorsed  Dr  Sanderson's  opinion   that:   a)   the
                       appellant's   schizoaffective   disorder    is    now
                       successfully treated and he is stable and has been so
                       for some time; b) he is fully accepting and compliant
                       with the treatment necessary to preserve  his  mental
                       well-being; c) there is a  clear  nexus  between  his
                       mental health and the risk he represents  to  others,
                       as is evident from the index offences and so it is  a
                       condition precedent to his safe management  that  his
                       progression to the  community  is  supported  by  the
                       architecture of a conditional discharge including the
                       power to recall him to hospital; d) conditions  would
                       support the appellant and safely manage his potential
                       risk.


                  iii) Dr Sanderson assessed the appellant as  having  coped
                       very well and complied with all conditions since  his
                       conditional discharge.  His compliance  has  been  so
                       good that Dr Sanderson is of the view that he  should
                       be transferred  fully  from  supported  accommodation
                       into  district  services.   His  view  is  that   the
                       appellant's "relapse signature is well understood and
                       a local community mental health team would be able to
                       support him in remaining well in the community".

                   iv) The risk of reoffending is assessed as low given  the
                       appellant's stable mental  health  over  an  extended
                       period of time and his complete compliance  with  all
                       aspects of  his  treatment.   Dr  Sanderson  directly
                       links the commission of the offences to the untreated
                       symptoms of his mental illness and  notes  that  once
                       treatment was  optimised  after  the  index  offence,
                       "there have been no concerns regarding aggressive  or
                       anti-social  behaviour  for  a  sustained  period  of
                       approximately six years".

      24. It is important to acknowledge that the  appellant  has  committed
          very serious violent offences in 2010, when he was an  outpatient.
           Prior to this he committed other less serious  offences  but  was
          known to mental health services and  receiving  treatment  in  the
          community.   The  appellant  also  assaulted  a  staff  member  at
          Ashworth  in  2011  and  requires  time  to  be  stabilised   with
          appropriate  treatment.   The  gravity  of  the  appellant's  past
          offending is at the serious end of the spectrum.


      25. In  the  period  leading  to  his  hospitalisation  in  2010,  the
          appellant did not engage fully  with  treatment,  and  it  is  the
          opinion of Dr Sanderson, which I accept, that  this  directly  led
          to his aggressive  and  paranoid  behaviour.   The  appellant  has
          fully complied with his treatment  since  becoming  stabilised  at
          Ashworth.  Dr Sanderson regarded this to be an extended period  of
          time such that the  risk  of  any  failure  to  respond  fully  to
          treatment and medication is now low.  The  corresponding  risk  of
          violence and danger to the community is also correspondingly  low.




      26. The medical evidence supports the proposition that  the  appellant
          has been successfully treated  in  hospital,  such  that  the  MHT
          accepted  Dr  Sanderson's  recommendations  in  full.    The   MHT
          specifically endorsed Dr Sanderson's  evidence  that  it  was  not
          necessary for the  safety  of  others  for  the  appellant  to  be
          detained in hospital for treatment.  The MHT  regarded  conditions
          as necessary and the appellant has evidenced continued  compliance
          in the community for about a year.


      27. Dr Sanderson regarded the risk of the appellant ceasing to  comply
          in the community to be low.  This must be distinguished  from  the
          position prior to the index offences, when the appellant  was  not
          complying with treatment and medication.  In any  event  I  accept
          Dr Sanderson's evidence that  even  if  the  appellant  ceases  or
          reduces compliance, his well understood relapse signature and  the
          relevant conditions in place are  sufficiently  robust  to  ensure
          steps  are  taken  to  protect  the  public,  such  as   increased
          monitoring  or  a  return  to  hospital,  prior  to  any  risk  of
          reoffending.


      28. When all the evidence is considered in the round, I do not  regard
          the appellant to be a danger to the community for the purposes  of
          the section  72  certificate  or  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
          Convention and the relevant Qualification Directive,  as  long  as
          he complies with the conditions  attached  to  his  discharge,  as
          required by his clinical team.  Dr Sanderson, as head of the  team
          is of the firm view, which I accept  (and  which  was  undisputed)
          that the risk of non-compliance is now  low,  given  the  extended
          period of compliance and the appellant's insight into  his  mental
          health and motivation to comply.


Art 33(1) of the Refugee Convention

Country guidance

      29. In SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG  [2016]
          UKUT 00308,  the  Upper  Tribunal  accepted  that  if  "particular
          concerns" arise when a  person  who  departed  Iran  illegally  is
          interviewed upon arrival, there is a risk of further  questioning,
          detention and ill-treatment, and said this at [23]:

                 "In our view the evidence does not establish that a  failed
                 asylum  seeker  who  had  left  Iran  illegally  would   be
                 subjected on return to a period of detention or questioning
                 such that there is a real risk of Article 3  ill-treatment.
                 The evidence in our view shows no more than that they  will
                 be  questioned,  and  that  if  there  are  any  particular
                 concerns arising from their previous activities  either  in
                 Iran or in the United Kingdom or whichever country they are
                 returned from, then  there  would  be  a  risk  of  further
                 questioning, detention and potential ill-treatment. In this
                 regard, it is relevant to return to Dr Kakhki's evidence in
                 re-examination where he said that the treatment they  would
                 receive would depend on their individual case. If they  co-
                 operated and accepted that they left illegally and  claimed
                 asylum abroad then  there  would  be  no  reason  for  ill-
                 treatment, and questioning would  be  for  a  fairly  brief
                 period. That seems to us to sum up the position  well,  and
                 as a consequence we conclude that a person with no  history
                 other than that of being a failed  asylum  seeker  who  had
                 exited illegally and who could  be  expected  to  tell  the
                 truth when questioned would not face a real  risk  of  ill-
                 treatment during the period of questioning at the airport."

      30. Both representatives agreed that it followed from SSH that:


              i) as an illegal departee from Iran, the  appellant  would  be
                 questioned at the point of return to Iran;
             ii) the initial  questioning  would  be  for  a  "fairly  brief
                 period" (at [12]  of  SSH  the  Internal  Organisation  for
                 Migration considered  that  in  the  context  of  voluntary
                 returnees, questioning might take a few hours);
            iii) if "particular concerns"  arose  from  previous  activities
                 either in Iran or in the United Kingdom, then  there  would
                 be the risk of  further  questioning  accompanied  by  ill-
                 treatment;
             iv) the assessment of whether "particular concerns" are  likely
                 to arise turns upon all the individual factors,  considered
                 cumulatively;
              v) the appellant would be expected  to  tell  the  truth  when
                 questioned;
             vi) the evidence suggests no appetite to prosecute for  illegal
                 exit alone, but if there is another offence,  illegal  exit
                 will be added on, the  cases  where  illegal  exitees  were
                 imprisoned show much more by way of specific  activity,  as
                 opposed to simple imputation - see [31] of SSH;
            vii) this appellant is a failed asylum seeker  who  exited  Iran
                 illegally but there are additional matters relevant to  his
                 history and profile, which require careful  scrutiny  on  a
                 cumulative basis, in light of the country guidance.


      31. Mr McVeety did not dispute the  appellant's  claim  to  have  left
          Iran illegally.  Indeed, he acknowledged it  would  be  surprising
          if he was able to successfully apply  for  an  exit  visa  at  the
          time, given his age and accepted period in detention in Iran.   Mr
          McVeety submitted that the appellant's  activities  were  so  long
          ago and of such a low profile that after  brief  questioning,  the
          appellant would be  released  and  no  "particular  concerns"  are
          reasonably likely to arise. Mr Draycott invited me  to  find  that
          the Iranian authorities are reasonably likely to have  "particular
          concerns" about this appellant when the  appellant's  history  and
          characteristics are viewed cumulatively.  These include: his  past
          detention in Iran; his  atheism;  his  relationship  history;  his
          failure to complete military service and his mental health.


Approach to evidence and risk

      32. I must apply the lower standard of proof  when  assessing  whether
          the Iranian authorities will have "particular concerns"  regarding
          the appellant.  In SSH at [26] and [31],  the  country  expert  Dr
          Kakhki accepted there was a difference  between  people  who  were
          activists or protestors on the one hand and people  on  the  other
          hand, such as the appellants in those cases, with no history  save
          that they were failed asylum seekers who departed Iran  illegally.
           Although there was agreement that the appellant  is  not  in  the
          latter "no history" category of returnee,  the  parties  disagreed
          on the likely approach  of  the  authorities  to  the  appellant's
          characteristics and history.   That  assessment  involves  nuanced
          analysis.  There is little  specific  guidance  available  on  the
          nature,   level   and   timing   of   activities    or    personal
          characteristics, likely to give rise to "particular concerns".


      33. It is important that the assessment takes place in the context  of
          what is known about the behaviour of the Iranian authorities  more
          generally and in  this  regard  I  have  taken  into  account  and
          approached my assessment of how  the  authorities  are  likely  to
          perceive  this  appellant,  within  the  context  of  the  general
          country background evidence.  In AB and Others (internet  activity
          - state of  evidence)  Iran  [2015]  UKUT  0257  (IAC)  the  Upper
          Tribunal  summarised  the  country  background  evidence  in   the
          following way:

                 "331.   The US Department of State Report  refers  to  the
                 crackdown on civil  society  intensifying  after  the  2009
                 elections.  There  are  reports  of  disappearances,  cruel
                 inhuman and degrading  punishments,  judicially  sanctioned
                 amputation  and  flogging,  beatings  and  rape  and  other
                 harshness. Although some prison facilities  including  Evin
                 prison in Tehran, are  notorious.  There  was  evidence  of
                 there being unofficial secret prisons where abuse  occurred
                 and prison  conditions  generally  being  harsh  and  life-
                 threatening. The point is  made  that  although  there  are
                 reassuring  constitutional  provisions  in   practice   the
                 authorities  can  and  do  detain   people   incommunicado,
                 sometimes for  weeks  or  even  months,  without  trial  or
                 contact  with  their  families.  The   "offences"   attract
                 attention are often vague by western standards and  include
                 such nebulous activity  as  "antirevolutionary  behaviour",
                 "moral corruption" and "siding with global arrogance".  The
                 point is that offences of this kind make  it  difficult  to
                 predict with any degree  of  accuracy  just  what  kind  of
                 behaviour is going to attract adverse attention."

      34. In AB the following caution was given:


                 "456.   The fact that people who do not seem to be of  any
                 interest to the authorities have no trouble  on  return  is
                 not really significant. Although Iran might be described as
                 exceedingly touchy there is no reason to  assume  that  the
                 state persecutes everyone and the mere fact of being in the
                 United Kingdom for a prolonged  period  does  not  lead  to
                 persecution. It may lead  to  scrutiny  and  this  is  what
                 concerns us most."




Risk factors

      35. Mr McVeety  accepted  that  there  is  no  reason  to  review  the
          Adjudicator's findings that the appellant was detained in Iran  in
          2002  for  reasons  relating  to  his  brother's   anti-government
          activities, and during that time it is reasonably likely  that  he
          was ill-treated, an experience that  has  impacted  upon  him.   I
          note that Adjudicator Axtell did not accept the appellant's  claim
          to have escaped from prison, and found that he was  released  such
          that he could safely return to Iran.


      36. Mr McVeety however invited me  to  find  that  these  events  took
          place a long time ago and  the  authorities  would  no  longer  be
          interested in these historical matters.

      37. It is important to note, as the Upper Tribunal did in SSH at  [31]
          that the examples of illegal departees who were imprisoned  showed
          "much more by way of specific activity than a simple  imputation".
           When assessing the appellant's history, I bear in  mind  that  he
          was not involved in any anti-regime activities  himself,  but  was
          probably perceived to have been involved in  his  brother's  anti-
          government activities in some way.  This was a long time ago,  and
          he has not taken part in any  related  activities  whilst  in  the
          United Kingdom.

      38. In  my  judgment,  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  upon  initial
          questioning, the appellant's past detention for  reasons  relating
          to perceived anti-government activities  will  become  known.   As
          pointed out in AB, the Iranian authorities remain concerned  about
          nebulous activity such as  "antirevolutionary  behaviour",  "moral
          corruption"  and  "siding  with  global  arrogance"  and   it   is
          difficult to predict with any degree of accuracy  just  what  kind
          of  behaviour  is  going  to  attract  adverse   attention.    The
          appellant's history of detention for  reasons  relating  to  anti-
          regime activities, even though it is restricted to one occasion  a
          considerable time ago and he did not ever know any  details  about
          his brother's activities, together with the  length  of  time  the
          appellant has been away  from  Iran  in  the  United  Kingdom,  is
          reasonably likely to elicit suspicion and further questioning.

      39. The appellant is likely  to  be  very  nervous  and  anxious  when
          questioned upon return to Iran,  as  a  consequence  of  his  past
          treatment at the hands of the Iranian authorities as a  young  man
          and   his   underlying   mental   health   condition   even   when
          appropriately treated with medication.  As Dr Sanderson put it:

                 "There is evidence that any related stimulus  can  reawaken
                 things he has gone through.  If exposed  to  interrogation,
                 this is likely to  have  a  more  detrimental  impact  than
                 someone without his underlying condition."


      40. The assessment of risk when  questioned  is  predicated  upon  the
          appellant telling the truth.  The 'truth' as agreed  includes  the
          following:


                    i) He left Iran unlawfully as a young man following  his
                       detention for reasons  relating  to  perceived  anti-
                       government activities.


                   ii) He has not attended the mosque since his  arrival  in
                       the United Kingdom in 2003 and is an atheist.

                  iii) He was permitted  to  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom,
                       following the refusal of  his  asylum  claim  on  the
                       basis of a relation with a Portuguese national  named
                       Princess (who had gender  reassignment  surgery)  but
                       that broke down in 2010 and he has since had fleeting
                       same-sex relationships.

                   iv) He has committed serious acts of  violence  and  been
                       detained in hospital for a lengthy  period.   He  has
                       been diagnosed with schizophrenia.

                    v) He has not completed military service  and  might  be
                       considered a draft evader.  However,  exceptions  are
                       made for those with schizophrenia -  see  2.4.11  and
                       5.1.1 of the Home Office's Note on  Military  Service
                       in Iran dated October 2016.

      41. When asked straightforward questions such as: What did you  do  in
          the UK? What friends did you associate with?   What  relationships
          did you have? What mosques  did  you  attend?,  the  appellant  is
          reasonably likely to truthfully  answer  in  accordance  with  the
          matters set out above.   This is reasonably  likely  to  lead  the
          authorities to view him with increased  adverse  interest.  As  Dr
          Sanderson explained, the appellant is reasonably  likely  to  find
          any such questioning very difficult indeed.  This is  particularly
          so  given  the  appellant's  subjective  fears  of   the   Iranian
          authorities after he was ill-treated in detention.


      42. Dr Sanderson also cautioned about the difficulties  many  face  in
          the  UK  when  first  imprisoned  in  accessing  medication.    Dr
          Sanderson highlighted that the failure  to  take  Clozapine  twice
          daily, could lead to a rapid risk of relapse.


Conclusion

      43.  When  all  the  evidence  is  considered   in   the   round   and
          cumulatively,  it  is   reasonably   likely   that   the   Iranian
          authorities  will  have  "particular   concerns"   regarding   the
          appellant's history and profile.  In Iran, nebulous activity  such
          as  "anti-revolutionary  behaviour"  and   "siding   with   global
          arrogance"  are  viewed  as  "offences"  and  worthy  of   adverse
          attention.  The appellant's past detention,  the  reason  for  it,
          his  religious  outlook  and  relationship  history,  the  lengthy
          period  he  has  spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his  likely
          behaviour when interviewed  must  be  considered  together.   When
          they are, it is reasonably likely  that  the  Iranian  authorities
          will be suspicious about the appellant's  behaviour,  associations
          and views.  It is  reasonably  likely  that  they  shall  consider
          further questioning necessary, in order  to  elicit  more  details
          and/or clarification regarding the appellant's  current  political
          and/or religious outlook and/or activities.


      44. Mr McVeety accepted, consistent with SSH, that  a  further  period
          of  questioning  is  reasonably  likely  to  be   accompanied   by
          detention and ill-treatment.   This  serious  harm  shall  be  for
          reasons relating to an imputed anti-regime political opinion.

      45.  It  follows  that  the  appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
          persecution  for  reasons  relating  to  his   imputed   political
          opinion.

Decision

      46. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and under Articles  2  and
          3 of the ECHR.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 November 2017
