
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03240/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th November 2018                          |On 3rd December 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                              mr Chia Hamedamin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Knight, Legal Representative, Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Iran, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State of 1st  February  2018  to
    refuse his application for asylum and humanitarian protection.   First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Swaniker  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 13th  August  2018.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  with
    permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis on 16th  September
    2018.

 2. There are essentially two Grounds of Appeal.  It is contended that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in applying too high  a  standard  when
    considering the evidence. It is further contended that the judge  erred
    in assessing whether the Appellant was at risk as a young  ethnic  Kurd
    from a rural area of Iran.

 3. The standard of proof in asylum cases is well established. In R v  SSHD
    ex p. Sivakumaran (1998)AC 958, the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  the
    existence  of  a  well-founded  fear  of   persecution   required   the
    establishment of what was described by  Lord  Keith  of  Kinkel  as  "a
    reasonable degree of likelihood"; by Lord  Tempelman  as  "a  real  and
    substantial danger"; and by Lord Goff as a "real and substantial risk".
    In Ravichandran (1996) Imm AR 97, Lord  Simon  Browne  said  that  "the
    question whether someone is at risk of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason  should  be  looked  at  in  the  round  and  all  the  relevant
    circumstances brought into account".

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Knight submitted that  the  judge  made  an
    erroneous statement in relation to the standard of proof at  paragraphs
    3 and 34 of the decision.  At paragraph 3 the judge said;

         "The burden of proof is on the Appellant to show  as  at  the  date
         hereof that there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that  he
         meets the requirements of the Qualification Regulations or that  he
         is entitled to be granted  humanitarian  protection  in  accordance
         with paragraph 339M of the Immigration Rules..."

    At paragraph 34 the  judge  said  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    establish that "there are substantial grounds for believing that he  is
    at a real risk of suffering treatment  and/or  punishment  contrary  to
    Articles 2 and 3 upon return to Iran".

 5. At the hearing Mr Kandola pointed out that in the reasons  for  refusal
    letter the Secretary of State used similar phrasing at paragraph 59  in
    reference to paragraph 339C of the  Immigration  Rules  where,  in  the
    context of consideration of humanitarian protection, the  Secretary  of
    State concluded that "there are no substantial  grounds  for  believing
    that there is a real risk of serious harm on  return  to  Iran".   This
    refers back to paragraph 339C(iii) which states that a person  will  be
    granted humanitarian protection in the UK if the Secretary of State  is
    satisfied that "substantial grounds have been shown for believing  that
    the person concerned if returned to the country of origin would face  a
    real risk of suffering serious harm."

 6. It therefore appears that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  quoted  the
    standard of proof applicable in relation  to  humanitarian  protection.
    In any event the judge undertook a detailed analysis of the Appellant's
    credibility at paragraphs 18 to 28 of the decision.  Mr Knight did  not
    point  to  any  aspects  of  that  assessment  which  demonstrate   the
    application of too high a standard in this assessment.

 7. Mr Kandola pointed to a number of places  in  the  decision  where  the
    judge specifically referred to the test in terms of  reasonable  degree
    of likelihood. For example at paragraph 17 where  the  judge  can  find
    that the Appellant had given divergent and  fundamentally  inconsistent
    accounts relating to material aspects of his claim "for  which  he  has
    not provided any  reasonable  or  credible  explanation".   Further  at
    paragraph 21 the judge referring  to  an  alleged  encounter  with  the
    Pasdar on the third smuggling trip across the border  which  the  judge
    found was a  straightforward  and  significant  event  the  fundamental
    details of which "would have reasonably likely remained  clear  in  the
    Appellant's mind".  The judge refers to  this  again  at  paragraph  23
    where she used the word reasonably and at 24 where she referred  to  an
    aspect  of  the  claim  which  it  was  expected  the  Appellant  would
    "reasonably likely be clear and consistent  about".   Again  the  judge
    refers to the Appellant's failure to give a "reasonable" explanation at
    paragraph 25.  At paragraph 28 the judge said that she found there  was
    a "reasonable likelihood" that the Appellant and his family remained in
    contact after leaving Iran and that his family  remain  there.   In  my
    view it is clear reading the decision as a whole that the judge applied
    the  appropriate  standard  to  the  assessment  of   the   Appellant's
    credibility.

 8. Mr Knight contended that, having made the findings she did,  the  judge
    failed to consider whether the Appellant was at risk on return  on  the
    basis of the findings made.  However the judge relied upon the  country
    guidance case of SSH and HR (illegal exit:  failed  asylum  seeker)  CG
    [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) where it was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    there had a well-founded fear  of  persecution  on  the  basis  of  his
    Kurdish ethnicity on return to Iran.  The Upper Tribunal's findings are
    summarised in the head note as follows:

         (a)  An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who  does
             not possess a  passport,  will  be  returnable  on  a  laissez
             passer, which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on  proof
             of identity and nationality.


          (b) An Iranian male in respect of whom no  adverse  interest  has
             previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not  face
             a real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3  rights  on
             return to Iran on account of having left Iran illegally and/or
             being a failed asylum seeker. No such risk exists at the  time
             of questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e.  of
             illegal exit and being  a  failed  asylum  seeker)  have  been
             established. In particular,  there  is  not  a  real  risk  of
             prosecution leading to imprisonment.


 9. The judge considered this matter at paragraph 29 of  the  decision  and
    concluded that there was no risk to the  Appellant  upon  return  as  a
    failed asylum seeker and/or account  of  his  Kurdish  ethnicity.   The
    judge further found that there was no credible evidence before  her  to
    support any claim based on the Appellant being a conscientious objector
    to military service.  Mr Knight did not point to  any  evidence  before
    the judge which could have led to an  alternative  conclusion  on  this
    matter.

10. Having considered the decision as a whole I conclude that  the  Grounds
    of Appeal have not been established.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    reached conclusions open to her on the basis of the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 28th November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 28th November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

