
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03815/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 September 2020                |On 11 September 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                   [M G Z]

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Bankfield Heath Solicitors

For the respondent:    None received



    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow on  29
         January 2020  against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judges A K Hussain and Saffer,  promulgated  on  29  November  2019
         following a hearing at Bradford on 25 September 2019.

      2. The appellant is an Egyptian national whose assessed date of  birth
         is 1 January 1998. He claims that he would be at risk on return  to
         Egypt because of his family's involvement  in  a  blood  feud  with
         another family over a land dispute. He claims that the  feud  began
         in October 2015 but that he was not involved in it  and  only  knew
         what he had been told by his father. In early  2016  he  claims  to
         have been sent to live with an aunt in Syria for  some  two  months
         following which he returned home. Due to the escalation of the feud
         because his paternal uncle had  killed  a  member  of  the  feuding
         family, the appellant was sent to Europe by his family.  He  claims
         to have travelled through Italy, France and Belgium, arriving  here
         in March 2017.

      3. The appellant's claim was refused by the respondent on 5 April 2019
         and his appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal panel which
         found that his evidence was not credible, that there was no  extant
         feud, that he had failed to claim asylum in the  countries  he  had
         passed through and that he had initially falsely claimed  to  be  a
         Syrian minor.

      4. No article 8 claim was pursued and it was conceded that the Refugee
         Convention could not be invoked due to the absence of a  convention
         reason.

      5. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  that  the  panel
         arguably erred in failing to consider the appellant's youth at  the
         time of claimed events when assessing his credibility. It  is  also
         argued that the panel made factual errors which further  undermined
         its credibility assessment.

    Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      6. The matter would normally then have been listed for  a  hearing  at
         Field House but due to the  Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to  take
         precautions against its spread, this did  not  happen  and  instead
         directions were sent to the parties on 28  April  2020.  They  were
         asked to present any objections to the matter being dealt  with  on
         the papers and to make any further submissions on the error of  law
         issue within certain time limits.

      7. The Tribunal has received written submissions  from  the  appellant
         but no reply from the respondent has been received. I am  satisfied
         that the directions were properly served on the Secretary of State.
         I now consider the matter.

      8. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      9. I have had regard to the submissions made and to all  the  evidence
         before me before deciding how to proceed. I take the  view  that  a
         full account of the facts are set out in  those  papers,  that  the
         arguments for and against the appellant have been clearly  set  out
         and that the issues to be decided are narrow. There are no  matters
         arising from the papers which would require clarification and so an
         oral hearing would not be needed for that purpose. I have regard to
         the importance of the matter to the appellant and consider  that  a
         speedy determination of this matter is in  his  best  interests.  I
         note that the appellant's submissions for an oral (remote)  hearing
         are based on general principles and what the 'normal' procedure is.
         No specific reasons are put forward as to why the matter could  not
         be properly decided on the papers in these abnormal  times  and  no
         good  reason  is  offered  as  to  how  the  appellant   would   be
         disadvantaged by such a process. I am satisfied that I am  able  to
         fairly and justly deal with this matter on the papers before me and
         I now proceed to do so.

    Submissions and grounds

     10. The appellant's written submissions were emailed  to  the  Tribunal
         and to the respondent on 11 May 2020. There has been  no  response,
         as far as I am aware, from the respondent as of today to either the
         Upper Tribunal's directions or to the appellant's submissions.

     11. The appellant relies on his grounds and argues  that  although  the
         Tribunal was aware of the appellant's limited involvement with  the
         feud, it failed to have  regard  to  his  age  when  assessing  his
         credibility and that, therefore, the conclusions are unsafe.  It is
         maintained that had the Tribunal reminded itself that the appellant
         had been a minor at the time of the events, even  on  his  assessed
         age, it may have taken a different view on credibility.

     12. Secondly, it is argued that the panel  made  factual  errors  which
         further undermine its findings.

     13. For this, I refer back to the grounds as no details are provided in
         the submissions. It is maintained there that the  Tribunal  wrongly
         found that the appellant had accepted that he  had  claimed  to  be
         Syrian on entry and that he had only admitted his true  nationality
         when confronted by the authorities. It is argued that the appellant
         never made such a concession.  Reference  is  made  to  the  asylum
         interview record where the appellant said that he had claimed to be
         Egyptian but had lived in Syria.

     14. The other factual error is said to be the Tribunal's  finding  that
         the appellant had withdrawn his claim to be a minor  following  the
         local authority's assessment of his age. It is argued that in  fact
         the appellant had challenged the  local  authority's  decision  and
         maintained his initial date of birth  at  the  hearing  before  the
         Tribunal. It is maintained that  these  errors  show  that  anxious
         scrutiny had not been given to the claim.

    Discussion and conclusions

     15. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission  and
         the submissions made by the appellant.

     16. The panel is criticised for its  credibility  assessment.  Much  is
         made of the failure of the panel to refer to the appellant's age at
         the time of the shooting by his paternal uncle  and  it  is  argued
         that had the Tribunal had regard to the appellant's youth it  would
         reached a different conclusion. The panel was clearly aware of  the
         dispute over the appellant's date of birth. This is referred to  in
         the first paragraph of the decision. The  appellant,  according  to
         his assessed date of birth, was just a few months short of being 22
         years old at the date of  the  hearing.  That  age  assessment  was
         challenged on judicial review but the claim was refused. A copy  of
         the decision has not been adduced.

     17. It is maintained in ground 1 that the appellant's age at  the  time
         of the "events" should  have  been  taken  into  account  when  the
         Tribunal assessed whether  or  not  there  had  been  a  feud.  The
         "events" referred to are not identified but would appear to  relate
         to one incident when the appellant's paternal uncle was alleged  to
         have killed a member of the opposing family.  It  is  difficult  to
         see, however, how having regard to the appellant's age  would  have
         made any material difference to the credibility assessment in  that
         respect for the following reasons. First, the panel considered  the
         account at face value, and accepted  that  the  appellant  was  not
         present at the time of the killing and that he would therefore  not
         have been able to provide a detailed account of what had transpired
         (at 23). As that had been accepted, assuming the account were true,
         consideration of the appellant's age (17 years at that time)  would
         have had no material impact on that conclusion.  Secondly,  it  was
         also  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  explained  the  apparent
         inconsistency over how the killing took place so that the panel  no
         longer considered such a discrepancy existed (at 24-25). Third,  no
         adverse finding is made by the panel over the  appellant's  changes
         in evidence about when the feud commenced or when he left Egypt for
         Syria.

     18. The most serious problem with the appellant's account and one  that
         has been omitted completely from  the  grounds  is  that  there  is
         evidence that the appellant was in Italy some ten months before  he
         even claimed to have left Egypt for Europe. That  conflict  remains
         an enormous hurdle to overcome whichever variation of  his  account
         is taken into account, including that given after full consultation
         with his legal representatives (in his statement  and  chronology).
         His age can have nothing to do with that as he would have been over
         18 at the time he claimed to have left Egypt in April 2016 (witness
         statement at paragraph 9; correcting earlier  accounts).  There  is
         indisputable  evidence  from  the  Italian  authorities  that   the
         appellant was already  in  Italy  in  July  2015.  This  cannot  be
         explained away by  the  appellant's  youth  and  the  grounds  fail
         entirely to engage with this difficulty which  entirely  undermines
         the account that he was in Egypt at the time and indeed for  almost
         a year afterwards.   It was entirely open to the panel to  conclude
         that he had fled Egypt before  any  feud  had  even  commenced  (on
         whichever version of events is taken into account).

     19. The panel is also criticized for making a factual error in  finding
         that the appellant had lied about his nationality  on  arrival  and
         claimed to be a Syrian  national.  Contrary  to  what  the  grounds
         maintain, the evidence shows that the appellant did  in  fact  make
         such a claim regardless of what he said later at his interview  (as
         cited in the grounds). Had the author  of  the  grounds  taken  the
         trouble to read through the evidence, he would have  seen  that  in
         his witness statement the appellant admits to  this  deception.  At
         paragraph 21 the appellant states: "The Home Office have said  that
         when I first arrived in the  UK,  I  said  that  I  was  Syrian.  I
         acknowledge I did this". Further, at the  hearing,  the  Record  of
         Proceedings  shows  that  he  was  cross-examined  about  this  and
         admitted that he had lied on arrival. The panel was therefore fully
         entitled to make the finding it did at paragraph 35.

     20. Additionally, the panel found that the appellant  had  changed  his
         evidence about the whereabouts of his sister and about  whether  he
         was sent to Syria to be with her or with an aunt (at 29-30).  Given
         that this was supposed  to  have  happened  shortly  prior  to  his
         arrival in the UK when he was already an adult, and given  that  he
         spent two months with that person, the panel was entitled  to  find
         that this undermined his claim to have fled  Egypt  for  Syria  (at
         30). There are also inconsistencies apparent from  the  appellant's
         interviews over his occupation in Egypt as he has claimed  both  to
         have never worked there and to have worked as a car mechanic and in
         a restaurant (RB: p. 7 and 26) and between  his  witness  statement
         and interview over whether or not he has been in contact  with  his
         sister since he was been in the UK .

     21. The  panel  found  that  the  credibility  of  the  claim  to  need
         international protection was further undermined by his  failure  to
         claim asylum in Italy, France or Belgium  (at  36)  and  by  giving
         false information to the Italian authorities (which he acknowledges
         at interview RB:32).

     22. Having considered all the evidence  the  panel  properly  concluded
         that the appellant's evidence was untruthful and  that  the  appeal
         had to fail.

    Decision

     23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any errors
         of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity

     24. I make an anonymity order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

     25. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no  reports
         of these proceedings of  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This  direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings.




    Signed


    R. Keki?
    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 8 September 2020
