
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03673/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th August 2019                   |On 22nd August 2019                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                             miss Mimy Mupangila
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj of Iris Law Firm, Gateshead
For the Respondent:    Mr P Stainthorpe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic  of  the  Congo.
    There is something of a history to her appeal, she first having arrived
    in the United Kingdom on or around 31st March 2013.  There have been  a
    number of appearances before the  Tribunal  in  which  the  Appellant's
    contention that she was entitled to refugee status have been  rejected.



 2. On 18th October 2017 the Appellant made a  further  application  to  be
    recognised as a refugee on  the  basis  of  her  involvement  with  the
    organisation,  APARECO,  in  Newcastle  and  that  on  her  case,   her
    involvement with it would  be  perceived  by  the  authorities  in  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo in such a way that on return she would  be
    at risk of persecution within the meaning of the Refugee Convention.

 3. On 28th February 2018 the Respondent rejected the application  and  the
    Appellant appealed.  On 19th April 2018 the appeal was heard  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Buchanan  sitting  at  North  Shields.   The
    appeal was dismissed by him on two bases.  Firstly, he did  not  accept
    that by reason of the activities with APARECO UK the Appellant would be
    at risk were she to be returned to the DRC. Particular reference should
    be made to paragraph 36 of his Decision and Reasons.  Secondly  because
    the Appellant had at one time permanent residence in  the  Republic  of
    South Africa, he was not satisfied that she had  established  that  she
    could not be returned there.

 4. Not content  with  that  Decision  by  Notice  dated  28th  June  2018,
    application was  made  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  At first instance, on 26th July 2018, permission was refused
    but on 21st August 2018 a renewed application was made both in  respect
    of the finding of Judge Buchanan that the Appellant  would  not  be  at
    risk by virtue of  her  political  activities  or  perceived  political
    activities and also in relation to the finding that the  Appellant  had
    not established that she could not be returned to South Africa.

 5. On 7th November 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Dr Storey granted  permission
    in these terms:

         "It is arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
         Appellant would not be perceived by the DRC authorities  on  return
         as either a leader, office bearer or  spokesperson  connected  with
         APARECO, notwithstanding she had taken on national responsibilities
         in 2017 in the UK.  The grounds disclose an arguable error of law".



 6. At the commencement of the proceedings before me I was concerned by the
    lack of any mention by Dr Storey in his  grant  of  permission  of  the
    second ground; being whether or not the  Appellant  was  returnable  to
    South Africa.  Mr Stainthorpe contended that the  terms  of  the  grant
    were such that no permission had  been  granted  on  that  point.   Not
    surprisingly Ms Brakaj argued to the contrary.  In my  judgment  noting
    that Dr Storey in no part of his grant stated that the  permission  was
    limited; noting that he speaks in terms of the "grounds" (pleural); and
    finally noting that granting permission only in respect  of  the  first
    aspect of the appeal would be meaningless because it would lead to  the
    appeal being dismissed in  any  event,   I  find  that  permission  was
    granted on both grounds. If I am wrong about that I grant permission at
    this stage for the matter to be argued.

 7. On the substantive matters, I am grateful to the parties  for  enabling
    me to focus on that which was in dispute and  not  having  to  consider
    areas which were not.  At the outset, Mr  Stainthorpe,  quite  properly
    and realistically accepted that there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of Judge Buchanan, in that he ought to have assessed  the
    risk to this Appellant on the basis of how she might  be  perceived  on
    return, rather than through the prism of her activities in  the  United
    Kingdom and the extent of them, though  he  accepted  that  the  latter
    informed the former.

 8. Earlier I made reference to paragraph 36 of Judge  Buchanan's  Decision
    and Reasons.  That reads as follows:

         "I have taken an overall view of all the evidence before me and the
         above-mentioned matters in reaching my decision.  I have  given  as
         much credit as I can to the Appellant for the documentary  evidence
         which the Appellant has produced.  I cannot disregard the  previous
         findings in respect of the Appellant's credibility or the timescale
         of the matters which fall for assessment, the case  in  respect  of
         the Appellant's credibility or the timescale of the  matters  which
         fall for assessment.  The case in respect  of  the  arrest  of  the
         Appellant's  father  and  cousin  and  their  questioning  is   not
         established.  I have considered the country guidance  authority  in
         BM and Others [2015] UKUT 293 and the BI (sic).   I  conclude  that
         the Appellant has established that she is a member of  APARECO  and
         has been appointed to various roles within  that  organisation  but
         she has failed to  establish  that  she  holds  a  significant  and
         visible role in APARECO or that she would be perceived as a leader,
         office bearer or spokesperson of APARECO by the authorities in  the
         DRC".

 9. As I say Mr Stainthorpe rightly conceded that the judge had fallen into
    error insofar as he failed adequately to consider whether the appellant
    would be at risk of being perceived  as  a  leader,  office  bearer  or
    spokesperson on return to the  DRC.   There  is  simply  no  sufficient
    explanation as to how the finding was arrived at and so I make it clear
    that although Mr Stainthorpe made the concession he did, I  agree  with
    him entirely.

10. There was then some discussion concerning the remaking of the decision.
    I heard submissions in the first instance in relation to the ability of
    the Appellant to return to South Africa.  Though at paragraph 38 of his
    Decision and Reasons, Judge Buchanan had  referred  to  the  burden  of
    proof resting on the Appellant to the lower  standard,  it  was  common
    ground that in fact the correct standard for this issue was  a  balance
    of probabilities.  Since I am remaking the  case,  I would  fall  into
    error myself if I were now to apply the wrong standard.

11. There is no dispute about  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  once  held
    permanent residence in South Africa; she has  produced  a  document  to
    that effect.  The issue was whether it was open to  Judge  Buchanan  to
    find that there was insufficient evidence for him to be satisfied  that
    the burden had been discharged.

12. It is trite law to say that matters of foreign law are matters of  fact
    and not of law. The importance of that is that there will be times when
    a domestic Court or Tribunal needs help with how foreign law is  to  be
    interpreted and how that law is applied in practice.

13. The starting point is paragraph 28 of the  South  African,  Immigration
    Act 13 of 2002.  It provides under the heading:

         "Withdrawal of permanent residence permit" (which I note came about
         by an amendment of 2004) "that the director general may withdraw  a
         permanent residence permit if its holder ...

         (c)  has been absent from the Republic for more than  three  years,
             provided that:

             (i)  upon showing good cause and upon  her  prior  application
                  the director general may extend this  period  in  specific
                  cases;

             (ii) the time when such holder

                  (aa) was residing abroad  while  in  the  service  of  the
                      state;

                  (bb) was  residing  abroad  while  the  representative  or
                      employee  of  a  person  or  association  of  persons
                      resident or established in the republic;

                  (cc) was residing  abroad  while  in  the  service  of  an
                      international organisation of which the  state  is  a
                      member;

                  (dd) in the case of the spouse or  dependent  child  of  a
                      person referred to in subitem  (aa),  (bb)  or  (cc),
                      such spouse or child was residing with such a person;
                      or

                  (ee) in the case of the spouse or  dependent  child  of  a
                      person who is a South African citizen, such spouse or
                      child was residing with such person,

                      shall not be computed within such period;

             (iii)     the  minister  may  grant  an  exemption  from   the
                  requirement of residence in respect of  certain  residence
                  or class of residence;

             (iv) the period of absence  may  only  be  interrupted  by  an
                  admission and sojourn in the republic; and

             (v)  the requirement of residence in the  republic  shall  not
                  affect any foreigner to whom exemption  has  been  granted
                  under Section 31(2)(b)  as  a  member  of  a  category  of
                  persons, unless  such  foreigner  previously  entered  the
                  republic or sojourned therein for the purpose of permanent
                  residence under the authority of such exemption; or

         (d)  has taken up residence in the republic within one year of  the
             issuance of such permit".

14.  I do not have Section 31(2)(b) before  me,  nor  was  it  available  to
    Judge Buchanan.  Ms Brakaj relied heavily also  before  me  and  before
    Judge Buchanan on a document from the South African High Commission  in
    Canada, in which, under the heading "Application for proof of permanent
    residence", it states:

         "Please note: a person loses  his/her  permanent  residence  permit
         when he/she is out of the  country  for  continuous  (three)  years
         according to the Immigration Act  and  according  to  the  repealed
         alien controller, continuous three years results in automatic lapse
         of the permit."

15.  One possibility for the interpretation of what there appears  is  that,
    ".... according to the Immigration Act" means within  the  clauses  and
    the manner in which the Act is to be interpreted.  I know not.  Neither
    did Judge  Buchanan.   Ms  Brakaj  asserts  that  taken  together  with
    correspondence with the VF Services  (UK)  Limited  demonstrating  that
    application had been made for a visa by the Appellant, the totality  of
    the evidence was sufficient to demonstrate that the judge ought to have
    accepted that the Appellant had discharged the burden  which  was  upon
    her.

16.  I remind myself that I am concerned only with whether it  was  open  to
    Judge Buchanan to make the findings that he did.   It  is  not  for  me
    simply to replace my own view for his.  As it happens, I take the  same
    view as Judge Buchanan.  The evidence is and was lacking.  I simply  do
    not know how the Act  of  2002  is  applied.   I  also  note  that  the
    withdrawal of permanent residence is  discretionary.   The  word  "may"
    appears not "must".  The provision provides the circumstances in  which
    the Director  General  on  the  face  of  the  Act  may  exercise  that
    discretion.  If the circumstances are not present, then the discretion,
    it seems, cannot be applied.  Whether there are any other circumstances
    which relate to this Appellant, for  example  in  relation  to  Section
    31(2)(b) was not, and Ms Brakaj accepts, evidence that was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. As I have said this is a question of fact, not  of
    law.

17.  There followed some discussion as to whether or not this matter  should
    be adjourned in order for additional evidence to be obtained to  go  to
    the point.  I reserved my view on that until after consideration of the
    first ground of appeal.  If the Appellant would necessarily fail,  then
    there was little point in any adjournment, though I shall explain why I
    have come to the view that the matter should not be  adjourned  in  due
    course.

18.  I turn then to the issue as to whether or not the  Appellant  would  be
    perceived as a person to whom  the  authority  would  have  an  adverse
    interest. With the consent of both parties I simply typed into "Google"
    the Appellant's name and then clicked on "images".   I  used  only  the
    Appellant's first and last name.  It was common ground that  the  first
    set of images which emerged were those of the  Appellant.  Included  in
    those images was a photograph of the Appellant in front of  an  APARECO
    poster.

19.  Having seen those photographs Mr Stainthorpe rightly conceded  that  on
    the first ground i.e. how the Appellant would be perceived on return to
    the DRC, she was entitled to succeed given the guidance in the case  of
    BM. I find therefore that on that point there was not only the material
    error of law but that were the Appellant to be returned to the DRC  she
    would be at real  risk  (lower  standard  applied)  of  persecution  by
    reason, at the very least, of her perceived political activities in the
    United Kingdom.

20.  If that were the only issue in this  matter,  the  Appellant  would  be
    entitled to refugee status, but it is not.

21.  An appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is not a dress  rehearsal  for  an
    onward appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Cases are to be determined on the
    basis of the evidence that is provided.  Judge Buchanan explained,  and
    sufficiently  so,  why  he  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had
    discharged the burden of proof. At paragraph 40  of  his  Decision  and
    Reasons he said amongst other observations:

         "I have no evidence before me  as  to  which  statute  governs  the
         Appellant's position.  I have no  evidence  from  a  South  African
         lawyer as to whether the Appellant will  have  lost  her  permanent
         resident rights. Does the fact that the Appellant has  been  absent
         from South Africa, and for most of the  time  has  been  making  an
         application for asylum in another country have any bearing  on  the
         situation?  Is the Immigration Act 2002 Act still in force?  Has it
         been amended?  [I pause to note that clearly it  has  by  the  2004
         legislation].  Has the  Director  General  in  fact  withdrawn  the
         Appellant's rights?

    [Again, I pause to note that it appears on the face of the  legislation
    to be discretionary].  Judge Buchanan made the  same  observation.   He
    went on to say these are just some of the questions which might need to
    be addressed before it can be said that the Appellant  has  established
    even to the "lower level" (which is not the correct standard) that  she
    has lost her right of permanent residence in South Africa.

22.  Ms Brakaj suggested to me that  the  difficulty  was  one  of  funding.
    That may be so.  I know not.  But I cannot make findings of fact on the
    basis of a lack of evidence simply because there is not the funding  to
    produce the evidence.  That is a matter which  needs  to  be  taken  up
    elsewhere if indeed it is an obstacle. Certain it is that the  Tribunal
    cannot be expected to  embark  upon  some  means  testing  exercise  to
    determine whether there should be an adjournment. The issue for  me  is
    whether the finding that the Appellant had not proven her case on  that
    point was one open to Judge Buchanan.  It was.

23.  Where does this leave the Appellant?  It means this, that she  now  has
    a positive finding that  she  cannot  be  returned  to  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo.  I am not granting permission for  further  evidence
    to be adduced at some other time. The test for whether  an  adjournment
    should be granted is "fairness": Terluk v Berezovsky  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    1345. There has been plenty of  time  to  obtain  additional  evidence.
    Further the First-tier Tribunal Judge pointed to the evidence that  was
    lacking. To adjourn  the  case  at  this  stage  would  impact  on  the
    administration of justice and delay some other appeal.

24.  The Appellant is not left without remedy.  What she  needs  to  do,  if
    she can, is to satisfy the  Secretary  of  State  that  she  cannot  be
    removed to South Africa.  Whether the Secretary of State is prepared to
    entertain the application as one amounting to a fresh claim, is one for
    the Secretary of State.  But it is if established and accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that such is the case then that is, as matters stand
    all that lies in the way of her being entitled to be  recognised  as  a
    refugee.

Decision

    It follows that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed insofar  as
    there was a material error of law.  In the remaking however the  appeal
    in the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed and the appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date: 20 August 2019





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

