
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03082/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2019                   |On 4 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     JKA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Basharat
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1975 and is  a  male  citizen  of  Ghana.  He
    claims to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  October  1999.  The
    appellant  has  made  a  number  of  applications  to  regularise   his
    immigration status culminating in an application for asylum July  2018.
    That application was refused by the Secretary of State  by  a  decision
    dated 17 March 2019. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    which, in a decision  promulgated  on  9  August  2019,  dismissed  the
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There are several grounds of appeal. The appellant claims  that  he  is
    homosexual and that he is a real risk of ill-treatment upon  return  to
    Ghana. Judge did not believe his account and permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted by Judge Finch on the basis  that  the  judge  had
    failed to take account of the  totality  of  the  appellant's  evidence
    relating to sexuality or to give sufficient weight to the fact that the
    appellant had only recognised his true sexuality after his marriage  to
    his wife had broken down.

 3. I find that there is some merit in the grounds concerning  the  judge's
    assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the   appellant's   international
    protection claim but the appellant's strongest argument relates to  his
    Article 8 appeal which was founded on his claim to have resided in  the
    United Kingdom for more than 20 years.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had lived in the United Kingdom since September/October  2000
    [28]. She did not accept that the appellant had arrived in 1999, as  he
    claimed. As a consequence, she did not find that the appellant met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of HC 395 (as  amended).  Whilst  the
    judge went on  to  find  that  the  appellant  could  reintegrate  into
    Ghanaian society and had skills as a trained vending machine  engineer,
    she did not, in her assessment of the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds,
    consider the length of the appellant's residence in this country. I  do
    not suggest that the judge should have approached this  appeal  on  the
    basis of  a  'near  miss'  under  the  rules  but  the  length  of  the
    appellant's residence, albeit insufficient to  satisfy  paragraph  276,
    should still have featured in her overall assessment.

 4. In the circumstances, I find that the judge's  decision  is  flawed  by
    legal error. I set the decision aside, preserving none of the  findings
    of fact save that the appellant has resided in the United Kingdom since
    at least September/October 2000. There will need  to  be  a  new  fact-
    finding exercise, both in relation  to  the  appellant's  international
    protection claim but also concerning his Article 8 appeal. It  will  be
    for the next Tribunal to  determine  when  the  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom and whether he has  resided  here  continuously,  as  he
    claims, for more than 20 years.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set-aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand, save that the appellant has lived in  the
    United Kingdom since September/October 2000. The appeal is returned  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision
    following a hearing.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





















