

                                                                [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number PA/03329/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Liverpool
          Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 15th December 2017                             On 11th January 2018



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                               ADNAM ABDULLAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Faryl (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The Appellant claimed asylum on the 1st of November 2016. The full facts
   of his claim are set out in the bundles in the Tribunal papers and
   summarised along with the reasons why the Secretary of State rejected the
   claim in the Refusal Letter of the 21st of March 2017. The Appellant's
   appeal against that decision was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge A
   Hudson at Manchester on the 4th of May 2017 and the appeal dismissed for
   the reasons given in the decision promulgated on the 16th of May 2017.

2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
   grounds of application to the First-tier Tribunal of the 17th of
   September 2017. The application was considered by First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Dineen who refused the application on the basis that the grounds as
   drafted did not identify any arguable error and were simply an attempt to
   reargue the appeal.

3. The grounds were handwritten by the Appellant who at that stage did not
   have the benefit of legal representation. The Appellant stated that Judge
   Dineen had not made any mention of the supporting documents the Appellant
   had forwarded to the Arnhem Support Centre on the 11th of August. The
   Appellant did not believe that the Tribunal had fully considered all of
   the evidence relating to his case as presented at the hearing on the 4th
   of May.


4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on the
   16th of October 2017. In doing so Judge Plimmer found that it was
   arguable that the finding that the delay in claiming was implausible had
   not taken account of background evidence and had not properly explained
   why internal relocation to Baghdad was reasonable. With regard to the
   additional information it was not clear if that had been available to the
   First-tier Tribunal and that required clarification.

5. At the start of the hearing it was accepted that the additional
   documents referred to had not been before the First-tier Tribunal. I
   observed that it followed that there was no error so far as those
   documents were concerned. So far as the remaining grounds are concerned
   the representatives made submissions which are set out in the Record of
   Proceedings in line with their respective positions.


6. The evidence relating to the treatment of former Ba'ath Party members
   was set out in paragraph 20 and the somewhat dated but only Country
   Guidance case on the point cited in paragraph 22. It is not suggested
   that the Judge has misquoted or misunderstood the evidence in relation to
   the position of former Ba'ath Party members. The thrust of the evidence
   from the BKA v Sweden case and the November 2016 CPI report was that the
   senior members at risk had either been dealt with or fled abroad and
   membership by itself was insufficient. Whilst the case of OH dated back
   to 2004 the evidence considered then was consistent with that considered
   in paragraph 20.


7. In the course of the hearing I observed that more evidence would be
   required than simply a bald assertion of Ba'ath Party membership and
   asked what background evidence there was to show the Appellant would be
   at risk? Ms Faryl said that there was none, it was the evidence of the
   Appellant and there was the cumulative effect of the evidence. It was
   submitted that it was contradictory to find that the Appellant left for
   medical treatment but that he has family in Iraq.


8. The findings set out in paragraphs 21 and 22 cannot be said to be a
   simple rejection of the Appellant's case. The Judge considered the
   suggestion that the Appellant had been pursued to Tuz Khurmato and was
   entitled to find that if he was of sufficient interest to have been
   located there more would have happened to him than simply threatening
   letters. The Judge was entitled to find that it was inherently unlikely
   that there would be a delay in the light of the Appellant's account and
   the evidence relied on. I am satisfied that there is no error in this
   respect.


9. With regard to internal relocation this was considered in paragraph 31
   where the Judge considered the Appellant's personal background, that he
   would be returned to Baghdad, his documentation and the presence of his
   family in Iraq. The Judge referred to the current country guidance case
   of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC).


10. The complaints made against the findings of the Judge in this regard do
   not fairly reflect the evidence and the observations of the Judge in the
   decision. The decision has to be read as a whole and the findings on the
   circumstances that the Appellant would face in Iraq on return were made
   in the context of the situation before he left and why, the absence of
   difficulties the Judge found he had had and the case law relating to the
   situation in Baghdad for those returning there and his still having
   family in the country. Read as a whole the decision was open to the Judge
   for the reasons given and the Judge was entitled to dismiss the appeal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 10th January 2018








































