


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/03599/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields        |Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2018            |On 16 November 2018                |
|Prepared on 9 November 2018   |                                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    Y. M.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
           illegally, and claimed asylum on 7 September 2017 saying that he
           faced a real risk of harm at  the  hands  of  non  state  agents
           through "honour based violence" as a result of the extra marital
           relationship he claimed to have enjoyed with M,  a  resident  of
           Suleymanyeh. He accepted that he originated from  the  KRG,  but
           said that the risk of harm he faced was not limited to his  home
           area of Suleymanyeh, but extended across the whole of  the  KRG.
           He also denied the ability to relocate to Baghdad to avoid  that
           risk.
        2. The Appellant's protection claim was refused by  the  Respondent
           on 2 March 2018. His appeal against that decision was heard  and
           dismissed by First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cope  in  a  decision
           promulgated on 29 May 2018, in the course  of  which  the  Judge
           rejected as untrue the Appellant's account of an  extra  marital
           affair with M. He concluded that the Appellant could  return  to
           the KRG as a returning former resident, and enjoy the support of
           his family and friends, resuming in safety the lifestyle he  had
           previously had.
        3. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  from  the  FtT  on
           grounds that Ms Brakaj did not  draft.  She  accepts  that  they
           should be read as asserting only one complaint, namely that  the
           Judge made inconsistent findings of fact in the  course  of  his
           decision. That was certainly how the grounds were  characterised
           in the course of the grant of permission to appeal made by First
           tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 20 June  2018,  who  considered  the
           complaint to be arguable.
        4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      The complaint


        5. When the appeal was called on for hearing Ms Brakaj  noted  that
           the Judge had accepted that "aspects of  the  Appellant's  case"
           had been given by him consistently [24], and that "some of  what
           he had to say about family  honour  in  Iraq,  and  the  KRI  in
           particular, is not inconsistent with  the  background  evidence"
           [25]. She argued that the Judge  had  thereby  not  been  simply
           noting the context in which he was to consider  the  credibility
           of the Appellant's account, but that  having  expressed  himself
           thus, it was not open to the Judge to go on to reject  the  core
           of that account as untrue, as he did.
        6. That argument was not one that was advanced with any vigour, and
           as  Ms  Brakaj  accepted,  it  failed   to   engage   with   the
           contradictions and inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  evidence
           that the Judge quite properly identified  and  explained  during
           the course of his decision.
        7. In my judgement it is clear that the draftsman  of  the  grounds
           misread the decision. Upon any fair reading of the  decision  it
           is clear that the Judge was at pains to  take  as  his  starting
           point the fact  that  some  extra  marital  relationships  would
           undoubtedly take place in  the  KRG,  and  that  some  of  those
           relationships would result in "honour  based  violence"  towards
           one or both of the couple concerned, generally from  members  of
           the woman's family.
        8. That starting point, or context, did not however mean that  upon
           the applicable low standard of proof  the  Judge  was  bound  to
           accept as truthful the evidence of  the  Appellant  as  one  who
           claimed to have undertaken an extra marital relationship. As  Ms
           Brakaj accepts, the  Judge  clearly  undertook  a  thorough  and
           painstaking analysis of the evidence that was placed before him,
           and concluded that the Appellant's evidence was untrue.  It  was
           in my judgement certainly  open  to  the  Judge  to  reach  that
           conclusion on the basis of the Appellant's evidence, and  in  my
           judgement he gave more than adequate reasons for his  conclusion
           that the Appellant had not told the truth;  MD  (Turkey)  [2017]
           EWCA Civ 1958.
        9. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the Judge did not  err
           in law in  concluding  that  he  should  reject  as  untrue  the
           Appellant's claim to be at risk of violence from members of  M's
           family should he return to his home area of Suleymanyeh.
       10. The focus of the Appellant's challenge was  entirely  upon  that
           adverse finding of fact. However for the avoidance of any doubt,
           I would record that since the Appellant did not face the risk he
           had described, and since he had no dispute with his own  family,
           the Judge's conclusion that he could be returned to Iraq by  air
           to Baghdad airport with identity card,  CSID  and  passport  was
           consistent with the country guidance to be found  in  AA  (Iraq)
           [2017] EWCA Civ 944, and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)
           Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC). From  Baghdad  airport  he  could
           take an internal flight to  Suleymanyeh,  and  resume  with  the
           support of his family the life he had decided to abandon when he
           chose to emigrate from Iraq.
       11. Accordingly, and notwithstanding the terms in  which  permission
           to appeal was granted, the grounds fail to disclose any material
           error of law in the approach taken by the Judge  to  the  appeal
           that requires his decision to be set aside and remade.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 29
   May 2018 contained no material error of law in the decision  to  dismiss
   the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside  and
   remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.







Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

[pic]Dated 9 November 2018
