






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03672/2018


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Manchester                         |                                   |
|On 15th April 2019                 |On 18 April 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                 Ms Thi [L]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A J Parker promulgated on the 10th May 2018 whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McGeachey on 28th January 2019. Thus the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

         1  The grounds of appeal state that the judge had aired because  he
         had not considered  important  evidence:  that  the  appellant  was
         'exposed' on the Internet on an official webpage and that therefore
         she would be in danger on return to Vietnam. It  is  asserted  that
         this is clear from the Home Office's own policy guidance.

         2  I consider that it is just possible that the grounds  of  appeal
         may be arguable

Preliminary Issue

 5. The appellant  in  the  past  had  been  represented  by  Oakmount  Law
    Solicitors. By email dated 12 April 2019  the  solicitors  stated  that
    they were unable to contact the appellant and that  they  were  without
    instructions. The solicitors therefore were coming off record.

 6. Subsequent to that email the  solicitors  contacted  the  Tribunal  and
    stated that they had managed to contact the appellant.  The  solicitors
    further stated that the appellant wished to withdraw  the  appeal.  The
    respondent was also informed.

 7. At some time prior to the hearing there was a further  email  from  the
    representatives indicating that the appellant did not wish to  withdraw
    the appeal but wished to have the appeal adjourned. No reason was given
    for having the appeal adjourned. It appears that that was considered by
    the duty judge at Field House and the application was refused.

 8. As background to the emails it was accepted by the respondent that  the
    appellant's husband, Mr [DN] date of birth [~] 1988 also  a  Vietnamese
    national HO Reference no. [N~], had been granted refugee status in  the
    United Kingdom. On 14 December 2018 the appellant's representatives had
    written to the respondent, UKVI Family Reunion  Team,  requesting  that
    the appellant and the child of the family be granted  "refugee"  status
    in line with Mr [N].

 9. By way of response it had been indicated by the respondent that  whilst
    the family circumstances may be considered  resulting  in  a  grant  of
    leave based upon family union, that did not  confer  on  the  appellant
    refugee status in her own right. It was indicated  that  the  appellant
    could either choose to pursue her appeal or could withdraw  the  appeal
    and rely upon family reunion alone. It was  clear  that  the  appellant
    would have to pursue her appeal, if she wanted refugee  status  in  her
    own right.

10. I note that in the past directions have been given  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the appellant and her representatives to lodge  documents.
    There had been a failure to comply and  to  deal  with  the  appeal  in
    accordance with the Procedure Rules.

11. The appellant and her representatives failed to attend the hearing. The
    application for an adjournment has been refused.

12. I note that the notice of hearing had been served on the solicitors and
    on the appellant in accordance with the Upper Tribunal Procedure rules.
    The notice of hearing had been sent to the  appellant  at  the  address
    given as the last address for service. Accordingly I was satisfied that
    notice of the hearing had been served in accordance with  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  I  therefore  determined  to
    proceed with the hearing  in  the  absence  of  the  appellant  or  her
    representatives.

    Consideration

13. It was for the appellant to attend the Upper Tribunal hearing  with  or
    without representatives to pursue her appeal. She has not done so.

14. In essence the grounds of appeal seek  to  argue  that  in  considering
    whether the appellant is entitled to asylum the  judge  has  failed  to
    consider the current position of  the  appellant  and  the  appellant's
    involvement in demonstrations and political activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom. It is alleged in  so  doing  that  the  judge  has  failed  to
    consider the current policy guidance of the respondent.

15. The appellant had claimed to be part  of  a  pro-life  religious  group
    called Bao Ve Sony Gio an Phaolo. The judge had made specific  findings
    about her activities in respect of the group and the inconsistencies in
    the appellant's account and the background information. The  judge  has
    dealt with the activities of the group and the arrest  and  convictions
    of individual members in paragraph 20. In paragraphs 18 to 24 the judge
    has  highlighted  specific  inconsistencies  between  the   appellant's
    account and background information.

16. The judge in paragraph  38  has  considered  the  current  Home  Office
    country policy on Vietnam.  The  judge  has  given  valid  reasons  for
    dismissing the appellant's claims based upon her activities in Vietnam.

17. Thereafter  the  judge  has  specifically  considered  the  appellant's
    activities in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  judge  noted  the  improving
    position with regard to human  rights  and  the  fact  that  the  Roman
    Catholic Church would fall to be considered as a  registered  religious
    group as identified in the Home Office policy guidance. On the basis of
    the evidence the judge was  not  satisfied  the  appellant  would  face
    inhumane or degrading treatment on return was not  satisfied  that  she
    would be subjected to conduct capable of constituting persecution.

18. Those were findings of fact the judge was entitled to make on the basis
    of  the  evidence  before  him.  The  judge  has  fully  justified  the
    conclusions reached and was entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk on  return.  In  the  circumstances  there  is  no
    material error of law.

    Notice of Decision

19. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.






Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 17th April 2018

