
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03886/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 April 2019                      |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   mr m a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, counsel instructed by Freedom
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of  Iran  born  on  15  January  1989.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 September 2017 and  claimed  asylum
    the following day, on the basis that he  had  been  involved  with  the
    Kurdistan Democratic Party-Iran (KDP-I) and  had  distributed  leaflets
    for the party at the request of his uncle.  His application for  asylum
    was refused in a decision dated 10 March 2018 and he  appealed  against
    that decision.  His  appeal  was  heard  on  24  April  2018  when  the
    Appellant gave evidence, both as to his reasons for claiming asylum and
    also as to his activities since he arrived  in  the  UK,  both  through
    Facebook and through attending demonstrations in support of the KDP  in
    London which had been published on YouTube.

 2. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  30  April  2018,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal, finding the Appellant's account  of  his  reasons
    for leaving Iran not to be credible, and also rejecting his claim based
    on his sur place activities in the UK.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on two grounds:  firstly,  it
    was asserted the judge had erred in his assessment of  the  credibility
    of the Appellant's claim and secondly, that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    dismissing the Appellant's sur place activities as low-level and  self-
    serving, absent consideration of whether such activities would put  the
    Appellant at risk on return to Iran.  It was submitted  the  judge  had
    failed to take account of the  relevant  country  guidance  cf  AB  and
    Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015]  UKUT  00257
    (IAC), in particular at [467] to [472].

 4. Permission to appeal was granted in respect of the second  ground  only
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant in a decision dated 9 July  2018  on
    the basis it was arguable that the judge may have erred in law  in  his
    assessment  of  the  Facebook  evidence.  A  renewed  application   for
    permission to appeal in respect of  the  first  ground  of  appeal  was
    refused by Upper Tribunal Judge King in a decision dated 30 July  2018.



    Hearing

5.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Sowerby on behalf  of  the
    Appellant drew attention to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  submitted
    substantial evidence at page 40 of his bundle onwards of attending KDP-
    I demonstrations in the UK, and also a plethora of Facebook excerpts at
    page 50 onwards, criticising the Iranian Government.  Some of these are
    in English and the Appellant's name is  clearly  visible:  for  example
    pages 52, 53, 55 onwards and 86.  He also drew attention to pages 47 to
    49, which are stills of video posts on YouTube where the  Appellant  is
    predominant in that footage and this related to a demonstration outside
    the Iranian Embassy on 3 November 2017.  He submitted that at [7.6] the
    judge gives no or no proper reasons for not giving weight to the  video
    and documentary  evidence.   Whilst  there  was  a  reference  in  that
    paragraph to reasons having already been provided, it is not clear what
    reasons these were.  Mr Sowerby submitted that  the  finding  was  also
    contrary to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in BA (Demonstrators  in
    Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC)  and  monitoring
    does clearly take place in Iran.  Mr Sowerby submitted that  the  judge
    further erred  at  [7.7]  in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the Appellant's claim and had further  failed  to  apply  the
    relevant jurisprudence cf Danian [1999] EWCA  Civ  3000;  YB  (Eritrea)
    [2008] EWCA Civ 360 and BA (Iran) (op cit).

6.   Whilst it was the Appellant's case  that  he  is  a  genuine  political
    activist, Mr Sowerby submitted that even if he was not, he would be  at
    risk as a result of his activity cf. AB  [2015]  UKUT  00257  (IAC)  at
    [457] which makes  it  absolutely  clear  that  blogging  and  Facebook
    activities are common amongst Iranian activists and the authorities are
    unhappy about this.  The Appellant could not be expected  to  lie  upon
    return to Iran and there would be a pinch point: [464] through to [471]
    refer.  The Appellant left Iran  illegally  so  he  would  need  to  be
    documented by the Iranian Embassy in the UK, and it is clear  from  the
    decision in SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed  asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) at [23] that as a failed asylum seeker he would
    be questioned on return.  Mr Sowerby further  sought  to  rely  on  the
    decision in HB (Kurds) Iran  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00430  (IAC)  which  was
    promulgated after the judge's decision but sees a clear development  in
    the case law, particularly with reference to Kurds from Iran  at  [87],
    [108], [114] to [116].

7.   In her submissions, Ms Pal stated she was  opposing  the  appeal,  that
    the judge did not accept the Appellant was a witness of truth, nor that
    the Facebook entries would come to the attention  of  the  authorities.
    She submitted the Appellant would not be at risk at the pinch point  on
    return to Iran.  Ms Pal submitted the judge had  done  just  enough  in
    finding that the Appellant would not be at risk on return to  Iran  and
    he was also low-level in terms of his involvement with the photographic
    evidence.  She submitted it is unlikely if the videos were to be viewed
    on return that he would be picked up as someone who opposed the Iranian
    Government.

8.   The judge also  considered  at  [7.10]  the  content  of  the  Facebook
    reports and at [7.11] the Appellant's credibility and the  issue  of  a
    returnee who left illegally at [7.13].  The judge found at [7.14]  that
    given he did not accept the Appellant was wanted by the authorities and
    his illegal exit would not be a significant risk  factor  cf.  SSH  (op
    cit).  She submitted there were  no  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision and the findings of the First-tier Tribunal should stand.

    Findings and Reasons in respect of the error of law

9.   I found a material error of  law  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's refugee sur place activities.  The judge held as follows in
    this respect:-

         "7.6 The appellant has engaged in activities in the United  Kingdom
             organised by the Kurdistan  Democratic  Party  in  the  United
             Kingdom,  but  for  the  reasons   mentioned   above,   beyond
             confirming that the  appellant  has  sought  out  the  Kurdish
             Democratic Party in the United Kingdom, and that he  may  have
             applied for membership and attended events that the party  has
             organised in the United Kingdom, I can give no weight  to  the
             video and documentary evidence.

         7.7  There is a risk that  economic  migrants  claim  asylum  using
             Facebook and attendance at rallies in an opportunistic  manner
             to bolster their desire to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  I am not satisfied that the reach of the appellant's
             Facebook entries will  have  come  to  the  attention  of  the
             Iranian  authorities.   I  attach   little   weight   to   the
             photographic and video images provided.  I do not  doubt  that
             the appellant  attended  outside  the  Iranian  embassy  on  3
             November 2017 and that glimpses of him appear in  the  videos.
             However,  I  am  satisfied  that  any  involvement  on   these
             occasions was at a low level and mainly for  the  self-serving
             embroidering of his claims that he is  politically  active  to
             lay the ground for an attempt to support his asylum claim."

10.  I find that the judge has failed to provide proper or adequate  reasons
    for rejecting the Appellant's claim in this respect.  Whilst  there  is
    reference at [7.6] to "reasons mentioned above" it is not apparent from
    the previous  paragraphs  what  these  reasons  are.  There  was  clear
    evidence before him that the Appellant is a "strong supporter"  of  the
    KDP-Iran in the  United  Kingdom  [7.5.](g)  refers  and  that  he  had
    attended at least one demonstration,  photographs  of  which  had  been
    published on YouTube  showing  the  Appellant  and  that  he  had  made
    multiple references to the KDP-I on Facebook.

11.  It is well-established that even an opportunistic claim for asylum  may
    succeed if it would give rise to a well-founded fear of persecution  on
    return: cf Danian [2000] Imm AR 3000 per Lord Justice Brooke.   In  the
    specific context of returnees to Iran, the Upper Tribunal  held  in  AB
    (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 00257 (IAC) at
    [472] that "It is not relevant if a person had used the internet in  an
    opportunistic way. The authorities are not concerned  with  a  person's
    motivation." It is     clear that the judge gave  no  consideration  to
    whether or not the Appellant would be at risk of persecution on account
    of his activities in the United Kingdom, which have  been  disseminated
    over the internet, despite rejecting his claim in respect of events  in
    Iran.

12.  I find in light of the  subsequent  country  guidance  decision  in  HB
    (Kurds - Iran)    (op cit) that the context in  which  the  Appellant's
    case requires consideration has changed and  the  evidence  before  the
    Upper Tribunal showed a clear deterioration  which  would  also  render
    unsafe the judge's findings.

13.  I announced my decision at the hearing and said that having sought  the
    views of the parties invited submissions so that  I  could  remake  the
    decision solely in respect of whether the Appellant would be at risk on
    return due to his sur place activities, the basis of his  claim  as  to
    why he left Iran having been rejected and upheld.

14.  Ms Pal submitted that, while she accepted there were  pictures  of  the
    Appellant holding a flag and attending  demonstrations,  she  submitted
    these were not sufficient  to  engage  the  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities on return.  There were  photographs  of  the  Appellant  at
    demonstrations,  however  his  actions   were   not   inflammatory   or
    sufficiently so for the Iranian authorities to target  him  on  return.
    The Appellant is low profile and his activities in the  UK  at  a  low-
    level and unlikely to engage the attention  of  the  authorities.   She
    invited me to dismiss the  appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

15.  In his submissions, Mr Sowerby sought to rely on an  additional  bundle
    of evidence  which  he  sought  to  adduce  pursuant  to  Rule  15,  in
    particular the transcript and translation of the  Appellant's  postings
    on Facebook at page 44 onwards and [64]-[65] of BA (Iran) (op cit).  He
    reminded me that the Appellant would be  returned  as  an  undocumented
    returnee and would not be expected to lie and that,  in  light  of  the
    decision in HB (Kurds-Iran) (op cit) at [116] and that  in  SSH  (Iran)
    (op cit) he would be detained.  Mr Sowerby submitted that the  decision
    in HB paints a bleak picture and that following what is said at [98](9)
    the Appellant would be perceived to be political, even  on  account  of
    low-level activity.  He has consistently called  the  Iranian  state  a
    terrorist state and this would attract the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities.

16.  I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Findings and reasons in respect of the substantive appeal

17.  I re-determine the appeal on the basis of the  following  facts,  which
    have been accepted by the First tier Tribunal:

    (i)  the Appellant is a national of Iran or Kurdish origin;

    (ii) he left Iran illegally;

    (iii)    there is a not a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
         reasons he has provided for leaving Iran are true;

    (iv) he is a "strong supporter of the KDP-Iran in the  United  Kingdom,
         he regularly attends party events and takes place in demonstrations
         against the Islamic Republic of Iran in the UK";

    (v)  he attended a demonstration outside the Iranian Embassy in  London
         on 3 November 2017 at which  videos  and  photographs  were  taken,
         showing the Appellant and these have been posted on YouTube;

    (vi) the Appellant's Facebook account contains many references  to  his
         support for the KDP, some of which  are  in  Kurdish  and  some  in
         English.

18.  The further evidence submitted to the Upper Tribunal pursuant  to  rule
    15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 contains a
    witness statement from the Appellant dated 12 March 2019, in  which  he
    stated that he attended demonstrations on  12  July  2018  outside  the
    Austrian Embassy to commemorate the assassination of Dr Ghassemlou;  on
    28 July 2018 outside the Houses of Parliament to protest the  treatment
    of political prisoners in Iran and  to  demand  the  cessation  of  the
    execution of Ramin Hossein Panahi; on 15  September  2018  outside  the
    Consular section of the  Iranian  Embassy  in  London  to  condemn  the
    attacks against the KDP headquarters in Koye in Iraq;  on  12  December
    2018 in Birmingham to  commemorate  Peshmerga  Day;  on  8  March  2019
    outside the Iranian Embassy to protest the treatment of women  in  Iran
    on International Women's Day. He states that he has posted  photographs
    of his attendance at the demonstrations on his Facebook account and has
    appended copies of those  photographs  to  his  statement,  at  P5-P43.
    Translations into English of some of the Kurdish language posts are  at
    P44-P46. The post on 15 September 2018 reads: "15/09/2018 in  front  of
    the Iranian Embassy in London to condemn the terrorist Republic of Iran
    for attacking the Democratic Party of Kurdistan's headquarters in Iraq.
    Martyrs of the leadership committee of Democratic  Party  of  Kurdistan
    following the terrorist attach by the dirty Regime of  Mullahs  on  8th
    September."

19.  I find in light of the evidence that the Appellant is  a  supporter  of
    the KDP-I in the United Kingdom and has attended  demonstrations,  both
    specifically in respect of the KDP-I and more generally in  respect  of
    his opposition to the Iranian regime. I find he  has  disseminated  his
    political views and activities via social media, on Facebook.

20.  In AB (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran  [2015]  UKUT  00257
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal considered whether the use of social media and
    internet activity placed returnees to Iran at risk  of  persecution  on
    return. Whilst concluding that there was insufficient evidence to issue
    country guidance, the decision was reported for  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    findings on the evidence at that time. It was concluded inter  alia  at
    [466]-[472] that:

         "466.    ... Some monitoring of activities outside Iran is possible
         and it occurs. It is not possible to determine what  circumstances,
         if any, enhance or dilute  the  risk  although  a  high  degree  of
         activity is not necessary to attract persecution.

         467. The mere fact of being in the United Kingdom for  a  prolonged
         period does not  lead  to  persecution.  However  it  may  lead  to
         scrutiny and there is clear evidence that  some  people  are  asked
         about their internet activity and particularly for  their  Facebook
         password. The act of returning someone creates a "pinch  point"  so
         that a person is brought into direct contact with  the  authorities
         in Iran who have both the time and inclination to interrogate them.
         We think it likely that they will be  asked  about  their  internet
         activity and likely if they have any internet activity for that  to
         be exposed and if it is less than flattering of the  government  to
         lead to at the very least a real risk of persecution.

         469. The capability to monitor outside Iran is not  very  different
         from the capability to monitor inside Iran. The Iranian authorities
         clearly have the capacity to restrict access  to  social  internet-
         based media. Overall it is very  difficult  to  make  any  sensible
         findings about anything that converts a  technical  possibility  of
         something being discovered into a real risk of it being discovered.

         470. The main concern is the pinch point of return.  A  person  who
         was returning to Iran after a reasonably short period of time on an
         ordinary passport having left Iran illegally would almost certainly
         not attract any particular attention  at  all  and  for  the  small
         number of people who would be returning  on  an  ordinary  passport
         having left lawfully we do not think that there would be  any  risk
         to them at all.

         471. However, as  might  more  frequently  be  the  case,  where  a
         person's leave to remain had lapsed and who might be travelling  on
         a special passport, there would  be  enhanced  interest.  The  more
         active they had been the  more  likely  the  authorities'  interest
         could lead to persecution.

         472. The mere fact that a person, if extremely discrete, blogged in
         the United Kingdom would not mean they would  necessarily  come  to
         the attention of the authorities in Iran. However, if there  was  a
         lapse of discretion they could face hostile interrogation on return
         which might expose them to risk. The more active a person had  been
         on the internet the greater the risk.  It  is  not  relevant  if  a
         person  had  used  the  internet  in  an  opportunistic  way.   The
         authorities are not concerned with a person's  motivation.  However
         in cases in which they have taken an interest  claiming  asylum  is
         viewed negatively. This may not of itself be sufficient to lead  to
         persecution but it may enhance the risk."

21.  In HB (Kurds) Iran CG  [2018]  UKUT  00430  (IAC)  a  country  guidance
    decision of the Upper Tribunal promulgated on  20  December  2018,  the
    Upper Tribunal held inter alia:

         "(1) SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]
         UKUT 308 (IAC) remains valid  country  guidance  in  terms  of  the
         country guidance offered in the  headnote.  For  the  avoidance  of
         doubt, that decision  is  not  authority  for  any  proposition  in
         relation to the risk on return for refused  Kurdish  asylum-seekers
         on account of their Kurdish ethnicity alone.

         (2)  Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence  does
         not support a contention that such discrimination is,  in  general,
         at such a level as to amount  to  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
         treatment.

         (3)  Since 2016 the Iranian authorities  have  become  increasingly
         suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity.  Those
         of Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater  suspicion
         than  hitherto  and  are  reasonably  likely  to  be  subjected  to
         heightened scrutiny on return to Iran.

         (4)  However,  the  mere  fact  of  being  a  returnee  of  Kurdish
         ethnicity with or without a valid passport, and  even  if  combined
         with illegal exit, does not create a risk of persecution or Article
         3 ill-treatment.

         (5)  Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk  factor  which,  when
         combined with other factors, may create a real risk of  persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment. Being  a  risk  factor  it  means  that
         Kurdish ethnicity is  a  factor  of  particular  significance  when
         assessing risk. Those "other  factors"  will  include  the  matters
         identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below...

         (7)  Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are  at
         risk of arrest, prolonged  detention  and  physical  abuse  by  the
         Iranian authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or  who
         speak out about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (8)  Activities that can  be  perceived  to  be  political  by  the
         Iranian  authorities  include   social   welfare   and   charitable
         activities  on  behalf  of  Kurds.  Indeed,  involvement  with  any
         organised activity on behalf of or  in  support  of  Kurds  can  be
         perceived as political and thus involve a risk of adverse attention
         by the Iranian authorities with the consequent risk of  persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (9)  Even 'low-level'  political  activity,  or  activity  that  is
         perceived to be political, such as, by way of  example  only,  mere
         possession of leaflets espousing or supporting Kurdish  rights,  if
         discovered, involves the same risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
         treatment. Each case however, depends  on  its  own  facts  and  an
         assessment will need to be made as to the nature  of  the  material
         possessed and how it would be likely to be viewed  by  the  Iranian
         authorities in the context of the foregoing guidance.

         (10) The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as
         a 'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to  be
         involved in Kurdish political activities  or  support  for  Kurdish
         rights. By 'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion
         is low and the reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely  to
         be extreme."

22.  I have also taken into consideration  the  updated  background  country
    evidence, in particular that postdating the country guidance  decision.
    Much of this information, however, is based on sources  pre-dating  the
    country guidance decision in HB (Kurds) and I find is  consistent  with
    that decision. A report from the Office of the UN High Commissioner for
    Human Rights dated 27 February 2019 at pages 55-57 provides at 56  that
    Kurdish political parties are banned in the country and  their  members
    and sympathisers  are  wanted  by  the  Iranian  military  intelligence
    services and in case of arrest they will tortured,  mistreated,  jailed
    or executed; in 2018 more than 9 Kurdish prisoners in  Iranian  prisons
    lost their lives through torture; in 2017 at least 112 Kurdish citizens
    were executed and more than 69 people in 2018.

23.  I find that there is a real risk that the Appellant's support  for  the
    KDP-I  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  via  social  media,  particularly
    Facebook, which he has been carrying out for the last  18  months,  may
    have become known to the Iranian authorities either through  monitoring
    those attending demonstrations or monitoring the internet and Facebook.
    In these circumstances, given that he would be returned to  Iran  as  a
    failed asylum seeker and a Kurd who has espoused support for the KDP-I,
    I find in light of the country guidance decision in HB (Kurds) that  he
    would be at risk of persecution on  the  basis  of  his  ethnicity  and
    perceived political opinion and he would face arrest, detention and ill-
    treatment contrary to Article 3 of ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 7 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
