
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03881/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2018                          |On 10 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                  miss d g
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel instructed by Marsh & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 6 September 1974.
     She has two daughters, both of whom were born in the UK (on 18 January
    2015 and 21 April 2016).  The appellant came to the UK on 30 September
    2014 and claimed asylum on 2 March 2015.  The basis of her application
    is that she was trafficked to the UK for the purpose of forced
    prostitution and would be at risk from her traffickers and/or family on
    return to Albania.

 2. On 24 August 2017 a referral to the Competent Authority was made by the
    National Referral Mechanism.  The Competent Authority concluded on 24
    August 2017 that the appellant was not a victim of trafficking.  The
    Conclusive Grounds Consideration Minutes state:

         "Your case has been considered by a Competent Authority caseworker
         following the decision that there were reasonable grounds to
         believe that you could be a victim of modern slavery.  As a result
         of further investigations into your case the Competent Authority
         caseworker has concluded that on the balance of probabilities you
         have not been exploited and are therefore not a victim of
         trafficking." [emphasis added]

 3. The appellant's claim for asylum was refused by the respondent on 8
    March 2018.  The appellant appealed against that decision and the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Neville at Taylor
    House on 25 April 2018.  In a decision promulgated on 6 July 2018 the
    judge dismissed the appeal, finding that the appellant had not
    established a well-founded fear of persecution and that no sustainable
    account had been put forward that could lead the Tribunal to conclude
    that returning her to Albania would be contrary to Articles 3 and 8
    ECHR.  The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The judge directed himself that as a consequence of the Court of Appeal
    judgments in MS (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 594 and AS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1469, he was required to accept
    the factual findings of the Competent Authority that underpin the
    appellant's claim to have been trafficked from Albania unless the
    Competent Authority's decision was perverse or irrational, or one that
    was not open to it.

 5. At paragraphs 33 to 37 the judge considered whether the Competent
    Authority's decision was perverse or irrational and concluded that it
    was not.  The judge then stated that he was required by MS (Pakistan)
    to disregard any postdecision evidence in respect of the facts
    determined by the Competent Authority.

 6. At paragraph 40 the judge stated that if he were not bound by the
    decision of the Competent Authority he would have reached a different
    view as to whether the appellant had been the victim of trafficking.
    At 40(l) he stated:

         "I would have gone on to allow the appeal on asylum and  Article  3
         grounds.  I would have allowed the appeal  on  Article  8  grounds,
         based on the Appellant and her  children  facing  very  significant
         difficulties on return."

 7. At paragraph 41 the judge stated that the appellant:

         "is not to be  considered  as  a  victim  of  trafficking  ...  The
         tribunal is left in the dark as to  her  'true'  situation,  as  it
         would be if the Appellant's core account had been  judged  entirely
         incredible by the tribunal.  She bears the burden  in  establishing
         the facts said to give rise to her future fear, and she cannot.".

 8. At paragraph 42 the judge concluded:

         "The Appellant's account not having been  established,  she  cannot
         engage the risk factors in TD.   She  does  not  establish  a  well
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of significant harm.   She
         puts forward no sustainable account that could lead the tribunal to
         conclude that return would be contrary to Articles 3 & 8 ECHR."

Grounds of Appeal

 9. The appellant advanced three grounds of appeal.  The first ground
    submits that the judge erred in finding that he was bound to follow the
    decision in MS (Pakistan).  The grounds argue that MS (Pakistan) is
    distinguishable from this appeal as the appellant in MS (Pakistan)
    received only a negative Reasonable Grounds Decision where the standard
    of proof is "I suspect but cannot prove", whereas in the present appeal
    the appellant received a positive reasonable grounds decision but a
    negative Conclusive Grounds Decision where the standard of proof is
    balance of probabilities.  It is argued that as the judge was deciding
    an asylum claim he should not have considered himself bound by findings
    that were made to a higher standard of proof and it was therefore
    submitted that MS (Pakistan) is not applicable in this case.

10. The second ground of appeal argues that the judge erred in finding that
    the decision of the Competent Authority was not perverse, irrational or
    one that was not open to it.  In the Conclusive Grounds Decision
    significant weight is placed on a claimed internal inconsistency in the
    appellant's account.  The Conclusive Grounds Decision states:

         "The internal credibility of your account has been considered.  You
         claim that your problems in Albania started in August 2014.  You
         claim that as a result you left Albania for a new life in the UK in
         September 2014.  This is noted to be wholly at odds with the
         available information from Albanian authorities which confirms that
         you last left Albania in January 2014, several months before the
         claimed events took place in Albania.  This is considered to
         fundamentally undermine your account as a whole."

11. Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant argued that it was wrong
    for the Competent Authority to place significant weight on a claimed
    discrepancy arising from information obtained from the Albanian
    authorities without giving her an opportunity to explain the
    discrepancy.  At paragraph 34 of the decision this submission was
    rejected.  The judge stated:

         "There is no broader requirement of procedural fairness  for  which
         authority  was  cited,  or  discrete  provision  in  the  guidance,
         requiring claimed victims of trafficking to be able to  comment  on
         evidence adverse to them prior to reliance being placed upon  it.".



12. In the grounds of appeal the appellant cited provisions of "Victims of
    modern slavery - Competent Authority guidance Version 3.0" where it is
    stated:

         "When is the adult potential victim of modern slavery interviewed?

         Interviews are more likely to be relevant to a conclusive grounds
         decision rather than a reasonable grounds decision.

         Trafficking or modern slavery interviews do not have to be carried
         out with potential victims in all NRM cases.  When the Competent
         Authority is considering the evidence it may be the case that the
         information submitted on the individual's situation is so
         compelling that an interview is not necessary or it may be possible
         to clarify the modern slavery issues as part of the asylum process
         by asking relevant questions during an asylum interview.

         If the information provided is slim or contradictory, an interview
         may help to clarify things - for example by allowing the potential
         victims to comment on any inconsistencies.  A victim might also be
         asked to account for inconsistencies by other methods such as in
         writing.

         It is also reasonable to assume that a potential victim who has
         experienced an event will be able to recount the central elements
         in a broadly consistent manner.  A potential victim's inability to
         remain consistent throughout their written and oral accounts of
         past and current events may lead the Competent Authority to
         disbelieve their claim.  However, before the Competent Authority
         come to a negative conclusion, they must first refer back to the
         first responder or other expert witnesses to clarify any
         inconsistencies in the claim." [emphasis added]

13. It is maintained in the grounds that given the weight placed upon the
    evidence from the Albanian authorities as to the date the appellant is
    said to have left Albania, the judge erred in finding that there was no
    requirement on the Competent Authority to give the appellant an
    opportunity to comment on this before the final conclusive grounds
    decision was made.

14. The third ground of appeal argues that the judge erred in failing to
    make findings in respect of the appellant's Article 8 claim.  The
    grounds submit that the judge dealt with this in only a cursory manner
    and that there is no engagement with issues relevant to Article 8 ECHR.



Submissions

15. I heard submissions from Ms Reid on behalf of the appellant and Mr
    Deller on behalf of the respondent.

16. Ms Reid recognised that she was in some difficulty with her first
    ground of appeal given that I was bound by MS (Pakistan) but argued
    that the present case is distinguishable because the appellant in MS
    (Pakistan) had been subject only to a reasonable grounds decision and
    not a conclusive grounds decision.

17. In respect of the second ground of appeal Ms Reid highlighted that the
    Competent Authority had reached a decision without giving the appellant
    an opportunity to comment on an issue that was treated as
    determinative.  She argued that this amounts to perversity.  With
    regard to Article 8, Ms Reid's submission was that the judge had
    omitted to consider the relevant factors or give reasons for the
    decision.

18. Mr Deller acknowledged that the decision in MS (Pakistan) is difficult
    to reconcile with the lower burden of proof that is applicable in
    asylum claims, but maintained that I was obliged to follow it as he did
    not accept that it could be distinguished from this appeal.

19. With regard to the claim that the Competent Authority's decision was
    perverse, he argued that the judge had considered this carefully and
    that the criticisms advanced by Ms Reid were not sufficient to mount
    such a challenge.

20. However, Mr Deller accepted that the judge had erred by failing to
    address Article 8 ECHR and in particular by failing to consider the
    best interests of the appellant's two children.  He accepted that the
    decision would need to be remade in respect of Article 8, but submitted
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of the asylum
    claim should stand.

21. Both parties were in agreement that if I were to find that the judge
    erred by finding he was required to accept the factual findings of the
    Competent Authority I should remake the decision by allowing the
    appellant's appeal for the reasons given by the judge in paragraph 40
    of the decision (where the judge set out the findings he would have
    made if not bound by the decision of the Competent Authority).

Analysis

22. The Court of Appeal in MS (Pakistan) has made clear that a Tribunal can
    only go behind a trafficking decision of the Competent Authority and re-
    determine the factual issues relevant to whether trafficking occurred
    if the decision of the Competent Authority was perverse, irrational or
    one which was not open to it.  See Paragraphs 69 and 70 of MS
    (Pakistan).

23. Whilst I can see the attraction of Ms Reed's argument that 'reasonable
    grounds decisions' (where there is a lower standard of proof) should be
    distinguished from 'conclusive grounds decisions' (where a higher
    standard of proof is applied), this is not consistent with MS
    (Pakistan) where no such distinction is made.  It is notable that
    AS (Afghanistan), which is commented on extensively in MS (Pakistan),
    concerned a conclusive grounds decision but no significance was
    attached to this in MS (Pakistan).

24. The judge was therefore correct when he concluded that he was bound to
    follow the Court of Appeal in MS (Pakistan) and consequently was unable
    to revisit the factual findings made by the Competent Authority as to
    whether trafficking of the appellant had taken place unless the
    decision of the Competent Authority was perverse, irrational or one
    which was not open to it.

25. I now turn to the second ground of appeal where it is contended that
    the judge erred by failing to recognise that the decision of the
    Competent Authority was perverse.  The Competent Authority found that
    the appellant's account was "fundamentally" undermined "as a whole"
    because there was a discrepancy between the date she said she left
    Albania (August 2014), and the information obtained by the Albanian
    authorities which states that she left Albania in January 2014.  This
    discrepancy appears to have been treated as determinative, as after
    referring to it the Competent Authority then considered other issues
    relevant to credibility only "for the sake of completeness".

26. The Competent Authority's conclusion that this discrepancy
    fundamentally undermined the appellant's account was reached despite
    the appellant claiming to have used false travel documents (which might
    plausibly account for it), and without the appellant being made aware
    of the information from the Albanian authorities so that she could give
    a response.  The Competent Authority's guidance envisages that there
    will be circumstances where it is appropriate for a person to be given
    an opportunity to comment on an inconsistency.  Given that so much
    weight was being placed on the evidence from the Albanian authorities
    and that the appellant's account indicated that there could be a
    plausible explanation for the discrepancy, it was, in my view, perverse
    for the Conclusive Grounds Decision to be reached without giving the
    appellant an opportunity to comment on the inconsistency.  The judge
    therefore erred by finding he was bound by the factual findings of the
    Competent Authority.

27. A further error was made in respect of Article 8 ECHR. As acknowledged
    by Mr Deller, the judge's evaluation of the claim was inadequate as,
    inter alia, he failed to consider the best interests of the children.

28. In remaking the decision I am not bound by the factual findings of the
    Competent Authority as, for the reasons given above, I have found that
    its decision was perverse.  At paragraph 40 of the First-tier Tribunal
    decision the judge, applying the lower standard of proof applicable in
    asylum cases, set out the findings he would have reached if he did not
    consider himself bound by MS (Pakistan).   He found the appellant's
    account to be credible and, applying TD & AD (Trafficked Women) CG
    [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC), concluded that she faced a real risk of re-
    trafficking if returned to Albania.  Given the cogency of the judge's
    unchallenged reasoning in paragraph 40, and that both parties agreed
    that if I found the judge was not bound by the fact finding of the
    Competent Authority I should remake the decision based on the findings
    of fact in that paragraph, I allow the appellant's asylum appeal for
    the reasons given by the judge in paragraph 40 of the First-tier
    Tribunal decision.

Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
    law and is set aside.

30. I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal by allowing the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




|Signed                                |                                      |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan  |Dated: 1 October 2018                 |

