
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03942/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd March 2019                            |On 4th April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     MHA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan of Counsel, instructed by Alison Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge M  J  H  Wilson  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the  FtT)  promulgated  on  4th  May
    2018.

 2. The Appellant is a national  of  Iraq.   His  claim  for  international
    protection was refused by the Respondent on 3rd  March  2018.   He  had
    claimed that he would be at risk if returned to  Iraq  because  he  was
    sought by a terrorist group, because he had  converted  from  Islam  to
    Christianity, and because he legally left Iraq.  The appeal  was  heard
    on 23rd April 2018.

 3. The judge heard evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  two  witnesses  in
    relation to his claimed conversion to Christianity.   The  judge  noted
    that there had been a previous appeal hearing  and  took  the  findings
    from that previous hearing as his starting point in accordance with the
    principles in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 007021.  The judge found that the
    Appellant relied, in the main, upon his conversion to  Christianity  as
    being the reason why he feared return to Iraq.  The  judge  found  that
    the Appellant had not given a  credible  account  in  relation  to  his
    claimed conversion, and  did  not  accept  that  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses proved that there had been a genuine conversion.  The  appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 4. The grounds seeking permission to appeal were settled  by  Counsel  and
    contain 33 paragraphs.  The grounds are summarised below.

 5. It was submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  by  having  "a  negative
    approach to the Appellant's credibility by placing heavy reliance  upon
    the determination of FtT IJ Lloyd-Smith".  It was  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to make findings on fresh evidence before him  of  the
    Appellant's baptism, confirmation, evangelising, and activities  within
    the church.

 6. It was submitted that the judge had erred at paragraph  28  in  finding
    the Christian conversion to be entirely bogus.   The  judge  had  given
    inadequate reasons and  placed  too  much  weight  on  the  Appellant's
    failure to recollect the  date  when  the  Appellant  began  to  attend
    church, despite the Appellant in re-examination  stating  that  it  was
    eighteen or nineteen months previously.

 7. It was submitted that the judge's consideration of  the  conversion  to
    Christianity is inadequate and insufficient and the judge had failed to
    make findings upon the length of  time  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    attending church, and his commitment and activities  with  the  church,
    and evidence of his evangelising.

 8. It was submitted that the judge had applied  too  high  a  standard  of
    proof.  It was further submitted that the judge had erred at paragraphs
    42 and 43 in not accepting the evidence of the  two  witnesses  to  the
    effect that the conversion to Christianity is genuine.  The  judge  had
    given inadequate reasoning for finding  that  there  were  difficulties
    with  understanding  and  communication  between  the   witnesses   and
    Appellant.

 9. It was submitted that the judge had erred by failing to  attach  weight
    to the evidence of Reverend Close, who was one of  the  two  witnesses,
    who had stated that she was  aware  that  the  Appellant  had  publicly
    proclaimed his faith and had been evangelising.

10. It was submitted that the judge had erred at paragraphs 44  and  45  in
    attaching little weight to a letter written  by  Reverend  White.   The
    Appellant in his statement had confirmed that he  spoke  with  Reverend
    White, and Susan Bray, one of  his  witnesses,  had  confirmed  in  her
    statement that she and the Appellant had met with Reverend  White.   It
    was  submitted  that  Reverend  White  has  first  hand  experience  of
    persecution as a Christian in Iraq, having written  a  book  about  his
    experience entitled "Vicar of Baghdad".

11. It was submitted that the judge had erred by  failing  to  consider  an
    important aspect of the case, in that the Appellant was  a  Muslim  who
    had converted to Christianity, and therefore the claim before the judge
    was not just about  the  treatment  of  Christians  in  Iraq,  but  the
    treatment of Muslims who have converted to Christianity in Iraq.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins in the
    following terms;

         "5.  In the most recent appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
             given very full reasons for concluding  that  the  Appellant's
             conversion (he has been baptised as a Christian and  confirmed
             by the Church of England) is one of convenience.

         6.   I did not expect to give permission to appeal when I read  the
             Decision and Reasons.  However, after reading  the  statements
             of the supporting witnesses, Ms Susan Bray  and  the  Reverend
             Carol Close, I find it arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal
             did not have proper regard for their  expertise  and/or  their
             opinion based on their experience of him as a person.

         7.   I also find it arguable  that  insufficient  regard  has  been
             given to the evidence of  his  having  a  'well-used'  Kurdish
             Bible (page 12 in the bundle, paragraph 20 in  the  statement)
             and his expression of joy during Christian worship  (page  12,
             paragraph 16 and, perhaps, page 14 paragraph 30).

         8.    Additionally  it  is  arguable  that  there   is   inadequate
             consideration of how he might be perceived in Iraq  given  his
             apparent evangelism amongst the Muslim community in the United
             Kingdom (page 7, paragraph 13)  and  his  being  baptised  and
             confirmed in the United Kingdom even if, contrary to his case,
             he has behaved cynically.

         9.   I give permission on each ground."

    Following the grant of permission to  appeal  the  Respondent  did  not
    lodge a response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

13. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

14. At the oral hearing Mr O'Ryan relied upon  six  points  to  demonstrate
    that the judge had materially erred in law.  Mr Tan argued  that  there
    was no material error of law, and the decision of the FtT should stand.
     I consider the six points raised on behalf of the Appellant below.

15. Firstly it was submitted that the judge had erred in  failing  to  make
    findings on the claim that the Appellant had been  evangelising.   This
    had been confirmed by Susan Bray and Reverend Close  in  their  witness
    statements.  Although Susan Bray had stated  in  paragraph  13  of  her
    witness statement that the appellant spoke to his Muslim friends  about
    the different prayers  in  church  including  the  Lord's  prayer,  and
    advised his friends that when they pray they must understand what  they
    are praying and not just  recite  the  prayers,  the  judge  noted  and
    recorded at paragraph 31 of his decision  that  in  her  oral  evidence
    Susan Bray said that she did not know whether the  appellant  told  his
    Kurdish friends that he was a Christian.

16. The judge does not make a specific finding in relation to evangelising.
    I note in  paragraph  3  of  the  judge's  decision  that  he  confirms
    considering all the evidence in the appeal and if a particular document
    is not mentioned in the decision, this does not indicate that the judge
    has failed to consider  it  or  give  it  appropriate  weight.   It  is
    emphasised at paragraph 4 that the judge has carefully  considered  all
    the evidence and all the arguments placed before  him.   After  reading
    the decision as a whole I have no reason to doubt that.

17. At paragraph 28 the judge describes the Appellant as  "an  evasive  and
    inconsistent witness in his evidence".  The judge  found  that  "simply
    put, the total evidence persuades me that the Appellant was willing  to
    do that which was necessary in order to secure  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I find that he was prepared to go through the motions."

18. At paragraph 43 the judge finds "I am satisfied in  the  light  of  the
    whole of the evidence that such  was  his  poor  credibility  that  his
    attendance and participation in church services was no less capable  of
    contrivance."

19. In my view it is  clear  from  reading  the  decision  that  the  judge
    considered all aspects of the evidence, including the  claim  that  the
    Appellant had been evangelising, and rejected the  claim  that  he  was
    genuinely evangelising.  My reading of the decision is that the judge's
    view was that any evangelising carried out by the  Appellant  was  done
    not because he genuinely believed in Christianity, but because  he  was
    using Christianity in an effort to remain in the UK.

20. The second point made on behalf of the Appellant relates to  paragraphs
    19-20 of the judge's decision, and the contention that the  judge  gave
    no weight to the Appellant's evidence, which he gave in re-examination,
    that he recalled that he had been  going  to  church  for  eighteen  or
    nineteen months.

21. The judge had found that the Appellant's failure to remember the  date,
    month or even the part of the year in which he started going to  church
    lacked credibility.  However the judge does record at paragraph 20 that
    the Appellant stated in answer to his  representative's  re-examination
    that he had been going to church for eighteen or nineteen months.  I do
    not find that the judge attached no weight to this.  The judge goes  on
    to record that

         "... even if this were true his repeated failure to recall when  it
         was he first experienced a Christian Church, or to  even  have  the
         slightest idea in which part of the year it happened,  casts  doubt
         upon the sincerity of his claim to be a genuine Christian  convert.
         I also note the reason he gave for not knowing was because  he  had
         'so much else going on' in his life.  However,  I  find  that  this
         does not credibly account for his complete failure to recall  when,
         what would be expected to be a meaningful life  changing  event  in
         his life, occurred."

22. The judge did  take  into  account  what  the  Appellant  said  in  re-
    examination, but found that notwithstanding  that,  the  Appellant  had
    initially stated that he could not remember when he  started  attending
    church and the adverse credibility finding made by the judge  was  open
    to make on the evidence.

23. Thirdly it was contended that the  judge  had  erred  when  considering
    communication between the Appellant and the two witnesses who gave oral
    evidence.  It was pointed  out  that  Reverend  Close  in  her  witness
    statement at paragraph 21 had stated that the Appellant "asks pertinent
    and interesting questions about Christianity that  are  thoughtful  and
    confirms his eagerness to learn  fully  about  Christianity."   It  was
    submitted that this had not been taken into account by the judge.

24. I do not agree that the judge  erred  when  considering  the  issue  of
    communication  between  the  Appellant  and   witnesses.    The   judge
    considered this issue, together with other issues at paragraphs  30-43.
    The judge found at paragraph 35  that  both  witnesses  had  failed  to
    credibly explain how they managed to  communicate  with  the  Appellant
    sufficient to be in a position to gauge the level and sincerity of  his
    commitment to his professed  religious  conversion.   Neither  of  them
    spoke or understood  Kurdish  Sorani  or  Arabic,  and  Reverend  Close
    confirmed that the Appellant's English was very poor.  At paragraph  36
    the judge  found  in  relation  to  Susan  Bray's  evidence,  that  she
    attempted to  gloss  over  the  language  problem,  claiming  that  she
    understood most of what the Appellant said but failing to  explain  how
    this  was  possible  in  the  circumstances  where  his   English   was
    acknowledged by Reverend Close to be so very poor that it took weeks to
    understand why he came to the church in the first place.

25. The judge, in my view, was entitled to find at paragraph  36  that  the
    witnesses  had  not  adequately  explained  how  it  was  possible   to
    communicate and understand  from  the  Appellant  issues  directly  and
    indirectly bearing upon Christianity, no matter  how  simply  explained
    without an interpreter, or anyone else at the church with knowledge  of
    the Kurdish or Arabic languages prepared to assist.  The judge did take
    into account at paragraph 30 that Susan Bray had said she  communicated
    with the Appellant by using Messenger, but when in church and on  other
    occasions she communicated with him face to face.   The  judge  records
    Susan Bray indicating that she believed the Appellant  understood  most
    of what was said but sometimes he answered incorrectly.

26. The judge took into account not only the witness statements made by the
    witnesses,  but  their  oral  evidence  when  they  were   specifically
    questioned about communication with the Appellant, and was entitled  to
    find at paragraph 35, the language issue was  not  the  only  point  of
    concern, but was highly significant.

27. The fourth point made on behalf of the Appellant relates to  paragraphs
    19-20 of the witness statement of Reverend Close in which she refers to
    the Appellant having two Bibles, which  she  described  as  being  well
    used.  There is no specific finding by the judge  in  relation  to  the
    Bibles, but when considering  this  submission,  I  take  into  account
    paragraphs 3 and 4 of the judge's decision, which I  have  referred  to
    previously, in which it is confirmed that even if a particular document
    or piece of evidence is not referred to, it has  been  considered.   At
    paragraph 28, which has been referred to previously,  the  judge  found
    that "the Appellant was willing to do that which was necessary in order
    to secure status in the United Kingdom.  I find that he was prepared to
    go through the motions."  The lack of a finding upon the  Bibles,  does
    not amount to a material error of law, when the decision is read  as  a
    whole.

28. The fifth point made on behalf of the Appellant  relates  to  a  letter
    written by Reverend White, a former Vicar of Baghdad.  It was submitted
    that the judge had erred in law  by  placing  minimal  weight  on  this
    letter.  The judge considered this letter  at  paragraphs  44-45.   The
    judge records at paragraph  44  that  "it  is  unclear  as  to  whether
    Reverend White had ever met the Appellant or even spoke to him."   That
    may have been unclear from the letter, but Susan Bray  in  her  witness
    statement at paragraph 20, contained  at  page  8  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle confirmed that she, together with a small group from the church,
    including the Appellant, did speak  with  Reverend  White  following  a
    presentation.  That meeting was not taken into account by the judge but
    I do not find that to be a material error  of  law  for  the  following
    reasons. The judge did take into account that Reverend  White  did  not
    attend the hearing.  The judge also analysed the brief  letter  written
    by Reverend White.  The judge found that the letter was undated, and it
    was unknown when it was written, it was unspecified to whom the  letter
    was directed, the letter was brief, containing one six line  paragraph.
    Reverend White had failed to confirm in the letter on what basis he was
    able to confirm that the Appellant was a committed converted  Christian
    and the judge found that Reverend White had made unsupported assertions
    for which he cited no authority.  The judge had been provided  with  no
    evidence to indicate that Reverend White was in a position  to  provide
    an expert opinion on Iraq.  He failed to  acknowledge  that  there  are
    areas of Iraq in which Christians are safe.

29. Overall, I find that the judge conducted an adequate  analysis  of  the
    letter written by Reverend White, and  was  entitled,  having  provided
    sustainable reasons, to attach minimum weight to it.

30. The sixth and final point made  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  at  the
    hearing was that the judge had not considered the risk to the Appellant
    as a convert to Christianity but had  simply  considered  the  risk  to
    Christians.  I do not find there is merit in  this  challenge.   It  is
    clear from reading the decision as a whole that  the  judge  understood
    that the  Appellant's  claim  was  to  have  converted  from  Islam  to
    Christianity.  The point  made  by  the  judge  was  that  he  was  not
    satisfied to the lower standard of proof applicable that the conversion
    was genuine.  The judge  gave  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    finding that the Appellant was not a genuine convert  to  Christianity,
    but was attempting to use Christianity in order to remain in the UK.

31. The decision prepared  by  the  judge  is  comprehensive.   It  is  not
    suggested that the judge has made irrational or perverse findings,  and
    it is clear that he has not.  The judge has reached conclusions open to
    make  on  the  evidence  and  given  sustainable  reasons   for   those
    conclusions.  I find that the judge has examined all the evidence,  and
    the grounds and arguments submitted on behalf of the  Appellant  amount
    to disagreements with the conclusions reached by the judge, but do  not
    disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 29th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 29th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
