
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03322/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2018                           |On 15 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                            MOHAMMED SADIQ SADIQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     E. Rutherford, instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    D. Mills, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     (Given Orally on 20 November 2018)

Introduction

 1. This appellant is an ethnic Arab from Mosul in Iraq, born in 1991.   He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 20 March 2017 refusing his protection  claim.   The  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Meyler  on  7  August  2017  and
    dismissed on all grounds in a decision promulgated on 17  August  2017.
    Ms Rutherford, who appears in the Upper Tribunal, also appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal in August 2017 and  drafted  the  grounds  upon
    which this appeal is founded.

First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 2. The First-tier Tribunal broadly rejected  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and his witnesses, in particular the evidence relating to the
    risk from Daesh and the evidence as to the events that are said to have
    led to the inability of the appellant to obtain documentation necessary
    for day-to-day life  in  Iraq,  such  as  his  Civil  Status  ID.   The
    foundation  of  this  latter  conclusion  was  the  rejection  of   the
    appellant's evidence that he has lost contact with  family  members  in
    Iraq.

 3. The FtT accepted the contention that Mosul is still "a contested  area"
    and that there is an Article 15(c) risk in that area (as identified  in
    the country guidance decision of AA (Iraq) [2015] UKUT  00544,  amended
    by AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944).  It then went on  in  paragraphs  40
    onwards to consider the issue of internal relocation -  the  region  of
    focus being the city of Baghdad, which is also the city  to  which  the
    appellant would be returned.  At paragraph 40 of its decision  the  FtT
    state as follows in this regard:

         "The appellant is a Sunni Muslim and ethnic Arab.  He  speaks  Arab
         fluently.  According to his own evidence, he  has  some  employment
         experience of setting up and managing a  small  business.   I  have
         found that he has extended family in and around Mosul, including  a
         number of maternal and paternal uncles in addition  to  his  mother
         and brother".

 4. The  FtT  continued  by  considering  the  country  guidance  decisions
    relating to Baghdad, and thereafter concluded that there is no risk  to
    the appellant in that city. It then turned to consider the question  of
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to live in Baghdad -
    a central issue in this regard being whether the appellant already has,
    or could obtain, originals or copies of his  Civil  Status  ID  (CSID),
    Iraqi Nationality Certificate and Public Distribution System card.   In
    this regard, the FtT concluded  as  follows  at  paragraph  43  of  its
    decision:

         "I have found that the appellant has failed to  establish  that  he
         would not be able to obtain his original  identity  documents  from
         his mother or extended family members who  remain  in  Mosul.   The
         appellant eventually explained in his oral  evidence  that  on  his
         trip to the UK, he had copies of his passport, his  Iraqi  ID  card
         and his ration card.  I find that he most likely left the originals
         with his mother and that his mother or extended family members will
         be able to obtain and send these  original  documents  to  him.   I
         therefore find the appellant  most  likely  already  owns  a  civil
         status ID, an Iraqi nationality certificate and public distribution
         system card that can be obtained on his behalf and sent to  him  in
         Baghdad".

 5. The FtT subsequently made alternative findings in the event that it was
    wrong in the above primary finding, concluding that  it  would  not  be
    unsafe or unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to Baghdad.

Grounds of Challenge

 6. Upper Tribunal Allen granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    on 10 January 2018, stating that "the grounds raise arguable issues  as
    to the appellant's ability to obtain a CSID and as a consequence to  be
    able effectively to relocate in Baghdad".

 7. Ms Rutherford  accepted  that  if  the  challenge  to  the  alternative
    findings is discounted, the appellant's grounds resolve to one question
    - did the FtT err in failing to  engage  with  the  issue  of  how  the
    appellant, living in Baghdad, would be able  to  obtain  his  CSID  and
    other documentation from his family members in Mosul, given  that  they
    are living in a contested area?

Decision and Discussion

 8. The fact that Mosul is a contested area should, it is said, lead to  an
    inference being drawn that it is reasonably likely that there would not
    be  a  mechanism  enabling  the  appellant  to  obtain   the   relevant
    documentation from his relatives in the Mosul area, if he were residing
    in Baghdad.

 9. It was accepted by Ms Rutherford that no submissions were made  to  the
    FtT on this issue because it had never been the appellant's  case  that
    such documentation was held by, or  was  obtainable  from,  his  family
    members in Mosul. The fact remains, however, that no  submissions  were
    made to the FtT on this  issue  and  the  FtT  was  not  drawn  to  any
    background  documentation  supporting  what  is  now  the   appellant's
    contention that his CSID, and other documents, could  not  be  obtained
    from Mosul to Baghdad.

10. At the hearing I invited Ms Rutherford to  draw  my  attention  to  any
    background evidence supportive of the  aforementioned  contention,  but
    she was unable  to  do  so.   In  such  circumstances,  the  ground  of
    challenge  rests  solely  on   the   proposition   that   because   his
    documentation is currently with his family members in Mosul  and  Mosul
    is a contested area there  can  be  no  reasonably  likelihood  of  the
    appellant obtaining his CSID and other documentation in Baghdad.

11. In my view,  in  the  absence  of  any  documentation  supporting  this
    submission the FtT was  perfectly  entitled  to  conclude  as  it  did,
    particularly in the absence of submissions being made to the  contrary,
    and it was not required to engage in any  further  enquiry.   For  this
    reason, I conclude that the FtT's finding on this issue is sustainable.
    This conclusion disposes of the appeal before the Upper  Tribunal,  the
    other grounds being challenges to the alternative findings of the  FtT,
    which need not be considered.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and its decision stands.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
27 December 2018
