
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03578/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 January 2017                   |On 20 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     N A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu instructed by Duncan Lewis, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria who was born on 3 September 1972.
     He is of Berber ethnicity.  The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 5 February 2001.  He claimed asylum on 4 February 2014.

 3. The basis of his  claim  was  his  association  with  "MB"  who  was  a
    prominent activist in the Berber movement in  Algeria.   The  appellant
    claimed that in 1997 and 1998, MB had stayed with the appellant and his
    family during which time the appellant took care of MB.   MB  left  him
    with confidential documents which he had subsequently hidden in Algeria
    and which were of interest  to  influential  figures  in  Algeria.   He
    claimed, as a consequence, to be at risk from them if  he  returned  to
    Algeria.

 4. On 2 December 2015, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.



The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 19 July 2016, Judge Richards-Clarke dismissed the appellant's appeal
    on all grounds.  In particular, she made an adverse credibility finding
    and did not accept that the appellant had the association with MB as he
    claimed.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the single  ground  that
    the judge had failed properly to take into account the expert report of
    Mr David Seddon dated 13 June 2016.

 7. On 8 August  2016,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grant-Hutchison)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 8. On 1 September 2016, the Secretary of State filed a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

The Submissions

 9. Mr Dieu, who represented the appellant adopted the ground of appeal and
    submitted that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for,  as
    the judge put it in para 25, "not attach[ing] weight  to"  the  report.
    Mr Dieu challenged the judge's approach in para 24 where he said  this:



         "24.     I find the Report of Mr Seddon to be limited as it  is  he
             did not interview the Appellant and it is primarily a  general
             discussion and review of  the  Appellants  claim.   Mr  Seddon
             reports what the Appellant has said and  places  this  in  the
             context of  the  background  evidence.   I  find  this  to  be
             insufficient to support the  Appellant's  claimed  association
             with [MB] that he hid confidential documents that  are  wanted
             by political figures in Algeria."

10. Mr Dieu submitted that it was not a proper basis to reject  the  report
    on the ground that the appellant had not been interviewed.  Mr  Seddon,
    a  recognised  expert,  did  not  suggest  that  he  had   insufficient
    information  or  that  an  interview  was  needed  in   assessing   the
    appellant's claim.  Further, it was wrong to characterise  Mr  Seddon's
    report as "primarily a general discussion" and, as the judge stated  in
    para 39, only dealing with the issues raised in  a  "limited"  way  and
    "no[t] specific to the appellant's claim".  Mr Dieu relied upon section
    4 of Mr Seddon's report at pages 21-26 which dealt in detail  with  the
    appellant's claim and the circumstances upon which he relied.

11. Further, Mr Dieu submitted that the judge's finding in para 38 that  it
    was not "plausible"  that  MB  would  arrange  a  long  stay  with  the
    appellant and trust him with confidential documents  and  his  personal
    care was specifically dealt with by Mr  Seddon  in  para  4.15  of  his
    report where he stated that the appellant's claimed involvement with MB
    was "at least plausible".

12. Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of State submitted that  the
    judge had not, as she appeared to say in para 25, attached no weight to
    Mr Seddon's report.  In fact, the judge had considered  the  report  at
    paras 21-23 and again at paras 38-39.  Mr Richards  submitted  that  Mr
    Seddon's report went no further than recounting the  appellant's  claim
    and saying that it was possible or plausible.   Mr  Richards  submitted
    that the judge was entitled to take into account that Mr Seddon thought
    it was possible (at para 4.15) that MB stayed with  the  appellant  but
    that it would be only for a brief time when the  appellant  claimed  it
    was for, as the judge put it in para 38, "some  time  during  1997  and
    1998".  Mr Richards submitted that there was  nothing  in  Mr  Seddon's
    report which set out a firm  evidential  basis  to  justify  the  judge
    coming to a different conclusion from the one she reached.  Mr Richards
    submitted that the judge had taken into account Mr Seddon's report  and
    had reached sustainable findings.

Discussion

13. The judge dealt with Mr Seddon's report at paras 21-25 and  38-39.   At
    21-25 the judge said this:

         "21.     The Appellant relies on the Expert Report of Mr Seddon [at
             page 17-28 of the Appellant's  bundle].   Mr  Seddon  did  not
             interview the Appellant but reviewed the documents provided by
             the Appellant's representatives including the Asylum Screening
             Interview, letters Appellant's representative 30 May 2015  and
             13 November 2015, the Appellant's medical  documents  and  the
             decision dated 2 December 2015.

         22.  Mr Seddon's reports examines in general  terms  [MB]  and  his
             visit  to  Taguemount  el  Djedid  Algeria  in  1997  and  the
             prominent Algerian figures mentioned by  the  Appellant  -  Mr
             Rebrab and Mr Mehenni.  Mr Seddon finds that it is

             'possible that [MB] stayed with [the appellant] and his family
             in Taguemount el Djedid when he made  that  final  journey  to
             Algeria, but it would have only been for  a  relatively  brief
             time.  The claim that he looked after [MB's] personal  affairs
             and documents during this time is hard to substantiate, but is
             I would suggest at least possible.'

         23.  Mr Seddon  also  describes  the  position  of  the  Berber  in
             Algeria.  Mr Seddon describes that the Berbers are still

             'generally  and  widely  subject  to   economic   and   social
             discrimination in Algeria, and may  be  harassed  in  specific
             context'  but  that  'For  the  most   part,   however,   this
             discrimination does not  reach  the  level  where  it  may  be
             regarded as persecution, if that is taken to imply a real risk
             of serious harm'.

         "24.     I find the Report of Mr Seddon to be limited as it  is  he
             did not interview the Appellant and it is primarily a  general
             discussion and review of the  Appellant's  claim.   Mr  Seddon
             reports what the Appellant has said and  places  this  in  the
             context of  the  background  evidence.   I  find  this  to  be
             insufficient to support the  Appellant's  claimed  association
             with [MB] that he hid confidential documents that  are  wanted
             by political figures in Algeria."

         25.  I do not find that Mr Seddon's report supports the Appellant's
             claim for international protection and I do not attach  weight
             to it.

    Then at 38-39 the judge said this:

         "38.     At the hearing before me it was the  Appellant's  evidence
             that [MB] stayed with his family for some time during 1997 and
             1998 and that he was  responsible  for  [MB's]  personal  care
             including washing, dressing and feeding.  This contradicts  Mr
             Seddon's finding that any stay  with  the  Appellant  and  his
             family would be a short period.  The Appellant does not  claim
             to have any previous connection with [MB] or  Berber  activism
             and I do no find it plausible that [MB], a  well-known  Berber
             activist, would arrange a prolonged stay  with  the  Appellant
             and  his  family  and  trust  the  Appellant  not  only   with
             confidential documents, but also with all his personal care.

         39.  In the decision letter dated 2 December  2015  the  Respondent
             has explained to the Appellant the reasons why his answers  at
             interview did not support  his  claim  and  I  find  that  the
             evidence brought forward by him does not support  him  because
             the expert report of Mr Seddon does not address  these  issues
             is limited and no specific to the Appellant's claim and in any
             event does not  suggest  that  the  treatment  of  Berbers  in
             Algeria amounts to persecution."

14. Whilst the judge sets out extracts from Mr Seddon's report at paras  22
    and 23 of her determination, at para 25 she clearly concludes that  the
    report should be given no weight at all.  Her reasons for doing so, set
    out in para 24, do not withstand scrutiny.  The absence of an interview
    with the appellant does  not  appear  to  have  any  relevance  to  the
    opinions expressed by Mr Seddon, in particular, as to the  plausibility
    of aspects of the appellant's account as to his involvement with MB  as
    claimed.  Likewise, although Mr Seddon's report deals with the  general
    country background, it clearly deals with the respondent's decision  in
    some detail in section 4 at pages 21-25.  In particular, based upon his
    expertise and knowledge, Mr Seddon  accepts  that  it  is  possible  or
    plausible that the appellant met MB as claimed in his home village  and
    that he stayed with the appellant and that the appellant took  care  of
    him and may have left confidential documents  with  him.   Mr  Seddon's
    report was, therefore, highly relevant to the plausibility of the  core
    of the appellant's claim.  It was not a report that could be  dismissed
    out of hand as entitled to no weight.

15. Although Mr Richards submitted that the judge had in  fact  taken  into
    account Mr Seddon's report, I do not agree.  Although the  judge  does,
    of course, refer and indeed sets out parts of Mr Seddon's  report,  she
    clearly considered that it did not assist or support the  core  of  the
    appellant's claim.  She said so in terms in paras 24 and 39.  In truth,
    it did provide some support.

16. In particular, subject to  one  point,  it  provided  support  for  the
    plausibility or possibility that MB stayed with the appellant and  left
    him with confidential documents (see para 4.15 of the report).  In para
    38 of her determination, the judge found that this  was  not  plausible
    contrary to the view of the expert.  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
    expert had only found plausible a stay for a "relatively  brief  time".
    The judge had made reference to that in para 38  and  it  was  a  valid
    reason for not accepting the appellant's account for a stay "some  time
    during 1997 and 1998".

17. In her determination, the judge  does  not  specifically  set  out  the
    appellant's evidence as to the claimed  length  of  stay  by  MB.   The
    refusal letter (at para 14) refers to a stay of "3-4 months".  If  this
    evidence was in the judge's mind, she clearly  concluded  that  it  was
    inconsistent with Mr Seddon's opinion that any  stay  would  be  for  a
    "relatively brief time".  Any such inconsistency does not appear to  be
    a matter which was explored in the evidence before the judge. It is not
    a point directly addressed or raised by Mr Seddon so  as  to  undermine
    his opinion that the appellant's claim is plausible (see paras 4.14 and
    4.15  of  his  report).    and  I  would  not  consider  the   evidence
    necessarily inconsistent without more.

18. In my judgment, the judge has failed properly to take into account  the
    expert  report  of  Mr  Seddon.   It  was  not  determinative  of   the
    appellant's credibility but it was relevant to  it  and  provided  some
    support for the credibility of the appellant's account,  in  particular
    that cores aspects of it were plausible.  In that regard, therefore,  I
    am satisfied that the judge  erred  in  law  in  reaching  her  adverse
    credibility finding.

19. In my  judgment,  that  error  was  material  to  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding despite the other reasons she gave for  it,  namely
    that the appellant had not mentioned  MB  in  his  screening  interview
    (para 37) and the thirteen-year delay in the appellant claiming  asylum
    in the UK (paras 40-46).  I am unable to say that the judge's  decision
    would inevitably have been the same had she properly taken into account
    Mr Seddon's expert report.

Decision

20. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

21. Given the nature and extent of fact finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,  it  is
    appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de
    novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Richards-Clarke.


                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:
