
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: PA/ 03596/2019
                                                              PA/ 03599/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Edinburgh                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2020                  |On 16 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 BERVIAN [A]
                                      &
                                  KHALID [I]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Handley  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 16  September  2019.   The  FtT  refused  permission  to
    appeal.  The appellant sought permission from the UT on 7 grounds,  set
    out in an application dated 13 November 2019.

 2. On 3 December 2019 UTJ Allen granted permission on grounds 1, 4, 5  and
    6 only, observing also  that  if  6  was  to  be  maintained,  "witness
    statements will be needed ...  to  support  the  contention"  that  the
    decision at [32] and [34] did not reflect the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellants at the hearing.

 3. Ms Loughran tendered statements by the appellants and  a  copy  of  her
    record of  proceedings  in  the  FtT.   Having  referred  also  to  the
    respondent's record, Mr Clark accepted that the judge went wrong  about
    the evidence given.  He also accepted that ground  1  showed  that  the
    judge erred in stating that there were 4 bundles  of  documents  before
    him, when there were 7 inventories (clearly labelled and indexed).

 4. Ground 1 focuses on a letter from the appellant's uncle.   Ms  Loughran
    showed that it  was  relevant  to  significant  matters  in  the  case,
    including the presence of the author at the wedding of the  appellants.
    Mr Clark astutely observed that [42] of the decision could be  read  as
    showing that the information in the letter had been taken into account;
    but he mentioned, very fairly,  that  the  information  could  also  be
    derived from Q/A 56 of the first appellant's interview, not  only  from
    the letter.   The decision does not refer specifically  to  the  letter
    and it is highly likely that it was overlooked.

 5. Ground 6 discloses that the judge was wrong in taking the  evidence  of
    the first appellant to be that her husband told her he wanted to remain
    in the UK (before their problems in Iraq crystallised).  The judge  did
    not specify the weight he gave to that matter, but it obviously  tended
    to support his view that the case was a fabrication.

 6. Ms Loughran supported ground  4,  lack  of  reasoning,  by  refence  to
    detailed evidence at interview, consistent between the two  appellants,
    and  not  mentioned  in  the  decision.   She   supported   ground   5,
    speculation, by examining the appellants' evidence about the  closeness
    or otherwise of their contact with one of the persons ([I]) involved in
    the alleged chain of events, which does not sit with the  judge's  view
    of the closeness of the connection and the inevitability or credibility
    of what might have been discussed.

 7. Grounds 4 and 5 are of some substance, although  they  might  not  have
    required the setting aside of a decision which  was  otherwise  soundly
    based.  Ground 1 and 6 are both strong.  Taking  the  errors  together,
    the decision cannot safely stand.

 8. It was common ground that on that finding, the  outcome  should  be  as
    follows.

 9. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

10. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for an entirely fresh hearing.

11. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Handley.

12. No anonymity order has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      20 February 2020
      UT Judge Macleman
