
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03609/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 November 2018                           |On 11 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     r a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hussain, Legal Representative from Raiyad
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R Chowdhury (the judge), promulgated on 11 June 2018, in
    which she dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's refusal of  his
    protection and human rights claims dated 4 March 2018.

 2. The most important aspect of  the  Appellant's  account,  at  least  on
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, was that he was gay and would be  at
    risk of persecution if returned  to  Bangladesh.   The  Respondent  had
    rejected all aspects of  his  claim  including  that  relating  to  his
    claimed sexuality.

 3. In considering the evidence, the judge made reference to section  8  of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004  and
    set out a self-direction in paragraph 48 of her  decision.   Thereafter
    she notes a number of evidential issues in respect of  the  failure  of
    the  Appellant  to  make  his  protection   claim   until   May   2017,
    notwithstanding his entry into this country in 2010.   In  addition  to
    the delay issue the judge makes findings in respect of the  absence  of
    corroborative evidence by way of witnesses or other  relevant  sources.
    The judge addresses the evidence that the Appellant had in fact engaged
    in intimate relations with men but found that this of  itself  did  not
    permit the Appellant to make out his claim even on the  lower  standard
    of proof.  In light of the findings the appeal was duly dismissed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds  of  appeal,  which  were  apparently  drafted  whilst  the
    Appellant was no longer represented, are brief and refer  to  what  are
    described as perverse findings in respect of paragraphs 50  and  56  of
    the judge's decision.

 5. Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 18 October 2018.



The hearing before me

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Hussain, who was  once  again  representing
    the Appellant as he done before the judge, relied  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He made reference to paragraph  52  of  the  judge's  decision
    which he submitted had been based upon a false factual premise,  namely
    that the Appellant had not actually gone to gay establishments as often
    as the judge had  thought.   The  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
    particular circumstances of the Appellant's sexuality and lifestyle  in
    the United Kingdom when addressing the  issue  of  delay.   Mr  Hussain
    submitted that the Appellant had in fact made his protection claim,  at
    least that aspect of it relating to the claimed sexuality, as  soon  as
    he was aware that he could do so, namely in May 2017.

 7. Ms Everett submitted that there were no errors  of  law  and  certainly
    nothing perverse  in  the  judge's  decision.   The  judge  had  indeed
    considered the explanations  put  forward  by  the  Appellant  and  had
    rejected them for reasons which were open to her.  She  submitted  that
    the judge had not placed too much emphasis on the delay issue  but  had
    considered this as part and parcel of the evidence as a  whole.  Within
    the delay issue there were differing strands, all of which were adverse
    to the Appellant's credibility.  In  addition,  she  pointed  out  that
    other reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account had been relied  on
    by the judge.  The section 8 issue had not been determinative.

 8. In reply, Mr Hussain reiterated the point made in respect of  paragraph
    52.  He submitted also that  the  judge  had  effectively  ignored  the
    contents of paragraph 12 of the Appellant's witness statement.



Decision on Error of Law

 9. I conclude that there are no errors of law in the judge's decision.

10. I have read this decision sensibly and as a whole.  In my view there is
    a correct self-direction in  respect  of  the  section  8/delay  issue,
    contained in paragraph 48.  Indeed  the  wording  used  therein  is  in
    similar terms to that set out in SM (Section 8:  Judge's process)  Iran
    [2005] UKAIT 00116 and JT (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 878.  It is  clear
    that  the  judge  was  decidedly   unimpressed   by   the   Appellant's
    explanations as to why he had failed to put forward a protection  claim
    based on sexuality until May 2017.  In my view the judge  was  entitled
    to have found that the Appellant had frequented gay establishments over
    the course of time: there was nothing inconsistent between this and the
    contents of paragraph 12 of the witness statement wherein the Appellant
    had stated that he attended bars several times a  month  initially  but
    this   then   decreased   to   several   times   a   year   thereafter.
    Notwithstanding a decrease in attendance, the judge was fully  entitled
    to conclude that he had been to a number of establishments on  numerous
    occasions over the course of the relevant period  with  which  she  was
    concerned.

11. The judge of course was also entitled to have taken  into  account  the
    level  of  education  and  general  background  circumstances  of   the
    Appellant and the two Article 8 applications made previously  in  which
    the Appellant had made no reference whatsoever to being gay.  The judge
    was also entitled to take into account the factors set out in paragraph
    56 as being relevant to  her  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    explanations put forward for what,  was  in  any  view,  a  significant
    delay.

12. I am satisfied that  the  judge  did  not  treat  the  delay  issue  as
    determinative of the Appellant's claim.   I  agree  with  Ms  Everett's
    submissions that a number of strands relating to that delay issue  were
    considered and properly set out with supporting reasons.  In  addition,
    and importantly, the judge considered other aspects of  the  evidential
    picture including that relating to the witnesses (and lack thereof) and
    the  absence  of  other  potentially  corroborative  evidence.   Whilst
    corroboration is never a requirement in protection claims, its  absence
    may well prove problematic  to  an  Appellant  where  there  are  other
    significant concerns relating to the reliability of their own evidence.

13. In short, I find that whilst the Appellant had purported to put forward
    explanations for the delay, the judge  had  considered  these  and  had
    rejected them for reasons which were not only perfectly rational but to
    which she was fully entitled to reach.

14. In light of this the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  shall  stand
    and the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors of  law  and
it shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





Signed        [pic]        Date: 6 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

