
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03635/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Iac (Priory      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Courts)                              |                                     |
|On 3 June 2019                       |On 15 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                 Khosawi [B]
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:
For the  Appellant:      Mr  M  Uddin,  Counsel  instructed  by  Braitch  RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Iraq, date of birth 7 December 1980,  made
    a political asylum claim on 29 September 2017, which was refused  on  2
    March 2018.  His appeal was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C
    Broe, dated 22 June 2018.  Permission to appeal that decision was given
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria on 7 August 2018.  The judge said in
    granting permission

         "2.  The Appellant is an Iraqi national.  The Appellant  claims  to
             have a well-founded fear of persecution if  returned  to  Iraq
             due to a blood feud with members of the Mangur clan.

         3.   The lengthy grounds of appeal make various assertions that the
             judge erred in his assessment of the Appellant's evidence.  In
             addition the grounds assert that the findings of the judge  on
             return to the IKR  are  unsustainable  in  the  light  of  the
             decision in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) (CG)."

2.   In granting permission the judge accepted that the judge had failed  to
    apply the guidance given in AAH and as such there was, on the  face  of
    it, an arguable error of law and that all grounds might be argued.

3.   The grounds are unduly long and do not necessarily  require  to  be  of
    the length as advanced by Mr Uddin but it is clear, in the light of the
    case of AAH, that the issue of safety of return, requiring a  CSID  and
    being able to move into  the  IKR  are  not  without  difficulties  and
    dangers, bearing in mind it  appears  to  be  common  ground  that  the
    Appellant is not in possession of  a  CSID  or  a  valid  passport  and
    therefore would have the difficulties identified in AAH in  being  able
    to travel within Iraq. The Original Tribunals decision failed to  apply
    the country guidance or give reason why it was not followed

4.   The original grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  raised  the
    issues of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  The judge in  dealing  with
    this matter made no arguable error of law [D29-36].



DECISION

The Appeal is allowed to the extent that the protection  claim  in  relation
to return to the IKR is to be remade.



ANONYMITY ORDER

Although an anonymity order was made in the First -tier Tribunal I  can  see
no present basis for its continuance.

DIRECTIONS

1.   List First-tier Tribunal two hours.

2.   Kurdish Sorani interpreter required.

3.   No findings of fact to stand.  All issues raised on protection  grounds
    on risk of return without CSID or Passport to the IKR to remain.

4.   Any further evidence dealing with any change  to  the  Article  8  ECHR
    issues to be served not less than ten clear  working  days  before  the
    resumed hearing.

5.   Resumed hearing not before First-tier Tribunal Judges Broe or Haria.

6.   Any further directions sought should be made on application in  writing
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

7.   Matter to be listed for hearing at Birmingham CJC.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 24 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


