
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/03226/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 22nd December 2016                |On 29th December 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mr SKA
                          Anonymity Direction Made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms A Evan instructed by UK Immigration Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas promulgated on 2nd November  2016.
    The appellant is an Iraqi  national  born  on  15th  August  1998.   He
    originates from Kirkuk a contested area in  Iraq  and  said  to  be  of
    Kurdish ethnicity. At the date of the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal he was just eighteen years old and he had entered  the  United
    Kingdom as an unaccompanied minor.

 2. The judge found the appellant had not discharged the burden of proof in
    respect of his claim that he was threatened and asked to  poison  bread
    intended for the Peshmerga, that  relocation  to  the  Iraqi  Kurdistan
    Region (IKR) was a viable option for him and he could obtain entry  and
    find employment and seek to remain longer. As such he did  not  qualify
    for humanitarian protection and his human rights would not be breached.



 3. The appellant appealed on three grounds namely (i)  the  judge  applied
    the incorrect standard of proof, (ii) the judge failed to give adequate
    reasons for  rejecting  the  asylum  claim  and  (iii)  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in her assessment of risk on return  and  internal
    relocation.

 4. Permission was granted in respect of the third ground only but Ms  Evan
    renewed her application at the hearing  before  me  on  the  first  two
    grounds.  Mr Tufan resisted the  application  and  contested  that  the
    judge had given adequate reasoning in  her  assessment  of  relocation.
    For the reasons given below I allow the application to  be  renewed  on
    the first two grounds.

 5. In relation to ground (i) I note that at the outset the judge  set  out
    at [4] that there should be 'substantial grounds for believing' that he
    met  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 and at [5] that the appellant need  to
    prove there was a 'real risk' he would suffer harm contrary to  Article
    2 and 3.

 6. Although the judge set out the standard of proof test  initially,  when
    actually applying the test to the facts, she appears to slip  into  the
    use of the standard of the balance of  probabilities  as  the  decision
    progresses.  At [27] the judge refers to his escape from the bakery  as
    being both 'not plausible' and  'not  credible'.   At  [29]  the  judge
    opines that the assessment  with  reference  to  the  saving  of  money
    ''indicates' that they had  been  saving  for  sometime  which  is  not
    consistent with the appellant having to flee Iraq quickly  in  fear  of
    his safety from these men but suggests that he had planned his exit for
    some time'.  These two points together with one other reason  at  [28],
    that the appellant was able to remain hiding in his  home  for  a  week
    without difficulty, amounted  essentially  to  the  reasoning  for  the
    rejection of his credibility.

 7. By paragraph [32] in relation to  the assessment of relocation in Iraq,
    the judge states 'I am not persuaded that the appellant's  ID  card  is
    not with his mother because in his screening interview, he said it  was
    in Kirkuk, yet in his statement he  says  it  was  taken  from  him  in
    Turkey'.  Not only does the judge use the language of 'suggest' but the
    appellant appears to actually state that the photocopy  was  in  Kirkuk
    whilst the actual ID was taken from him in Turkey.  The  possession  or
    access to a CSID is an important issue as stated  at  [170]  of  in  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) as it is the gateway to
    accessing services in Iraq.  In AA it was recorded that  'The  Tribunal
    will need to know, in particular, whether the person  concerned  has  a
    CSID. It is only where return is feasible but the individual  concerned
    does not have a CSID that the consequences of not having one come  into
    play'.

 8. It would appear that on assessing credibility and key facts relevant to
    the claim the judge used the wrong standard of proof.  That is an error
    of law.

 9.  At the outset of her decision the judge notes that 'the appellant  was
    a minor when he left Iraq' but nowhere appears to apply the  Vulnerable
    Witness Guidelines when assessing the discrepancies in the evidence and
    credibility.  The screening and asylum interviews were given  when  the
    appellant was a minor. This is relevant to grounds (i) and (ii) and the
    overall fundamental assessment of credibility.

10. Turning to ground (iii), the respondent accepted in her refusal  letter
    that although the appellant had previously lived in the IKR  there  was
    no evidence to demonstrate that he was officially registered there with
    the IKR authorities and it was concluded  that  he  would  in  fact  be
    retuned to Baghdad. There was no assessment by the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in relation to the  factors  identified  in  AA  in  relation  to
    relocation to Baghdad.

11. Return to the IKR is fact sensitive and the Tribunal needed to look  at
    not just relocation to the IKR but the journey to the IKR from  Baghdad
    where it was accepted the appellant would  be  returned  but  also  his
    ability to remain and work  long  term  in  the  IKR.  Indeed  and  the
    Tribunal needed to  make  a  detailed  and  fact  sensitive  assessment
    following the guidance set out in AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]
    UKUT 00544 (IAC) and particularly paragraph 204.  That does not  appear
    to have occurred.

         "19.     A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can  obtain
             entry for 10 days as a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
             permission for a further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can
             remain for longer, although K will need to register  with  the
             authorities and provide details of the employer. There  is  no
             evidence that the IKR authorities  pro-actively  remove  Kurds
             from the IKR whose permits have come to an end.

         20.      Whether K, if  returned  to  Baghdad,  can  reasonably  be
             expected to avoid any potential undue harshness in  that  city
             by travelling to the IKR,  will  be  fact  sensitive;  and  is
             likely to involve an assessment of  (a)  the  practicality  of
             travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil by air);  (b)
             the likelihood of K's securing employment in the IKR; and  (c)
             the availability of assistance from family and friends in  the
             IKR."

12. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 22nd December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
