
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03122/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11th August 2016                      |On 17th August 2016                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     upper tribunal Deputy judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                    [h t]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Malik, Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Martins made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 21st
    April 2016.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1981.   She  arrived
    in the UK on 20th June 2015 and claimed asylum on arrival, on the basis
    of her Ahmadi faith.  She has  family  members  in  the  UK,  including
    parents and a sister.  Her husband who is also  an  Ahmadi  remains  in
    Pakistan.

 3. When her appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal,  it  was  accepted
    that she is of  the  Ahmadi  faith,  but  not  that  she  had  suffered
    persecution on account of it, nor that she genuinely feared persecution
    on return to Pakistan.

Grounds of Application/ UT Hearing

 4. The Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  FtT's  decision  in
    detailed grounds, which were relied upon by Mr Malik  at  the  hearing.
    So far as the grant of permission is  concerned  it  characterised  the
    three grounds upon which permission was sought as essentially amounting
    to variants on one ground.  The grant succinctly  sets  out  the  issue
    before me and the relevant part reads as follows:

         "It is arguable that the Tribunal  failed  to  assess  whether  the
         Appellant would exercise discretion in the practice of her religion
         upon return to Pakistan and, if so, whether this would  be  due  to
         fear of persecution or due to some other reason.  The three grounds
         are effectively variants of the above argument  and  permission  to
         appeal in respect of them is accordingly granted."

 5. Mr Malik's  submission  followed  the  lines  of  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.  He submitted first that the judge  had  failed  to  follow
    binding country guidance case law MN and Others CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389
    (IAC), because there was a failure to consider the Appellant's evidence
    and give appropriate weight to the letter of support  produced  by  the
    AMA UK.  Secondly the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  letter  of
    support produced  by  the  AMA  UK  and  thirdly  had  failed  to  give
    consideration to the Appellant's sur place activities.

 6. In the elaboration of those points, Mr  Malik  submitted  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to undertake the two-step approach outlined in
    MN.  The judge first had to  establish  whether  the  Appellant  is  an
    Ahmadi and having established that whether the Appellant would have  to
    exercise discretion in the  practice  of  her  religion  on  return  to
    Pakistan and if the  answer  to  that  question  is  "yes"  would  this
    exercise of discretion be due to fear of persecution  or  due  to  some
    other reason.

 7. He submitted that the determination fell short  of  carrying  out  that
    exercise and therefore the judge's conclusion that the Appellant  would
    not be at risk on return to Pakistan, lacked proper reasoning.

 8. Mr Tarlow on behalf  of  the  Respondent  defended  the  decision.   He
    referred to [48] and [49], which, he said showed  that  the  judge  had
    turned her mind to  the  two  questions  set  out  in  MN  and  Others.
    Concerning the criticism made  that  the  judge  had  not  specifically
    mentioned MN and Others, that could not count as an error  requiring  a
    decision  to  be  set  aside,  provided  the  judge  had  followed  the
    principles.  He submitted that a full reading of the  text  would  show
    that the judge had followed those principles.  He had accepted that the
    Appellant is an Ahmadi.  He had made reasoned findings showing why  the
    core of the Appellant's claim was not credible.  Those findings set out
    that the incident which triggered the Appellant's  flight  to  the  UK,
    revolved around an incident in April 2015  when  she  claimed  she  was
    preaching at home and that the threats of one of the women  caused  her
    to  experience  stress  and  anxiety,  which  in  turn  caused  her   a
    miscarriage.  The judge set out that there was no evidence to link  the
    miscarriage with that incident.

 9. The judge had noted the AMA letters and noted that there was no mention
    of the Appellant preaching in either Pakistan nor the UK.

10. Mr Tarlow submitted that therefore the grounds amounted to no more than
    a disagreement with the judges' findings and decision.

Consideration

11. Clearly it is accepted that the Appellant is an Ahmadi.  The  criticism
    of the judge's approach therefore is on this basis.  The  judge  failed
    to assess whether  the  Appellant  would  exercise  discretion  in  the
    practice of her religion on return to Pakistan.  If the answer  to  the
    question is "yes" would this exercise of discretion be due to  fear  of
    persecution or due to some other reason.

12.  The  first  point  to  consider  is  the  historical  reason  for  the
    Appellant's flight to the UK.  The judge found the  Appellant  had  not
    been open in her evidence  when  she  said  that  she  suffered  stress
    following an incident in her home in  April  2015  and  that  this  had
    resulted in her miscarriage. The medical evidence  showed  simply  that
    she was hospitalised (sadly) due to a miscarriage.  Therefore  I  agree
    with Mr Tarlow that  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  disbelieve  the
    Appellant's account of how her miscarriage came about and equally  open
    to the judge to place little or no reliance upon the one incident which
    the Appellant claims caused her stress and miscarriage.

13. Equally I find the judge specifically referred to the letter  from  AMA
    UK, which made no reference to any preaching  the  Appellant  had  been
    involved in, in Pakistan. The judge did fully acknowledged and set  out
    at [34] the  activities  which  the  Appellant  had  engaged  in  after
    arriving in the UK.

14. However, despite making reasoned findings on the  Appellant's  historic
    claim, I find force in Mr Malik's submission that the judge's  decision
    does not go far enough to show that there has been proper consideration
    given to the second  step  identified  in  MN  and  Others.   Step  two
    involves an enquiry into the Claimant's intentions or wishes as to  his
    or her fate if returned to Pakistan.  The burden is on the Claimant  to
    demonstrate that any intention or wish to practice and manifest aspects
    of the faith openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal  Code,
    is genuinely held and of  particular  importance  to  the  Claimant  to
    preserve his or her religious identity.  The  decision-maker  needs  to
    evaluate all the evidence.  Behaviour since arrival in the UK may  also
    be relevant.

15. There is of course a cautionary note in this  and  had  note  8  stated
    Ahmadis who are not able to show that they practice their faith at  all
    in Pakistan or that they did so on anything other than  the  restricted
    basis described in (paragraph 2) above are in general  unlikely  to  be
    able to show that their genuine intentions or wishes  are  to  practise
    and manifest their faith openly on return.

16. Although the judge sets out the detailed letter from AMA UK, I find the
    reasons for rejecting that evidence unclear. It may well be that having
    found the Appellant's historic claim lacking in credibility  the  judge
    has decided that she  can  place  little  reliance  on  the  sur  place
    activities  but  she  does  not  say  that.  There   must   be   proper
    consideration and reasons given for rejecting the evidence put forward.

17. The judge at [54] says that he notes that the Appellant is involved  in
    the Ahmadi community in the United Kingdom and on account of  her  lack
    of English it is said she does not preach although she  does  stand  at
    stalls and hands out leaflets.  Thereafter  however  the  judge  simply
    goes on to say that he cannot be satisfied on the evidence that she has
    suffered persecution on account of her faith.  I  see  no  analysis  of
    that evidence, leading to the conclusion given.

18. That evidence is material to the Appellant's  claim  and  therefore,  I
    find no alternative but to set the decision aside for material error.

19. I did canvass with the parties, the appropriate course  should  I  find
    material error in the FtT's decision.  Mr Malik's  view  was  that  the
    matter should be returned  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.  Credibility is at the core of this appeal.  I  therefore  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision in its entirety and remit  the
    matter to that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  I  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I remit the matter to  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Martins) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                Date         16 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
