
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03260/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |On 16th August 2019                  |
|Given extempore on 6th August 2019   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     M E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Sadiq, a Solicitor and Director of the firm
Adam Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant was born on 30th May, 1978 and is  a  citizen  of  Sudan.
    On behalf of the respondent  Mr  McVeety  conceded  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    McAll, in that it is not clear from the determination whether the judge
    has considered and/or applied country guidance case law in relation  to
    the risk on return based, on  the  appellant's  ethnicity  alone  as  a
    member of the Berti tribe.

2.   Both representatives agreed that this was  a  material  error  of  law.
    They asked that the matter be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal. I am
    satisfied that there is an error of law in the determination  of  Judge
    McAll.

3.   The only challenge to the determination today was  in  respect  of  the
    issue of the risk on return, given the appellant's ethnicity and  being
    a non-Arab Darfuri.  Judge McAll had in his determination already found
    there to be no risk to the appellant's daughters of FGM since he  found
    that part plainly not credible.  That finding shall stand. I set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   The sole issue to  be  decided  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  be
    whether as a member of the Berti tribe and being a non-Arab Darfuri she
    will be at risk of persecution on return to Sudan.

5.   The appeal is to be heard a First Tier Tribunal judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McAll and two  hours  should  be  allowed  for  the
    hearing of the appeal.

6.   An Arabic interpreter is required.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
13th August 2019
