
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03868/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 May 2021 via Skype for Business |On 10 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     JS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by Aask
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to were the  grounds  of  appeal,  written
submissions from the parties, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  the
grant of permission to appeal  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson,  and  the
decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Deborah  Taylor,  the  contents  of
which I have recorded.
The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: no fairness  concerns  were  raised
arising from the proceedings being conducted remotely.

 1. This matter was originally listed before me solely to address the issue
    of the appellant's risk on return to Sri Lanka, the First-tier Tribunal
    having previously found  that  the  appellant  was  excluded  from  the
    Refugee Convention in what were thought to be undisturbed  findings  of
    fact, following a decision of a deputy judge to set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. For the reasons set out  below,  properly  understood,  there  were  no
    preserved  findings  of  fact  from  the  judgment  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The task  facing  the  Upper  Tribunal  was,  therefore,  to
    redetermine the appellant's asylum claim in its  entirety.   Under  the
    circumstances,  consistent  with  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the   Practice
    Statements of the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, I was satisfied that  the  nature  and
    extent of the judicial fact-finding that would  be  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade was such that it would be  appropriate  to  remit
    the matter to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  reheard  afresh,  by  a
    different judge.  This decision sets out my reasons for  remitting  the
    case to the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  also  for  refusing  a  recusal
    application made by the appellant.

Factual and procedural background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 3  January  1969.   He
    initially claimed asylum on 12 August 2009 on the grounds that  he  had
    been falsely accused of being a member of the  LTTE.   That  claim  was
    refused on 17 May 2010 and he withdrew a subsequent appeal against that
    refusal.  On 2 April 2012, he made a fresh claim for asylum, which  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 5 March 2018.

 4. In his fresh claim, the appellant said worked as a prominent fundraiser
    for the Tamil Coordinating Committee ("the TCC") in Italy, placing  him
    at risk of being persecuted by  the  Sri  Lankan  Government  upon  his
    return.  In  her  decision,  the  Secretary  of  State  considered  the
    appellant to have been a member of the  LTTE,  a  proscribed  terrorist
    group for which the TCC was one of  several  front  organisations,  and
    that he was thereby excluded from the Refugee Convention under  Article
    1F(b) (serious non-political crime committed  outside  the  appellant's
    country of refuge).  She certified under section 55 of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 that the appellant was not entitled  to
    the protection of Article 33(1) of  the  Refugee  Convention.   In  any
    event, the Secretary of State considered that the appellant  would  not
    be at risk upon his return to Sri Lanka.

 5. The appellant appealed against the Secretary of State's decision  of  5
    March 2018.  His appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moxon
    who, in a decision promulgated on 19 August 2019, dismissed the appeal.
     The judge found that the appellant was excluded  from  the  Convention
    pursuant to Article 1F(b) and that he would not face a risk of  serious
    harm upon his return.

 6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against the decision  of
    Judge Moxon, challenging both the decision concerning exclusion and the
    finding in relation to  risk  on  return.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson in a decision  dated  8  October
    2019.  The operative grant of permission  was  unrestricted.   However,
    the reasons given by the judge considered  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
    relation to the judge's findings on exclusion to be unarguable.  Having
    addressed the arguability of the grounds of appeal concerning  risk  on
    return, the reasons for the grant  of  permission  concluded  in  these
    terms:

         "Permission to appeal is granted on this limited issue."

    It is clear that the grant of permission to appeal was intended  to  be
    limited in scope.

 7. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal was heard by Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Deborah Taylor on 20  January  2020  in  Bradford.   She
    stated the following at [10] to [12] of her decision:

         "10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
         the judge had erred in law in failing to direct himself  where  the
         burden of proving Article 1F(b) falls and misapplied relevant  case
         law in relation to the application of exclusion clauses.

         11. Permission to appeal was refused on both those grounds.

         12. Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson,  on  8  October  2019,  did  grant
         permission on the final ground, namely that the judge had failed to
         make any or adequate findings in relation to the  claimed  risk  on
         return on the basis of the appellant's prominent  role  within  the
         TCC. The appellant had claimed to be at risk on return to Sri Lanka
         as a result of the TCC's proscription and the new emergency laws of
         22 April 2019, separate from any risk he might face as a result  of
         his membership of the LTTE."

    A full copy of the decision may be found in the Annex to this decision.

 8. The deputy judge allowed the appeal in relation to what she  considered
    was the sole issue before the Upper Tribunal, namely  the  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the appellant's risk  on  return
    to Sri Lanka. At [16] she stated:

         "The judge's decision is set aside."

 9. She added at [17]:

         "The  underlying  facts,  so  far  as  the  appellant's  historical
         activities are concerned, are not in dispute. The  question  to  be
         decided is whether those activities  would  make  the  appellant  a
         person of interest to the authorities today."

10. The judge directed that the decision be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal.
    She did not expressly preserve any findings  of  fact  reached  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

11. At case management review hearings conducted on  2  July  2020  and  10
    December 2020 by Upper Tribunal Judges Grubb  and  Keith  respectively,
    and later before me on 18 January 2021, the issue for consideration  at
    the resumed hearing was said to be that identified by the deputy  judge
    at [17] of her decision, namely the appellant's risk on return  to  Sri
    Lanka.  At each of those hearings, the appellant was directed to  apply
    to adduce additional evidence pursuant to  an  application  under  rule
    15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  No  such
    application was ever forthcoming, as set out below.

12. This matter was listed for a resumed hearing  before  me  on  29  March
    2021. Ms Jegarajah's primary submission on that occasion  was  that  it
    was necessary for me to adjourn the proceedings in order to enable  the
    appellant to adduce further evidence going to the issue  of  exclusion,
    and his risk on return to Sri Lanka, which could be made the subject of
    an application under rule 15(2A).  Some new evidence had been provided,
    including an expert report, and a copy of the Sri Lankan Gazette, which
    was said to proscribe the appellant by name.  None of the new  evidence
    was the subject of an application under rule 15(2A).

13. Ms Jegarajah also advanced a range of submissions  contending  that  it
    would be irrational and unlawful for the focus of the  resumed  hearing
    to be the appellant's risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  alone,  without
    considering the issue of his exclusion from the Refugee  Convention  in
    the round. The arguments advanced by Ms Jegarajah in  support  of  that
    submission were that it  was  open  to  me  to  review  Judge  Hanson's
    restricted grant of permission to appeal under rules 45 and 46  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,  and  that  the  deputy
    judge's approach involved a "Robinson obvious" error.  I rejected those
    submissions.  A rule 46 review is engaged only in  the  context  of  an
    application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal,  once  the
    Upper Tribunal has completed the process required by section 13 of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  ("the  2007  Act").   The
    proceedings had not reached that stage.  In any event, the criteria for
    a review in rule 45(1) upon which Ms  Jegarajah  sought  to  rely  were
    engaged where the  Upper  Tribunal  had  either  overlooked  a  binding
    authority, or a court had made a decision  which  was  binding  on  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The "binding" decision upon which Ms Jegarajah  sought
    to rely was a judgment of an Italian court (in relation  to  which  she
    was yet to obtain a certified translation)  which  could  not,  on  any
    view, be categorised as binding on this tribunal.

14. Nor could it be said that there was a Robinson  obvious  error  in  the
    deputy judge's decision, contrary to the submissions of  Ms  Jegarajah.
    There is simply no authority I have been alerted to which holds that it
    would  be  unlawful  to  consider  the  issue  of  risk  on  return  in
    circumstances where the issue of exclusion had already been determined.

15. However, there were considerations, not raised by Ms  Jegarajah,  which
    supported her goal of securing a full reappraisal of the issue  of  the
    appellant's exclusion from the Refugee Convention, which I drew to  the
    parties' attention following the luncheon  adjournment.  They  were  as
    follows.

16. First, although Judge Hanson plainly intended to restrict his grant  of
    permission to appeal to the issue of the appellant's risk on return, he
    did not so restrict the operative grant of  permission  to  appeal.  He
    simply stated, "permission to appeal is granted." Pursuant to Safi  and
    others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC),  in  the
    absence of a restriction  in  the  operative  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal, it will only be in  very  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
    Upper Tribunal  will  consider  the  otherwise  unrestricted  grant  of
    permission to appeal to be restricted. It follows, therefore, that  the
    deputy judge was incorrect to state that the appellant had not obtained
    permission to appeal on all grounds: he had.  Although  Safi  preserves
    the possibility "in  very  exceptional  circumstances"  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to construe an otherwise unrestricted grant of  permission  to
    appeal as restricted, it is clear that the deputy judge did not address
    her mind to the issue.  Nothing turns, therefore, on the  small  degree
    of flexibility inherent to the principle enunciated in Safi.

17. Secondly, by setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal with
    no express provision to preserve any findings of fact reached by  Judge
    Moxon, in particular in relation to the issue of exclusion, the  deputy
    judge set aside the entirety of the findings reached by the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

18. The above factors had  not  been  considered  by  either  party,  so  I
    adjourned the hearing and gave directions for  written  submissions  on
    the point, set out in a Note and Directions dated 30 March  2021.   The
    hearing resumed on 5 May 2021 to consider legal argument on the  issues
    raised in the note.

19. In my Note and  Directions,  I  implored  the  appellant  to  make  the
    application under rule 15(2A) to rely on new evidence that he had  been
    directed to make on multiple occasions by different judges.

Recusal application

20. In her skeleton argument dated 22 April 2021, Ms Jegarajah applied  for
    me to recuse myself from the case on two bases.

21. First, on  the  basis  that  I  had  countenanced  the  possibility  of
    separating the issue of risk on return from exclusion,  which  amounted
    to a misapprehension of a fundamental aspect of  refugee  law,  thereby
    disqualifying me from hearing the appeal: see [16]  of  Ms  Jegarajah's
    skeleton argument.

22. Secondly, on the basis of the bias, or apparent bias,  I  was  said  to
    have manifested  towards  the  appellant  in  my  Note  and  Directions
    concerning the need for the appellant to  comply  with  the  directions
    previously given to make an application under rule  15(2A).   In  those
    directions, I  included  the  following  passages,  under  the  heading
    Further case management directions: procedural rigour:

         "11.  A  recurring  theme  in  these  proceedings  has   been   the
         appellant's failure to comply with directions of both tiers of  the
         tribunal.  In  his  decision  at  [7],  Judge  Moxon  outlined  the
         appellant's failure to comply with directions given by the FTT:  an
         initial hearing in November 2018 was adjourned for the appellant to
         obtain  expert  evidence,  which  was  not  provided.   A   further
         adjournment followed on 14 May 2019, again  for  the  appellant  to
         adduce evidence.  The deadline was not met.  The matter  eventually
         proceeded on 29 July 2019.

          12. There has been a similar pattern  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         relation to the evidence required for the decision  to  be  remade.
         At a CMRH on 2 July 2020,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  gave  the
         appellant until 1 October 2020 to make an  application  under  rule
         15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  to
         adduce further evidence.   The appellant did not comply  with  that
         direction.  Upper Tribunal Judge Keith held a further  CMRH  on  10
         December 2020, at which Ms Jegarajah said the  appellant  would  be
         able to comply by 8 January 2021.  The  appellant  did  not  comply
         with that direction.  At a further CMRH, on 18  January  2021,  the
         appellant undertook to make the application by 15 March 2021.  That
         deadline was breached, as was  a  direction  to  serve  a  skeleton
         argument on the respondent by the same day, with  the  effect  that
         the respondent's consequential obligations could not  be  met.   In
         the event, the appellant did not serve a skeleton argument  on  the
         respondent until 25 March 2021, with the understandable consequence
         that Mr Lindsay was  unable  to  provide  a  skeleton  argument  in
         response.  Very shortly before the resumed hearing, still absent  a
         rule 15(2A) application, the appellant served a large  quantity  of
         additional materials on the tribunal and the respondent.

          13. While those representing the appellant sought to explain these
         failures by reference to their personal circumstances at the  time,
         the reasons  given  were  not  good  reasons,  and  were  simply  a
         continuation  of   the   procedurally   lacklustre   approach   the
         appellant's legal team has taken to its duties to both chambers  of
         this tribunal throughout these proceedings.

         14.  Ms Jegarajah had applied for  a  further  adjournment  at  the
         hearing before me, in order to obtain a translation of  a  judgment
         of an Italian court, which was said to be relevant to the issue  of
         exclusion, and possibly the appellant's risk on return.   In  light
         of the proceedings having been adjourned,  the  appellant  now  has
         more time to secure a certified translation to use in  this  court.
         However, as I identified at [3] of  my  note  of  the  CMRH  on  18
         January 2021, the  appellant  has  sought  a  translation  of  that
         judgment for some time.  He has had ample time to secure funding to
         obtain the translation.  If it is  not  available  by  the  resumed
         hearing, the Upper Tribunal is likely to conclude that no amount of
         further  adjournments  would  lead  to  a  translation  being  made
         available, such that no further adjournments would be necessary for
         that reason."

Recusal: discussion

23. In relation to the first recusal request, there can  be  no  suggestion
    that seeking to approach the issues involved in the  remaking  of  this
    appeal as envisaged by both Judge  Hanson  in  granting  permission  to
    appeal, and Deputy Judge Taylor, when  considering  the  error  of  law
    decision, could possibly give rise to any concerns about  bias  towards
    the appellant, or the tribunal's understanding of refugee  law.   While
    it can  be  helpful  to  consider  exclusion  and  the  risk  of  being
    persecuted in the round in the context of taking an  overall  decision,
    Ms Jegarajah has pointed to no authority  to  the  effect  that  merely
    suggesting  the  two  matters  be  dealt  with  separately  necessarily
    disqualifies a judge from hearing the appeal.

24. In relation to the second recusal request, Ms Jegarajah did  not  refer
    to any authorities to substantiate her submissions, but I consider  the
    test for apparent bias to remain that articulated by the House of Lords
    in Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67 per Lord Hope at [103]:

         "The question is whether the  fair-minded  and  informed  observer,
         having considered the facts, would conclude that there was  a  real
         possibility that the tribunal was biased."

25. In her skeleton argument Ms  Jegarajah  was  particularly  critical  of
    paragraph [13] of my Note and Directions.  Ms Jegarajah submitted  that
    good reasons had been given by both her instructing solicitor,  Mrs  S.
    Kirupakaran, who provided a witness  statement  outlining  the  matters
    arising as a result of her clinical vulnerability during the  pandemic,
    and in the course of an oral statement that she, Ms Jegarajah, gave  at
    the hearing concerning her family circumstances arising from the health
    conditions of one of her children.  The  appellant  was  not  confident
    that he could receive a fair  trial  in  light  of  my  comments.   The
    Secretary of State was receiving favourable  treatment  in  comparison,
    she submitted.

26. Applying the test in Porter v Magill, I  considered  that  Lord  Hope's
    fair minded observer would know and consider the following facts:

        a. The fair minded observer would be aware of the emphasis  by  the
           senior  courts  on  the  need  for  procedural  rigour,  and  in
           particular  the  observation  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  WA
           (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]
           EWCA Civ 302 at [33] that, "[e]ven in asylum  claims,  adherence
           to the rules of the court and procedural rigour are necessary."

        b. The fair minded observer would also know that there had  been  a
           number  of  instances  of  procedural  non-compliance   by   the
           appellant's legal team, as summarised at [11]  and  [12]  of  my
           note,  quoted  above.   The   explanations   provided   by   the
           appellant's legal team ahead of the hearing  on  29  March  2021
           addressed, at  best,  the  late  compliance  with  some  of  the
           directions issued at a case management hearing held before me on
           18 January 2021, in particular in relation to the service of the
           appellant's  skeleton  argument,  and  some  of  the  additional
           evidence he sought to rely on.  The late service of the skeleton
           argument was not the only example of  procedural  non-compliance
           by the appellant.

        c. The fair-minded  observer  would  know  that,  despite  repeated
           extensions of the direction requiring the appellant to serve  an
           application under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
           Tribunal) Rules 2008 in relation to new evidence  he  sought  to
           rely upon, to date no application under  rule  15(2A)  had  been
           made.  By the time of the resumed hearing on 5 May  2021,  there
           still had  not  been  an  application  under  rule  15(2A.   The
           explanations purportedly provided by the appellant's legal  team
           as outlined in the previous paragraph did not  even  attempt  to
           engage with the repeated  non-compliance  with  the  requirement
           that an application under rule 15(2A) must be made in order  for
           new evidence to be relied upon.

        d. The fair minded observer would know that the reason the Note and
           Directions did not go into detail about the reasons provided  by
           the appellant's legal team was due  to  the  sensitive  personal
           information  upon  which  the  explanations  were   based;   the
           explanations did not address the matters set  out  in  paragraph
           (b), above.

        e. The observer would know that, read  as  a  whole,  the  aim  and
           purpose of the Procedural Rigour part of the Note and Directions
           was to ensure that the appellant was able to present his case on
           the basis of the best possible evidential  foundation,  pursuant
           to the overriding  objective  to  deal  with  cases  fairly  and
           justly.  The observations were raised  in  the  context  of  the
           tribunal having identified, of its  own  motion,  a  significant
           procedural point in favour of the appellant which had  not  been
           identified by his own legal team.

        f. Finally, the fair minded observer would know that no discourtesy
           was intended towards the appellant's legal team, as explained at
           the hearing on 5 May 2021.

27. Ms Jegarajah's submission that the appellant had no confidence that  he
    could receive a fair trial was, with respect, not the question  for  my
    consideration.  Quite apart from the fact there was no  statement  from
    the appellant to that effect, the test for  recusal  is  objective,  by
    reference to what the fair-minded observer, in possession of the facts,
    would consider, rather than the subjective fears  of  a  party  to  the
    litigation. It was nothing to the point that the Secretary of State had
    been "allowed" not to engage with the evolving case advanced on  behalf
    of the appellant, as Ms Jegarajah submitted;  the  Secretary  of  State
    cannot be criticised for not engaging with evidence that had  not  been
    the subject of an  application  to  put  before  the  tribunal.  If  an
    appellant repeatedly fails to make an application under rule 15(2A)  of
    the procedure rules, he cannot complain when his opposing party has not
    engaged with the very material he has failed to apply to  rely  on.  It
    would be inappropriate to expect or otherwise direct the  Secretary  of
    State to respond to parts of an appellant's case that were  not  before
    the Tribunal.

28. Drawing these factors together, I  concluded  that  Lord  Hope's  fair-
    minded observer would conclude that there was no appearance of bias  in
    my conduct of the proceedings, and I refused the application to  recuse
    myself.

Scope of the resumed hearing

29. Having refused the appellant's application to recuse  myself  from  the
    proceedings, it was necessary to determine the  scope  of  the  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal, in light of  the  deputy  judge  having  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety, with  no
    findings of fact preserved, as I had identified on 29  March  2021.  It
    may be that the deputy judge intended to preserve the findings of  fact
    relating to exclusion, but she did not say so; certainly, the reference
    to the appellant's "historical activities" not being disputed  did  not
    amount to a preservation of Judge Moxon's findings that  the  appellant
    was excluded from the Refugee Convention. It simply recorded the common
    ground between the parties concerning the  fact  of  appellant's  prior
    activities on behalf of the TCC in Italy. Unless I were to revisit that
    decision, the deputy judge's decision would stand.

30. Ms Jegarajah supported any procedural  course  that  would  enable  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

31. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  the
    Upper Tribunal's task under section 12 of the 2007 Act is only complete
    once the process set out in section 12 of the 2007 Act (proceedings  on
    appeal to Upper Tribunal) is complete, pursuant to VOM (Error of law  -
    when  appealable)  Nigeria  [2016]  UKUT  410  (IAC).   I  enjoyed  the
    discretion to revisit the deputy judge's error of  law  decision,  such
    that I could clarify that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    set aside only to the extent that it concerned the appellant's risk  on
    return, and not the issue of exclusion, he submitted.

32. While I  accept  that  the  jurisdiction  does  exist  to  revisit  the
    reasoning of so-called "error of law" decisions pursuant to  AZ  (error
    of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UKUT 245 (IAC), that is
    a jurisdiction to be exercised only  in  very  exceptional  cases:  see
    paragraph (2) of the Headnote.

33. There is established jurisprudence of this  tribunal  relating  to  the
    scope to set aside its previous decisions, as opposed to merely revisit
    the reasons  given  for  a  decision:  see,  for  example,  Jan  (Upper
    Tribunal: set-aside powers) [2016] UKUT 336 (IAC).  I consider  that  I
    should approach any power to revisit the deputy judge's "error of  law"
    reasons in light of the general constraints of the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    set aside its own decisions as  outlined  in  Jan  and  calibrate  what
    amounts to "very exceptional cases" accordingly.  The deputy judge  set
    aside the decision of Judge Moxon in  its  entirety  with  no  findings
    preserved.  I see no basis to put the  clock  back  and  reconduct  the
    error of law hearing.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been
    set aside.  It no longer exists.   I  must  abide  by  that  procedural
    reality.  I  consider  that  it  would  be  inappropriate  to  seek  to
    resurrect parts of a decision of the First-tier Tribunal that has  been
    set aside in its entirety.

34. It follows that the task of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's appeal in these proceedings  is  to  hear  the  appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of his fresh  claim  in
    its entirety.  That entails  a  complete  factual  reappraisal  of  the
    appellant's historical activities from the perspective of the exclusion
    clauses, and also to assess his risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka  in  any
    event.

35. In light of the scope of the findings of fact that it is now clear  are
    required, I consider that it would be appropriate to remit this  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a different  judge,  with  no
    findings of fact preserved.  In that respect, I consider that it  would
    be appropriate to depart from the findings of the deputy judge that the
    matter be reheard in this tribunal.  In  light  of  the  scope  of  the
    findings of fact required, the required very exceptional  circumstances
    are present justifying a departure from  the  deputy  judge's  decision
    that the matter be reheard in this tribunal.

36. There was some discussion at the hearing before me as to  the  location
    of the remitted appeal.  Ms  Jegarajah  asked  for  the  matter  to  be
    remitted to a London hearing centre.  I  remit  the  appeal  to  Taylor
    House.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside with, as held by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor,
no findings of fact preserved.

It is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  at  Taylor  House,
before a different judge.

In light of the procedural and evidential complexities  of  this  matter,  I
direct that the file be referred to the Resident Judge at Taylor  House  for
further case management directions.

I maintain the anonymity order already in force.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith            Date 24 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03868/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th January 2020                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     JS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Jegarajah instructed by Aask Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Moxon made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 29th July 2019.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 3rd January  1969.   He
    initially claimed asylum in the UK on 12th August 2009 on  the  grounds
    that he had been falsely accused of being a member of  the  LTTE.   His
    claim was refused on 17th May 2010 and a subsequent appeal against that
    decision was withdrawn.

 3. He made further submissions to support his claim  for  asylum  on  15th
    April 2012 asserting that he had not been truthful initially  and  that
    he had in  fact  been  a  prominent  member  of  the  TCC  which  is  a
    fundraising organisation working with the LTTE.

 4. The respondent refused the application on 5th March 2018 asserting that
    the appellant was excluded from the protection offered by  the  Refugee
    Convention by virtue of Article 1F(b) and that in any event, he was not
    at risk of mistreatment upon return to Sri Lanka.

 5. At paragraph 15 of  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the  respondent
    stated:

         "In the substantive consideration of your claim  for  asylum  which
         follows it has been accepted that you were a member of the LTTE  (a
         proscribed terrorist group) and you had a prominent  role  for  the
         LTTE.  It is your membership and work  carried  out  for  the  LTTE
         which gives rise to your  exclusion  from  the  Refugee  Convention
         under Article 1F(b)".

 6. At paragraphs 40 and 41 of the same letter the respondent continued:

         "You have stated that you joined the TCC when you went to Italy and
         even  was  in  command  of   other   people   whilst   fundraising.
         Considering the objective information on the LTTE and TCC above and
         the accounts you gave about your role in TCC goes to show that  you
         played a prominent role for the TCC in which you  raised  money  to
         further finance terrorism and terrorist activities carried  out  by
         the LTTE in Sri Lanka.

         This is considered to be a serious non-political crime which  would
         attract imprisonment in the UK.  It is therefore concluded that you
         have committed a serious non-political  crime  outside  of  the  UK
         prior to your admission which would constitute your exclusion under
         Article 1F(b) of the Refugee Convention".

 7. The judge made a number of adverse credibility  findings  stating  that
    the appellant was unable to provide the full names of people  who  gave
    him instructions, which was not  credible.  Moreover  in  his  position
    within the LTTE it was not credible that he would not  have  known  the
    nature of their activities and the use to  which  the  funds  which  he
    raised were being put.  At paragraph 49 he said:

         "He has adduced a version of the Sri Lankan Gazette  version  which
         names him and I give that  document  weight,  but  the  weight  and
         reliability must be  considered  in  the  round  with  all  of  the
         evidence in the case".

 8. The judge accepted the appellant's role within the LTTE as a fundraiser
    but did not consider that  he  could  bring  himself  within  the  risk
    categories set out in the country guidance case of GJ and Others (post-
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319.   He  did  not
    accept that the appellant had ever been  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

 9. The judge concluded that the appellant would not be at risk  on  return
    to Sri Lanka and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The Grounds of Application

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law in failing to  direct  himself  where  the  burden  of
    proving Article  1F(b)  falls  and  misapplied  relevant  case  law  in
    relation to the application of exclusion clauses.

11. Permission to appeal was refused on both those grounds.

12. Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson, on 8th October 2019, did grant  permission
    on the final ground, namely that the judge had failed to  make  any  or
    adequate findings in relation to the claimed  risk  on  return  on  the
    basis of the appellant's prominent role within the TCC.  The  appellant
    had claimed to be at risk on return to Sri Lanka as  a  result  of  the
    TCC's proscription and the new  emergency  laws  of  22nd  April  2019,
    separate from any risk he might face as a result of his  membership  of
    the LTTE.

Consideration as to whether there is a Material Error of Law

13. Mr McVeety defended the determination.  He acknowledged that the  judge
    had not considered the appellant's membership and role within  the  TCC
    per se but submitted that there was no evidence to show that membership
    of that organisation created a distinct risk  from  membership  of  the
    LTTE.  The judge had properly applied the country guidance case  of  GJ
    and concluded that, since the appellant has done nothing within the Sri
    Lankan diaspora to promote the Tamil cause since  2008,  he  could  not
    establish that the authorities in Sri Lanka would have any interest  in
    him in any event.

14. I am, however, persuaded by Ms Jegarajah's argument that the fact  that
    the judge did not address or engage with her argument that the TCC is a
    distinct organisation and accordingly any risk to the appellant  should
    have been assessed.  I  accept  her  submission  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    government's attitude towards those involved in diaspora activities  is
    nuanced, and  the  fact  that  the  government  proscribes  a  host  of
    different organisations, proscriptions which are reassessed  from  time
    to time, sometimes lifted, sometimes  re-imposed,  indicates  that  the
    government does not have the broad-brush attitude suggested by both the
    respondent and the Immigration Judge.

15. Moreover, the landscape in Sri Lanka  has  clearly  changed  since  the
    Tribunal made its decision in GJ,  not only in relation to proscription
    but also the issuing of the new emergency  regulations  on  22nd  April
    2019.  I therefore conclude that the judge's error in not engaging with
    those arguments is material.

Disposal

16. The judge's decision is set aside.

17. The underlying facts, so far as the appellant's historic activities are
    concerned, are not in dispute.  The question to be decided  is  whether
    those activities would make the appellant a person of interest  to  the
    authorities  today.   Accordingly,  this  matter  is  referred  to  the
    Principal Resident Judge who will decide whether  this  is  a  suitable
    case for a panel of Upper Tribunal  Judges  to  decide.  The  case   is
    transferred to London.

18. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 27 January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
