

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03912/2019


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2020                           |On 27 February 2020           |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                       MOHAMMED TOFEEK AZIZ ALBARZINJI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Greer instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. On 25 September 2019 the Upper Tribunal found error  of  law  in  a
        decision of a judge of the First-Tier Tribunal which was set aside.
        The matter comes back before the Upper Tribunal  to  enable  it  to
        substitute a decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 29  November  1989.  The
        appellant's nationality, ethnicity as an Iraqi Kurd, date of birth,
        home  city  of  Kirkuk,  concession   made   by   the   appellant's
        representative that there is no issue relating to  the  appellant's
        ability to obtain his original CSID or replacement CSID  to  enable
        him to travel safely to the IKR, and his religious sect as a  Sunni
        Muslim, are all preserved findings.
     3. The core the appellant's claim is a fear on return to Iraq of being
        persecuted or ill treated as a victim of an honour crime.  He  also
        expressed a fear of ISIS.
     4. The appellant provided an initial bundle dated 17 May 2019 which he
        seeks to rely upon in the proceedings before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
        together with a supplementary bundle containing additional  country
        information including a copy of the recent  country  guidance  case
        relating to Iraq of SMO [2019] UKUT 00400.




Discussion



     5. During the course of preliminary discussions it was discovered that
        a supplementary bundle had not reached the Upper Tribunal file. The
        Senior Presenting Officer had received an e-mail from Mr Greer that
        morning shortly before the hearing attaching a copy.  It  was  said
        the supplementary bundle contained  photographs  of  the  appellant
        standing outside the Iraqi embassy to support his  claim  he  could
        not obtain a replacement CSID although Mr Greer was advised that it
        is a preserved finding from the First-Tier Tribunal as noted above.
     6. Mr Greer then claimed his instructing solicitors had not  seen  the
        error of law finding following which a copy of that  on  the  Upper
        Tribunal was provided to the  parties.  Both  confirmed  they  were
        ready to proceed.
     7. At [61] of the First-Tier Tribunal judgement it is written:


             61.  I am grateful to Mr Greer who very properly  informed  me
                  that there  was  no  issue  relating  to  the  Appellant's
                  ability to obtain his original CSIDs or a replacement CSID
                  to enable him to travel safely to the IKR if he  is  found
                  not to be credible  in  the  core  aspect  of  his  claim,
                  namely, that he is at risk  of  being  the  victim  of  an
                  honour crime on return to Iraq.


     8. The  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  in  his  supplementary
        statement dated 15 January 2020 relating to this issue  is  in  the
        following terms:


             4.   I went to the Iraqi Consulate in Manchester on 14 January
                  2020 at about 2 PM following what the judge asked me. This
                  was  in  order  to  see  if  they  could  provide  me  any
                  replacement documents to prove who I am.
             5.   Unfortunately, the staff said they could not help me with
                  this as I could not prove who I am without any documents.


     9. It is not made out the appellant took any  documents  with  him  to
        establish  his   identity   or   provided   information   following
        questioning. This also appears to be an action taken as a result of
        a question the appellant was asked in the appeal before the  First-
        Tier Tribunal. That has been overtaken by  the  preserved  findings
        following the Judge taking all relevant aspects into account.
    10. The issue, as before, is whether the appellant's  claim  to  be  at
        risk on return of an honour killing, or for any  other  reason,  is
        credible.
    11. The appellant confirmed  in  his  original  statement  that  he  is
        content to rely on the basis of his asylum claim as set out at [11]
        of the respondent's reasons for refusal  letter  which  is  in  the
        following terms:


                  A. You are Muhamad Tufrk Aziz, born on  28  November  1989
                     and are a national of Iraq.
                  B. You are Kurdish.
                  C. You fear your cousins and uncle in Iran because you had
                     premarital sex with your  cousin  Iman,  who  you  were
                     engaged to.
                  D. During this  time,  you  also  secretly  married  to  a
                     Christian named Mira.
                  E. You informed your uncle after some time  that  you  did
                     not wish to marry Iman.  At  first  he  accepted  this,
                     however, after he found out  you  had  premarital  sex,
                     your uncle and your cousin beat you and they threatened
                     to kill you, unless you marry her.
                  F. You fled Kirkuk to Mosul where Mira lived.  Whilst  you
                     were there you were captured by Daesh for being married
                     to a Christian.
                  G. You were detained by Daesh for 15 - 16 days, before you
                     bribed a guard for your release.
                  H. You returned to your village  in  Kirkuk,  however  you
                     were targeted by Daesh by letters and you were shot  at
                     3 times.
                  I. You decided to leave Iraq because you are at risk  from
                     both your uncle and Daesh.
                  J. On return you fear return to Kirkuk as ISIS still  have
                     underground cells  and  you  fear  return  to  Iraq  in
                     general is your uncle could locate you and kill you.

    12. The situation in Iraq so far as ISIL (Daesh) is concerned  is  that
        even though there are still pockets of this group in parts of  Iraq
        they do not have the civilian or military presence they had in  the
        past in Kirkuk or such areas. It is a finding in SMO that following
        the military defeat of ISIL in 2017 and the resulting reduction  in
        levels of direct and indirect violence, any ongoing conflict is not
        such that there are substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
        civilian returning to Iraq,  solely  on  account  of  his  presence
        there, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
        violence amounting to serious harm within the scope of Article  (c)
        of the Qualification Directive.
    13. It is not made out the appellant will  be  returned  to  the  small
        mountainous area identified in SMO where ISIL continue to  exercise
        control and where the risk of indiscriminate violence is such as to
        engage Article 15(c).
    14. Whilst it is recognised in SMO that the situation in  the  formally
        contested areas, including Kirkuk is complex, whether the return of
        an individual to such an area would be contrary to article  15  (C)
        is fact sensitive.
    15. There is no credible evidence that the appellant  has  demonstrated
        opposition to or criticism of the GOI, the KRG  or  local  security
        actors, there is insufficient evidence to establish  the  appellant
        is a member of a national ethnic or religious group which is either
        in the minority in the area in question (Kirkuk) or not in de facto
        control of that area.  The appellant is not  an  LGBTI  individual.
        The appellant has not established he does not  conform  to  Islamic
        mores and is not a wealthy or westernised individual sufficient  to
        place him at risk on return. The  appellant  is  not  a  member  of
        humanitarian  or  medical  staff   or   associated   with   Western
        organisations or security forces, is an adult male with no evidence
        of disabilities. I find he has failed to make out  a  profile  that
        will place him at risk in light of  the  current  country  guidance
        caselaw.
    16. The appellant also fails to establish that he is likely  on  return
        to face destitution or living conditions sufficient to give rise to
        a breach of article 3 ECHR.
    17. SMO provides guidance on documentation and  feasibility  of  return
        and in relation to the Civil Status Identity Document, noting  that
        an appellant can be returned to Iraq using an expired  passport  or
        Laissez passer. It has not been shown the  appellant  will  not  be
        able to secure the means to return on this basis.
    18. SMO repeats that it remains the case that an individual is expected
        to attend the local CSID office in order to  obtain  a  replacement
        document and that all such offices have now reopened. At 383 of SMO
        it is found: "...An Iraqi national in the UK would be able to apply
        for a CSID in the way explained  in  AA  (Iraq)  and,  if  one  was
        successfully obtained, we find that it would be acceptable evidence
        of the individual's identity throughout Iraq.  Notwithstanding  the
        plan to replace the old CSID system with the INID  by  the  end  of
        2019, we accept what was said by EASO (in February  2019)  and  the
        Danish Immigration Service and Landinfo (in  November  2018),  that
        implementation was delayed and that still being used in  Iraq,  and
        that it continues to be issued in those parts  of  the  country  in
        which the INID terminals have not  been  rolled  out.   Given  this
        evidence, and the fact that the CSID has been a  feature  of  Iraqi
        society for so long, we do not accept that there will come  a  time
        at the end of this  year  when  the  CSID  suddenly  ceases  to  be
        acceptable as proof of identity."
    19. At Para 381 of SMO: ....."In  the  event  that  an  individual  CSA
        office has no terminal, the position is obviously different and  it
        is individuals who are registered at those  offices  who  might  be
        able to secure a CSID by the use of a proxy.  We have  no  list  of
        the CSA offices which do and do not have an INID terminal, however,
        and any such list would be quickly outdated as the  INID  programme
        continues to expand.  It will consequently  be  for  an  individual
        appellant who does not have an CSID or an INID to establish on  the
        lower standard that they cannot obtain a  CSID  by  the  use  of  a
        proxy, whether from the UK or on arrival in Baghdad."
    20. The appellant was cross-examined extensively  in  relation  to  his
        claim to have no contact with family members in  Iraq.  He  claimed
        his last contact was some 5 to 6 years ago when  he  spoke  to  his
        mother when he was in Turkey. The appellant confirmed that when  he
        last spoke to her his family were in  the  family  home  in  Kirkuk
        although claimed not to know where they are  now.  When  asked  why
        there had been no contact and why he had not tried to find them the
        appellant claimed he did not want them to know  where  he  was  and
        that he did not want anyone to know.
    21. The appellant claimed not to know the number  of  the  family  book
        registration of the family in Iraq but confirmed that he knew where
        his father was born, his father's date of birth and place of  birth
        and his grandfather's name; although claimed not to know where  his
        grandfather was born. When the appellant was asked  what  prevented
        him contacting his father and family he  replied,  "my  life".  The
        appellant also confirmed he had  no  problems  with  his  immediate
        family, but the  problem  was  with  his  cousin  and  that  if  he
        contacted his father his uncle would know.
    22. The appellant claims to face a real risk on return from ISIL which
        I do not find is a claim that he has substantiated, during his time
        in Iraq or since, especially in light of the fact this group has no
        remaining position of strength as it did previously in Iraq.
    23. The appellant's alleged he had a secret wedding  with  a  Christian
        girl.  The appellant claimed that he had married in secret when the
        requirement under Iraqi law is that there  must  be  at  least  two
        witnesses present for a valid marriage. When asked who attended the
        wedding he claimed that two friends came indicating that  it  could
        not have been secret. The appellant claimed that  he  said  it  was
        secret as his family did not know.
    24. The appellant was asked where he got married which he stated was in
        court. When asked which court he was married in he  stated  it  was
        the marriage court whereas the requirement for a valid marriage  in
        Iraq requires the bride and groom in order  to  obtain  a  marriage
        certificate to appear personally in front of a judge of the  Social
        Status Court in order to submit an application  for  marriage.  The
        appellant did not refer to this court or the process despite having
        been given the opportunity to do so.
    25. The appellant was asked whether he had provided anything else  that
        the court requested to which he confirmed that he had been asked to
        take a blood test which he went to the hospital the  day  after  to
        have taken and provided the results. Requirements of valid marriage
        are that after submitting an application for marriage  the  parties
        must obtain a medical examination per instructions from  the  court
        clerk and that after obtaining a medical  examination  the  parties
        returned to the Social Status Court with  their  two  witnesses.  A
        fundamental requirement for there to be a valid marriage in Iraq is
        that the parties possess the  capacity  to  marry  and  so  require
        confirmation that they have the requisite mental capacity to  which
        the appellant made no reference.
    26. When asked his age and that of his alleged wife the  appellant  was
        unable to confirm how old his wife was, stating only that  she  was
        just over 18. The appellant, if he had credibly married, would have
        been aware of this fact as it is a requirement for the  parties  to
        confirm that there are over the age of 18 to be able to marry.
    27. Despite claiming to have married the  appellant  appeared  to  know
        very little about the proper procedure  that  he  would  have  been
        required  to  have  gone  through  to  have  secured   a   marriage
        certificate.
    28. It is also noted from the evidence given to the First-Tier Tribunal
        that this is an interfaith marriage with no evidence being given by
        the appellant that his alleged Christian  bride  had  converted  to
        Islam to enable the marriage to be valid.
    29. The appellant also has failed to  produce  a  marriage  certificate
        despite claiming one was issued by the court  in  Kirkuk  and  gave
        evidence leading the First-Tier Tribunal Judge to  infer  that  the
        marriage was attended by a close friend, Umid.  The  appellant  now
        claims two friends attended and on the basis of the  account  given
        earlier the marriage would not been  valid  as  two  witnesses  are
        required.
    30. The appellant's account of being arrested by ISIL having married  a
        Christian yet not  being  killed  or  suffering  horrendous  injury
        appears contrary to the country guidance material and  evidence  in
        the public domain regarding interfaith marriages and the  treatment
        of those involved with same,  especially  with  those  who  do  not
        follow the beliefs of ISIL.
    31. In relation to the appellant's claim to  have  been  able  to  have
        sexual relationships with his cousin as a teenager, the  person  he
        claims he did not like or want to marry,  the  appellant  fails  to
        establish how this would have been possible in light of the  strict
        Islamic rules regarding dating and whether he would have undertaken
        such un-Islamic behaviour in light of the  risks  that  would  have
        been presented.
    32. I find there is merit in Mr Dimuycz submission that the appellant's
        alleged claim to face a real risk from family members as  a  result
        of premarital intercourse and subsequent marrying a Christian, from
        his uncles and cousins, is a  fabrication.  Despite  the  appellant
        being fully aware that the only accepted fact was Iraqi nationality
        and Kurdish ethnicity and that the respondent rejected his claim to
        have been forced to marry a cousin or to have received threats from
        his uncle and cousins, to have been married to Mira or to have been
        targeted by ISIL in the refusal letter [59 -  60],  since  9  April
        2019, he has failed to substantiate his claim to establish that  he
        is a credible witness.
    33. There is no credible evidence the appellant faces a real risk  from
        any member of his family. It is not made  out  that  his  claim  is
        credible. It is not made out the appellant  will  not  be  able  to
        obtain a replacement CSID if he is unable to  obtain  the  original
        from home with the assistance of his family.
    34. The appellant claims to have made no attempt to contact his  family
        who remained in the family home.  It is not established he does not
        have a male relative in Iraq or that the offices he or  they  would
        approach to obtain a CSIDs would not be able  to  provide  one  for
        him. The appellant failed  to  establish  that  he  is  a  reliable
        witness. As Mr Greer accepted in such circumstances, with the claim
        not being accepted as being credible including his claim not to  be
        able obtain the CSID which he stated was at home with  his  parents
        in the original appeal, then he must fail.
    35. The submission the appellant has no evidence that  he  can  contact
        his family in Iraq is noted but he has not  established  he  cannot
        contact his family and his claim to do so has to  be  treated  with
        caution in light of the other adverse credibility findings made.
    36. I find the appellant has failed to substantiate his claim. I do not
        find the  appellant  a  credible  witness.  I  find  that  bar  the
        appellant's nationality and ethnicity very little else he claims to
        be true actually is. I find the appellant can obtain a  replacement
        CSIDs and Mr Greer was right  to  inform  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
        there was no issue concerning this matter if the appellant was  not
        credible in relation to the core aspect of  the  case.  That  is  a
        specific reference to the appellant's claim to  face  a  real  risk
        from family members as a result of premarital relationships and his
        marriage to a Christian woman both of which are found to be  false.
        The family members in Iraq will be  able  to  provide  support  and
        assistance to enable him to reinstate himself in Iraq.
    37. I find the appellant is no more than a  failed  asylum  seeker  who
        sought  to  rely  upon  a  made-up  claim  to  secure  a  grant  of
        international protection, which has not been found to be  credible.
        The appeal is dismissed on both protection and human rights grounds
        as a result.

Decision

    38. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    39. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 24 February 2020












