
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03688/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                            |On 5 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              Douglas Mayombwe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes, Counsel instructed by Greater
Manchester
     Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In response to a decision made  by  the  respondent  on  1  March  2018
    refusing his protection claim the  appellant,  a  national  of  Uganda,
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision sent on 1 May 2018,
    Judge  Davies  of  that  Tribunal  dismissed  his  appeal.   Like   the
    respondent the judge did not accept that  the  appellant  had  given  a
    credible account of being gay and being at risk on return to Uganda for
    that reason.

2.   The grounds  mount  a  four-pronged  attack  on  the  judge's  decision
    contending that he erred  in:  (1)  his  treatment  of  the  supporting
    witness evidence in the case by failing to consider it  in  the  round;
    (2) in his consideration of  the  content  of  the  evidence  given  by
    supporting  witnesses  whose  evidence  was  not  challenged   by   the
    respondent; (3) in conflating the  concept  of  sexuality  with  sexual
    activity, and  (4)  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  all  his
    findings. I record  my  gratitude  to  the  representatives  for  their
    excellent submissions:-

3.   Ground 1 is right at the level of principle to identify that  "[i]t  is
    an error of approach to come to a negative  assessment  of  credibility
    and then ask whether that assessment is displaced  by  other  material"
    (AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123).  That is binding authority  on
    me.  However, I do not accept that the judge committed this error.  The
    principal paragraph in which the judge is said to have  gone  wrong  is
    paragraph 44:

         "44. The sole issue in the case was whether the Appellant  is  gay.
             The burden of proof is on the Appellant to the lower standard.
              There are significant credibility  issues  arising  from  the
             inconsistency of his account, including the delay in  claiming
             asylum despite that being the stated purpose of his travel  to
             the  UK.   The  Appellant  has  produced  supporting   witness
             evidence including some oral evidence.  Even taking account of
             the  lower  standard,  I  am  not  able  to  find   that   the
             corroborative evidence produced  offsets  the  damage  to  the
             Appellant's  credibility  caused  by  his  own   accounts   at
             different times.  I have had no evidence, even a letter,  from
             an ex-boyfriend in the UK."

    But in the penultimate sentence the judge does not say he  has  already
    reached a negative assessment of credibility but only that  the  damage
    done to his  credibility  by  shortcomings  identified  earlier  (which
    included that it was "riddled with inconsistencies" (paragraph 34)  and
    contained "numerous discrepancies" (see paragraph  35))  could  not  be
    offset by the corroborative evidence.  That language is consistent with
    what he undertook to do in paragraph 10,  namely  "take  account  of  a
    variety of disparate pieces of evidence" and also in paragraph  18:  "I
    took account of all the evidence".  That is to say that in my judgement
    the language used in paragraph  44  reflects,  a  proper  balancing  of
    considerations and the fact that the judge found the negative  pull  of
    the other shortcomings in the appellant's  account  too  strong  to  be
    overcome or  be  "counter-weight[ed]"  (to  use  the  judge's  term  in
    paragraph 36) by the corroborative evidence.

4.   As regards (2), it is correct that the  respondent  did  not  in  terms
    challenge the evidence of the  supporting  witnesses  and  it  is  also
    correct that some of this evidence did not rely on what  the  appellant
    had told the witnesses but on their  own  direct  observations  of  the
    appellant.   However,  the  reasons  why   the   judge   rejected   the
    corroborative evidence were not based solely  on  his  assessment  that
    they relied solely on what the appellant told them but on:

    (i)  failure to attend and be  cross-examined  (paragraphs  38  and  39
         regarding E Kiyemba's letter and S Comley's letter of support);

    (ii) lack of specificity (paragraph 40 from P Judge);

    (iii)    lack of reasons given for the witness's  assessment  that  the
         appellant was gay (paragraph 41, P Judge);

    (iv) the likelihood in light of the evidence  as  a  whole,  which  the
         witness did not have the benefit of, that the  witness  relied  too
         much on what the appellant told him (paragraph 42, Mr Jones).

    I consider these reasons for  attaching  only  limited  weight  to  the
    corroborative evidence were within the range  of  reasonable  response,
    even in relation to the evidence of Ms  Jones.   On  the  latter's  own
    evidence, it was an important feature of his own  assessment  that  the
    appellant  was  gay  that  the  appellant  had  told  him   about   two
    relationships.  It was open to the judge to find at paragraph  45  that
    this evidence also reflected a somewhat stereotypical view of  how  gay
    people behave.

5.   Ground 3 is right to draw attention  to  decision-makers  understanding
    that sexual orientation is essentially  about  sexual  identity  rather
    than sexual activity, that is something highlighted both  by  the  Home
    Office API on "Sexual orientation and asylum claims" and by the UKSC in
    HJ (Iran) and the CJEU in A, B and C.  However, I do not consider  that
    the judge conflated the two.  Certainly, the judge did  pay  particular
    attention to the appellant's claims about sexual relationships when  he
    was a boy and subsequently; but that was because that  these  formed  a
    major  part  of  the  appellant's  own  claim  to  be  of  gay   sexual
    orientation.  The judge clearly understood that the  appellant's  claim
    to be gay also encompassed matters of a non-sexual nature such  as  the
    appellant's  feelings  (paragraph  21),  who  he  felt   attracted   to
    (paragraph 22); and his experience  of  dancing  (paragraphs  22,  26).
    Furthermore, the judge recognised that the fact that the appellant  had
    a sexual relationship did not necessarily mean  he  identified  as  gay
    (see paragraphs 24-25).

6.   With respect I find ground 4 a mere makeweight.  The  point  the  judge
    made in paragraph 31 was that he could  not  see  why  the  appellant's
    employer would pay for a visa application for another country  "if  the
    Appellant  was  thought  to  be   attending   a   legitimate   business
    conference".  The fact that it  is  common  place  that  employers  use
    agents does not mean that the judge erred in finding it  surprising  in
    this case, particularly given that the application  contained  untruths
    and the appellant had not established  the  employer  was  ignorant  of
    this. In  any  event,  it  simply  cannot  be  said  that  the  judge's
    assessment of this matter had any material bearing on  the  outcome  of
    his assessment of credibility

Notice of Decision

7.   For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially
    err in law and accordingly his decision must stand.

8.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed
             [pic]
                                    Date: 25 October 2018
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
