
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03840/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th and 6th March 2019                   |On 10 May 2019                 |
|Written submissions on the 12th March 2019  |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                                     and
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     IZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss B. Asanovic, Counsel instructed by Lawrence and
                    Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    THIS DECISION  AND  REASONS  IS  TO  BE  SERVED  UPON  THE  APPELLANT'S
    SOLICITORS, NOT ON THE APPELLANT DIRECT.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

Background:

      1. On 28th July 2015 IZ made a claim for international protection.  He
         was interviewed, and his  claim  refused  by  the  respondent.  His
         statutory appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed by First-
         tier Tribunal  Judge  Adio  for  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 24th February 2017. He  was  refused  permission  to
         appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  that  decision  being  quashed  on
         judicial review, following which permission to appeal  was  granted
         by the Upper Tribunal. For reasons set out in a decision made by Mr
         Justice Lane and Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds,  promulgated  on  21st
         November 2017, the Tribunal found an error of law in  the  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal judge such that  the  decision  was  set
         aside to be remade. There is no extant appeal based on the  refusal
         of recognition as a refugee; the appeal is against the  refusal  of
         his Article 3 claim for international protection.

      2. At the commencement of the hearing, the  parties  agreed  that  the
         issues to be addressed by us, to which the evidence and submissions
         were directed, are as follows:

          i) Does detention of  a  gay  man  in  a  Lithuanian  prison  for
             convicted prisoners result in Article 3 prohibited treatment;

         ii) Does detention of a sex offender in a  Lithuanian  prison  for
             convicted prisoners result in Article 3 prohibited treatment;

        iii) Does detention of a person with mental health  problems  in  a
             Lithuanian prison for convicted prisoners result in Article  3
             prohibited treatment;

         iv) Does detention of a person with all three characteristics in a
             Lithuanian prison result in Article 3 prohibited treatment;

          v) Does detention in segregation on conviction result in  Article
             3 prohibited treatment.

      3. Various directions were  made  which,  in  significant  part,  were
         either not complied with by the parties or complied with very late.
         No reason or satisfactory explanation was offered to  us  for  such
         non-compliance.  The  appellant's  solicitors  were   notified   in
         directions made on 10th July 2018  that  the  Tribunal  was  to  be
         notified in writing of any special measures that were  required  on
         the basis of the  appellant's  asserted  vulnerability.  None  were
         notified save that Ms Asanovic stated at the  commencement  of  the
         hearing that if the  appellant  gave  oral  evidence,  regular  and
         frequent breaks were requested. We agreed  that  if  the  appellant
         gave oral evidence, he would be treated as a vulnerable witness and
         breaks given.

      4. Eventually we were provided with a bundle of documents amounting to
         1307 pages, some of which were provided during the  course  of  the
         hearing.  In  so  far  as  our  attention  was  drawn  to  specific
         documents, we have referred to these in our decision.  We  have  of
         course had regard to all of the material, whether we make  specific
         mention of it or not.

      5. We were provided with a  bundle  of  authorities  and,  during  the
         course of the hearing, we were also  handed  AM  (Zimbabwe)  [2018]
         EWCA Civ 64 and a decision of Westminster Magistrates Court  Zuolys
         dated 12th October 2018. Ms Asanovic objected to the production  of
         this latter case, submitting  that  it  was  not  binding  or  even
         persuasive  in  our  decision-making  process.  We   admitted   the
         decision, noting that her objection could be developed  further  in
         submissions if she wished to pursue it, but that we were aware that
         as a decision of a Magistrates Court we were not bound  by  it  (or
         indeed the decision of the High Court in the extradition appeal  of
         IZ).

      6. Despite her initial indication to the contrary, Ms Asanovic  stated
         that the appellant would not be giving oral evidence  and  that  no
         special measures were required for  the  duration  of  the  hearing
         because of the appellant's  vulnerable  status.  Ms  Asanovic  then
         decided to call IZ to give oral evidence, which he  gave  with  the
         assistance of an interpreter, after which we heard  from  Professor
         Katona and Professor Morgan. IZ was cross examined  by  Mr  Clarke;
         there was no re-examination and we did not have  any  questions  of
         the appellant. No concerns were raised by Ms Asanovic  and  we  are
         satisfied that the appellant's evidence was  freely  given  without
         any difficulties.

      7. In reaching our findings on the evidence we have borne in mind  the
         Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010:  Child,  Vulnerable
         Adult and Sensitive Appellant ("the guidance note")  and  also  the
         Practice Direction, First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable
         Adult and Sensitive Witnesses.

      8. We emphasised to the appellant  that  he  was  free  to  leave  the
         hearing room at any time. He remained in the  hearing  room  during
         Professor Katona's evidence and  for  part  of  Professor  Morgan's
         evidence.  We  indicated  our  surprise,  just  before  Mr   Clarke
         commenced his closing submissions, that the appellant had  remained
         in the hearing during Professor Katona's  evidence  which  included
         considerable discussion of possible suicide risk. We were surprised
         that neither Ms Asanovic nor Professor  Katona  sought  to  discuss
         with the appellant the advisability of him remaining in the hearing
         room during that evidence. Ms Asanovic confirmed  she  would  again
         discuss the matter of him remaining during submissions. He left the
         hearing room during Mr Clarke's submissions.

      9. At the request of Ms Asanovic, with no objection from Mr Clarke, we
         confirmed that our decision and reasons would be  served  upon  his
         solicitors rather on him direct. The appellant was aware  of  these
         arrangements  so  that  service  upon  his  solicitors  only   will
         constitute good and effective service of the decision of the  Upper
         Tribunal.

     10. We received skeleton arguments from both representatives and  heard
         oral submissions from Mr Clarke but, because of the  time,  it  was
         agreed that we would receive written submissions from Ms  Asanovic.
         She agreed to send her written submissions to Mr Clarke who  agreed
         to indicate whether he wished to reply and if so whether a  written
         response was adequate, or whether he wished  us  to  reconvene.  We
         subsequently received his confirmation that he did not wish to make
         any response, written or oral.

     11. For some extraordinary unexplained reason, Ms Asanovic agreed  with
         Professor Katona that, prior to his oral evidence, he would talk to
         the appellant to make observations on the appellant's oral evidence
         that had been given earlier that day. She did not provide Professor
         Katona with a  transcript  of  IZ's  evidence  given  earlier  that
         morning that had led to her arranging that discussion but gave  him
         her oral summary of that evidence. There was  no  interpreter.  She
         remained in the consulting room during that discussion. She did not
         notify either Mr Clarke or the  Tribunal  that  she  proposed  that
         Professor Katona have a consultation with the appellant and nor did
         she agree what information Professor Katona would be provided  with
         about the appellant's evidence. Professor Katona  was  not  present
         during  the  appellant's  evidence.  Although  there   is   nothing
         objectionable per se in an expert  witness  having  a  consultation
         with an appellant, in this case in these circumstances we  consider
         this to be an error of judgment. She  subsequently  apologised  for
         what she accepted was  an  error  of  judgement  on  her  part  for
         permitting such an exchange.

    Background to IZ's claim

     12. The background to the appellant's claim is not disputed and  is  as
         follows:

     13. IZ is a Lithuanian citizen born on 25th February 1977.  He  is  gay
         and was,  until  recently,  in  a  relationship  in  the  UK.  That
         relationship has now broken down.

     14. In 1999 he was assaulted while walking  in  a  street  in  Vilnius,
         where he lived and worked,  by  individuals  who  also  abused  him
         verbally as being gay. He did not report that attack to the police.

     15. In 2007[1] IZ came to the UK for three months. In unchallenged oral
         evidence before us, IZ said he was "not  an  open  person"  and  he
         hoped to meet someone in the UK. He returned to  Lithuania  because
         his parents, who are disabled, needed his financial assistance  and
         he found communication difficult in the UK.

     16. After his return to Lithuania, he was employed  as  a  train  guard
         which included monitoring the sleeping section  of  the  train.  In
         2010 he was charged with sexual assault on a sleeping passenger  on
         21st December 2010. He left Lithuania on 10th June 2011,  returning
         in January 2012 for his trial.  He  returned  to  the  UK  on  15th
         January 2012 prior to sentencing.

     17. He was convicted of unlawfully performing oral sex  on  a  sleeping
         passenger and the Third District Court of  Vilnius  City  sentenced
         him to 1-year imprisonment on 24th January 2012. His appeal to  the
         Vilnius County Court on  26th  April  2012  was  dismissed  in  his
         absence. His appeal to the Lithuanian Supreme Court  was  dismissed
         on 11 December 2012. He continues to deny he committed the  offence
         for which he was convicted. There is no submission before  us  that
         the  judicial  system  of  Lithuania  is  such  as  to  render  the
         conviction unsafe.

     18. A European Arrest Warrant was issued by a judge of  Vilnius  County
         Court on 5th March 2014 and certified on 10th April  2014.  He  was
         arrested in the UK on 9th  October  2014  and,  after  a  contested
         hearing,  District  Judge  Snow  ordered  his  extradition  on  2nd
         February 2015. The decision reached was that there was no risk that
         the appellant would be held in conditions that would breach Article
         3 of the  ECHR.  His  appeal  against  that  order  was  heard  and
         dismissed by the Lord Chief Justice and Mr Justice Mitting on  14th
         July 2015 (reported at [2015] EWHC 2335)

    Appellant's evidence

     19. IZ said that his parents were still  alive,  and  he  continued  to
         support them financially by sending money. He said that  after  the
         trial and the publication of details in the  newspapers,  his  name
         was known, and his neighbours became aware of him and that  he  was
         not strong enough to be able to handle that. When asked if  he  had
         lived openly in Lithuania as  a  gay  man  and  whether  he  had  a
         boyfriend he said that he only had sex partners; he didn't go  from
         "man to man" and felt safer meeting up with married men. When asked
         whether he wanted to live openly as a gay man in Lithuania he  said
         he wanted to kill himself because of the life he was  living.  This
         reflects what he said in his 2016 witness statement, namely that as
         long ago as 10 years  previously,  he  had  thought  of  committing
         suicide. He said he had not left Lithuania earlier because  he  had
         no offers of work or accommodation in the UK.

     20. In his witness statement dated 7th  February  2017  (a  handwritten
         letter from  him),  the  appellant  denied  that  he  committed  an
         offence; he says he was flirting with the man and it was  when  the
         man's companion woke up that he was accused of  sucking  the  man's
         penis. He denied he had been doing that. His  explanation  for  his
         previous statement that there had been consensual sex  was  because
         of a lack of interpreter and that his English was not perfect,  and
         he was often misunderstood. He  said  that  he  informed  Professor
         Katona of this.

     21. In his first witness statement made on 19th May 2016, taken by  his
         solicitors without an interpreter, in connection  with  his  asylum
         claim, IZ said that he would hide who he was  (this  was  taken  by
         both parties and by us to mean his sexuality) when  in  prison.  In
         his later witness statements and in oral evidence he said  that  he
         would disclose "who he was" because he took the  view  that  if  he
         were later "discovered" then he would be more humiliated than if he
         were open about his sexuality  to  begin  with.  He  said  in  oral
         evidence that if he were not in prison in Lithuania he  would  hide
         "who he was". There were  no  other  alterations  to  the  evidence
         relied upon in that witness statement.

     22. In his 2016 witness statement IZ said that that he had always lived
         a discreet life because of fear of being identified as gay and  the
         consequences but that  after  the  conviction  and  the  publicity,
         people now knew he was gay and "the situation had become  untenable
         for [him] with this crime". He resigned his employment in Lithuania
         on 25th May 2011 because "it became impossible for [him] to  remain
         there as people at work were pointing  fingers  at  [him]  all  the
         time". He confirms he has had  long  term  relationships  but  with
         married men  and  that  there  was  no  long-term  future  in  such
         relationships.

     23. In his 2016 witness statement he refers  to  having  mental  health
         problems, which he disclosed to the respondent  during  his  asylum
         interviews, which were undertaken with an interpreter  provided  by
         the respondent in July and November 2015.

    Medical evidence

     24. IZ's GP records have not been produced. There is a  record  in  the
         bundle of a "Patient Summary: Home  Visit  (problem  based)"  which
         refers to him declining voice mail messages on 18th August 2014, to
         him being newly registered "here" on 5th November 2015. The  record
         produced states there is no information recorded of active problems
         or patient plan. From  the  disclosed  record  it  states  "Last  5
         clinically relevant consultations" which record  the  appellant  as
         having previously tried Setraline  which  was  stopped  because  of
         adverse reaction and being prescribed Mirtazapine on 21st  December
         2015. There is reference to him having made  plans  as  to  how  he
         would harm himself (21st December 2015) and on 22nd  February  2016
         to feeling more positive and that his solicitor has told him he  is
         positive about a good outcome to the extradition hearing. There  is
         a record on 31st October 2016 "Due to  see  Prof  Katona  privately
         (Expert in Mind...)- unsure whether this is  a  psychiatrist.  They
         have requested a letter from patient's GP". There are no  other  GP
         records produced.

     25. There is no record in the GP notes  disclosed  that  the  appellant
         informed the GP of a previous suicide attempt in 2002/3  whilst  in
         Lithuania. A copy of any letter sent by the GP to Professor  Katona
         is not in the bundle. The GP records of the appellant's first visit
         to them and of any medical  notes  made,  other  than  as  recorded
         above, have not been produced.

    Professor Katona's written and oral evidence

     26. Professor  Katona  produced  written  reports  in  respect  of  the
         Appellant dated 12th November 2016 following an examination on  7th
         (or possibly 11th) November 2016; 18th May 2017 commenting upon the
         First-tier  Tribunal  decision;  1st  February  2018  following  an
         examination on 30th January  2018;  4th  July  2018  following  the
         examination on 30th January 2018 and a letter dated 4th March  2019
         responding to questions put to him by the respondent on an  unknown
         date. Although Professor Katona spoke with IZ in a conference  room
         at the Tribunal on 5th March 2019 in the presence of  Ms  Asanovic,
         we have placed no weight upon Professor Katona's  evidence  arising
         from  that  consultation,  if  that  is  what  it  was,  given  the
         inappropriate environment and conditions in which it took place.

     27. All consultations between the appellant and Professor  Katona  took
         place in English and  without  an  interpreter  present.  Professor
         Katona states in his first report that the appellant's English  was
         heavily accented, but he was able "to use his  clinical  skills  to
         elicit  a  clear  account  from  [the  appellant]   of   his   past
         experiences, current circumstances and  mental  symptoms".  In  his
         oral evidence, Professor Katona said that he would not say that the
         consultations were not difficult but that he, Professor Katona, had
         the skill to enable the consultations to proceed.  When  asked  why
         the appellant was prepared to come and see him but  would  not,  as
         described  in  his  various  reports,  seek  therapeutic  treatment
         elsewhere, Professor Katona said that the appellant was not seeking
         therapeutic assistance from him  and  that  the  appellant  had  no
         therapeutic expectation from the consultation; it was to prepare  a
         report for use by the solicitors and barrister.

     28. In  the  November  2016  report,  Professor  Katona  sets  out  the
         appellant's background as described to him  by  the  appellant.  He
         refers to the appellant's account that he had taken a large  number
         of his mother's tablets in about 2002/2003 after the  breakdown  of
         the first relationship he had which he felt  able  to  describe  as
         love. The appellant, according to what he  told  Professor  Katona,
         then vomited the tablets up and did not seek hospital treatment. He
         told Professor Katona that he had not "made any subsequent  suicide
         attempts" and had not had any  further  relationships  (other  than
         casual) because he had hoped to  resume  the  loving  relationship.
         Professor Katona records the appellant saying that if  returned  to
         Lithuania, he would kill himself by taking  tablets  with  alcohol.
         In this report Professor Katona  concludes  on  the  basis  of  his
         clinical  observation  of  the   appellant's   speech,   demeanour,
         appearance and symptoms, that the appellant

             "7.2. ... currently fulfils the criteria of the Diagnostic and
             Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders   ...   for   Major
             Depressive Episode ... In particular

                  7.2.1 He is low in mood most of the time

                  7.2.2 He has lost the capacity to enjoy

                  7.2.3 he feels tired and without energy most of the time

                  7.2.4 His sleep is disturbed - though less so since he has
                  been taking   antidepressants

                  7.2.5 he has thoughts of suicide and a specific plan

             7.3. ... also has many features (see below) suggestive of post-
             traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) although he  currently  falls
             just short of fulfilling DSM 5 criteria  for  Post  -Traumatic
             Stress Disorder (...)

                  7.3.1 He has experienced relevant stressors (two  episodes
                  of homophobic violence and the threat of  imprisonment  in
                  Lithuania where he is convinced he would be  subjected  to
                  severe homophobic ill-treatment).

                  7.3.2 He has intrusions phenomena (intrusive thoughts)

                  7.3.3 He has avoidance-related behaviour in  the  form  of
                  avoiding situations in which his tag (and  his  associated
                  difficulties) are revealed.

                  7.3.4 He has negative alterations in cognitions  and  mood
                  in the form of emotional numbness,  anhedonia  and  social
                  withdrawal

                  7.3.5 He has alterations in arousal and reactivity in  the
                  form of disturbed  sleep  but  does  not  have  any  other
                  symptoms  in  this  category.   This   may   reflect   the
                  tranquillizing/sedating  effect  of  the   anti-depressant
                  treatment he is currently taking

                  7.3.6 His symptoms have lasted for more than a month, have
                  functional significance to  the  extent  of  substantially
                  impeding his day-to-day activity and cannot in my clinical
                  opinion be explained in terms of medication, illicit drugs
                  or of other health problems.

             7.4. ... in my opinion he should be regarded as having PTSD as
             well as major depression  despite  not  quite  fulfilling  the
             relevant  diagnostic  criteria  (probably   because   of   the
             beneficial effects of antidepressant  treatment,  being  in  a
             safe place and having the structure and  distraction  provided
             by his two jobs) at the time I assessed him.

             7.5. In my clinical opinion [the appellant's]  depression  has
             been caused by multiple factors. These include his  separation
             from his immediate  family,  his  years  of  being  unable  to
             express his  sexuality  freely,  and  the  current  threat  of
             extradition to what he is certain will be a terrible fate. His
             PTSD is in my view cause[d] by more  specific  factors  -  his
             past experiences of homophobic assault and the threat  hanging
             over him of extradition to  what  he  is  certain  will  be  a
             terrible fate.

             ...

             8.3. I am aware that [the appellant] did not receive treatment
             for his mental symptoms until quite recently.  In  my  opinion
             this is largely a reflection of his sense of  relative  safety
             in the UK till he lost his appeal against extradition and then
             had his asylum claim refused. People with PTSD ....  are  also
             often reluctant to seek help because doing so would mean  that
             they were obliged to describe their traumatic experiences  and
             thereby  suffer  the  distress  associated   with   such   re-
             experiencing. Avoidance of such re-experiencing is a  hallmark
             of PTSD.

             9.1. ... NICE emphasises that psychological treatments  should
             be regarded as 'first-line' treatment and medication as second-
             line treatment.

             9.2. [The appellant] has so far made only a  limited  response
             to  anti-depressants  and  would  in  my  view  benefit   from
             psychological intervention. Unfortunately, [people  like  [the
             appellant]]  who  have  suffered  'interpersonal'  trauma  (ie
             following the deliberate  cruelty  of  others)  often  do  not
             respond well to brief trauma-focussed CBT and need much longer
             and more individually tailored psychotherapy  which  may  also
             need to be more prolonged.

             9.3. A sense of safety is a crucial requirement for  effective
             treatment of PTSD.

             ...

             10.1. [The appellant] made clear to me that he  was  convinced
             that, both because of the generally poor prison conditions  in
             Lithuania and (more crucially) because of  the  high  risk  he
             perceives of being subjected to homophobic discrimination  and
             attack, he would rather die  than  serve  his  sentence  in  a
             Lithuanian  prison.  He  views  prison  in  Lithuania  as   an
             environment in which he would be in extreme danger.

             10.2. ... His already high suicide risk would also increase.

             ...

             11.2. If he were forced to serve his  sentence  in  Lithuania,
             his risk of suicide would increase further. This would be  the
             case in the UK once he had lost all hope of being  allowed  to
             remain. It would also remain  very  high  during  the  removal
             process and once he was back in Lithuania. There  would  be  a
             further increase in risk once he was incarcerated in Lithuania
             (particularly  if  he  experienced  any   further   homophobic
             attacks).

             ...

             12.1. There is evidence that perceived discrimination  worsens
             psychological distress, and that the  effect  is  particularly
             marked where the perceived discrimination is related to sexual
             orientation...

             12.2. In my clinical opinion, [the  appellant's]  attempts  to
             hide his sexuality during his adolescent and  adult  years  in
             Lithuania has contributed significantly to his PTSD and  major
             depression symptoms."

     29. The reports dated 1st February 2018 and 4th July 2018 appear to  be
         virtually identical save that the later  report  includes  extracts
         from what Professor Katona describes as "recent GP  notes  relevant
         to his  mental  health."  Those  notes  themselves  have  not  been
         produced. The extracts describe a switch in medication and  then  a
         return to Mirtapazine. Professor Katona reiterates in these reports
         that the appellant would, in his view, benefit  from  psychological
         intervention but that a "sense of safety is a  crucial  requirement
         for effective psychological treatment...".  He  confirms  that  his
         conclusions on the impact of incarceration in  Lithuania  have  not
         changed since the 2016 report but that in  his  view  the  risk  of
         suicide if the appellant were  forced  to  serve  his  sentence  in
         Lithuania  has  increased  because  the  appellant  has  spoken  of
         hoarding tablets with a view to an overdose.

     30. Paragraph 3.5 of Professor Katona's report says

             "On 5th January 2018 Dr Anderson noted  that  [the  appellant]
             'says feels gen(erally) better on Mirtapazine' but that he was
             'tearful when relating the circumstances and stresses  he  has
             gone through'. He 'had been suicidal/not afraid  to  die'  but
             'the recent judge pronouncement has given him more  hope'.  Dr
             Anderson nonetheless explained to  [the  appellant]  that  '28
             tabs of mirtazapine [were] more appropriate than the requested
             56'.  This  indicates  Dr  Anderson's   concern   about   [the
             appellant's] risk of taking an overdose."

     31. In  response  to  written  questions  and  in  his  oral  evidence,
         Professor Katona drew attention to the appellant's stated intention
         that he would not seek psychological help, that  he  had  formed  a
         suicide plan if forced to return to Lithuania and that although

             "...  reasonable  precautions  such  as  removal   of   means,
             hospitalization and close or constant observation would reduce
             the risk to some extent  but  would  not  eliminate  it.  Such
             measures  do  not  address  the  underlying   cause   of   his
             suicidality (his subjective belief of the fate  in  store  for
             him) and would also be likely to increase his distress."

     32. Professor Katona said

             "... one of the things that research evidence  shows  is  that
             multiplicity of trauma makes the  likelihood  of  trauma  more
             likely. In the appellant's case it is not  just  two  discreet
             episodes of trauma but also  the  chronic  discrimination  for
             years and the fears  he  has  of  homophobic  assault/rape  in
             prison. It is the combination of  what  might  happen  in  the
             future".

     33. When asked about the appellant's coping strategies both now and  in
         the future, Professor Katona  referred  to  the  appellant  keeping
         himself busy, the decision to be open  about  his  sexuality  is  a
         coping strategy but that it would depend on  the  circumstances  he
         might find himself in.

     34. Professor Katona referred to the appellant feeling that he would be
         safe serving his sentence in the UK.  He  makes  reference  to  the
         appellant, on going into custody in the UK, identifying himself  as
         gay and being placed in a separate section in the prison.

     35. In answer to a question from us, Professor  Katona  said  that  the
         appellant has not engaged with psychological treatment; although he
         has  engaged  with  the  GP  to  the  extent  of  being  prescribed
         medication that is  a  much  lower  level  of  engagement  than  is
         required to engage with therapy. Nor,  he  said,  was  telling  him
         (Professor Katona) to be equated with a therapeutic relationship.

     36. Professor Katona drew on his extensive clinical experience that  it
         was not uncommon for individuals who have been  traumatised  to  be
         resistant to treatment; that the appellant  doesn't  want  to  talk
         because it brings reminders of "bad things" that have happened  and
         "bad things" that  will  happen.  Professor  Katona  confirmed  the
         appellant had not described any particular  specific  instances  of
         discrimination but that his understanding was that

             "... a lot of people who are gay  and  live  in  societies  in
             which being gay is not tolerated feel criticised/observed  all
             the time not necessarily because of what is actually happening
             but because of what they perceive...."

    Written and oral evidence of Professor Morgan

     37. Professor Morgan first wrote a report  in  connection  with  Prison
         Conditions and the appellant in 2014. That report was considered by
         the High Court - see below. On 11th August 2016,  Professor  Morgan
         emailed the appellant's solicitor and said that  he  had  no  basis
         before him to alter his views  as  expressed  in  that  report.  He
         brought to the  attention  of  the  solicitors  that  the  European
         Committee for the Prevention of Torture and  Inhuman  or  Degrading
         Treatment or Punishment ("CPT") was due to  visit  Lithuania  again
         during 2016. The CPT was set up under the Council of Europe and the
         European Convention on the Prevention of  Torture  and  Inhuman  or
         Degrading Treatment  or  Punishment  1989.  It  is  a  non-judicial
         preventative mechanism to prevent those deprived of  their  liberty
         from being exposed to torture and other ill-treatment.  To  achieve
         this aim, the CPT carry out periodic inspections every  four  years
         with additional ad hoc inspections where necessary.  CPT  delegates
         have unlimited access to places of detention and the right to  move
         inside such  places  without  restrictions;  they  interview  those
         deprived of their liberty in private and  communicate  freely  with
         anyone who  can  provide  information.  Cooperation  with  national
         authorities is at the heart of the CPT's work since the aim  is  to
         protect those deprived of their  liberty  rather  than  to  condemn
         states for abuses.

     38. Professor Morgan produced a further report, to  be  read  alongside
         his 2014 report, dated 2nd  March  2019  and  gave  oral  evidence.
         Professor Morgan'  evidence  was  impartial,  clear,  coherent  and
         plainly based upon his expert knowledge of custodial conditions  in
         Lithuania through his inspection work  together  with  his  broader
         experience of custodial conditions and the standards promulgated by
         key international human rights bodies. He stressed that the reports
         prepared  by  the  CPT  were  thorough  and   based   on   detailed
         examination, random interviews and independent analysis.

     39. Professor Morgan was asked to prepare a report on  the  basis  that
         the appellant was a gay man who had been convicted in  2012  for  a
         sexual offence against a man and had been sentenced to  12  months'
         imprisonment. Professor Morgan had not,  it  seems,  been  provided
         with all the documents in the case by  the  appellant's  solicitors
         but understood that the appellant suffered from PTSD and  would  be
         at high risk of  suicide  if  returned  to  Lithuania  and  prison;
         Professor Morgan read the appellant's witness statement.   We  have
         not been provided with a copy of the  letter  of  instructions  but
         from Professor Morgan's summary it seems that it was suggested that
         the appellant's "homosexuality will make  him  vulnerable  to  harm
         from fellow  prisoners  should  he  be  extradited  to  serve"  his
         sentence.

     40. Professor Morgan provided a very helpful summary of the methodology
         employed by the CPT: The CPT undertake periodic visits and if  they
         encounter areas/issues of concern they will identify them  and  say
         that improvements should be considered. They tend to return to  the
         location that caused  them  concern  to  see  whether  things  have
         improved. If they have not  improved  they  may  use  Article  8(5)
         European Convention for the Prevention of Torture  and  Inhuman  or
         Degrading Treatment or Punishment which is an immediate observation
         requiring quick response, because of  the  concerns  identified;  a
         time schedule may be imposed. It is a ratcheting up of pressure  on
         the basis of the evidence they have. The next step  is  high  level
         talks. There is not usually an inspection but, over 1-2 days, there
         are "serious meetings" with the responsible  members  during  which
         the CPT will set out their concerns and explain why  those  matters
         need to be addressed and solutions found. Those discussions are not
         generally published. Some countries publish the initial  report  as
         soon as it is received; some countries publish the report and their
         response to that report at the same time - as does Lithuania.   The
         high-level talks are the last step before  the  CPT  utilise  their
         last 'weapon' which is a public declaration. There have only been 6-
         8 in the history of the CPT where there is extensive  maltreatment.
         The timescale for a public declaration  can  vary  enormously;  for
         Turkey and Greece the public declarations were within a short  time
         of the warning - the high-level talks or an extreme report.

     41. In the case of Lithuania, the CPT first  carried  out  a  visit  of
         inspection to Lithuania in 2000 and has since carried out a further
         seven visits. The  CPT  visited  Lithuania  between  5th  and  15th
         September 2016. The Lithuanian Government's response to that report
         together with the report itself was published on 1st February 2018.
         Professor Morgan had been a member of earlier inspection visits  by
         the CPT but not that one. The CPT also visited  Lithuania  to  hold
         "High Level Talks" with Lithuanian Ministers and  senior  officials
         in April 2017. Professor Morgan states

             "4.4 ... The agenda for that meeting has not been divulged but
             we can reasonably infer from previous CPT reports on Lithuania
             what the CPT wished to discuss as matters of pressing  concern
             repeatedly raised in inspection visit reports.  Those  matters
             were extensively covered in my report of 29 December 2014  but
             can be confirmed by reference to the CPT report arising out of
             the Committees visit in September 2016 and since published.

             4.5 The CPT's concerns include: at the principal  prisons  for
             sentenced prisoners:

                o generally poor living conditions for  prisoners  in  large
                  dormitories not meeting the CPT  or  ECtHR  minimum  space
                  standards;

                o inadequate provision of food;

                o  insufficient  employment   or   other   positive   regime
                  activities for prisoners meaning that  a  high  proportion
                  are idle for much of the time;

                o too few staff for adequate prisoner supervision

                o dangerously high levels of inter-prisoner exploitation and
                  violence including sexual exploitation;

                o excessive use of force on prisoners by prison guards;

                o inadequate medical services, in particular the absence  of
                  psychiatric support."

     42. The CPT visited Lithuania again in 2018 and went to  the  principal
         prisons for convicted prisoners. Professor Morgan did not know  how
         that related to the high-level talks that were held in April  2017;
         the 2018 report has  not  yet  been  published.   Professor  Morgan
         addressed the Lithuanian Government's  response  to  the  2016  CPT
         report, stating inter alia

             "4.7 The Lithuanian authorities have  repeatedly  asserted  in
             their published  responses  to  CPT  reports  that  they  will
             shortly address the deficiencies identified by the CPT ...

             4.8  The  pleas  from  the  Lithuanian  authorities  in  their
             responses to CPT reports that plans  are  in  hand  to  remedy
             shortcomings has been a continuing and disappointing  refrain.
             For example, when the CPT first visited Lithuania in 2000, the
             Government responded to the  assessment  of  Lukiskes  Prison,
             Vilnius, the country's largest  and  principal  remand  prison
             (but  which  also  houses  lifers  and  some  other  sentenced
             prisoners) in which in 2008 the CPT found some  conditions  to
             be 'outrageous' and which could be said to amount  to  inhuman
             or degrading treatment

             ...

             4.9 In the Lithuanian Government's response to the CPT's  2016
             report it is stated that the problems of staff maltreatment of
             prisoners and the prevalence of inter-prisoner  violence  were
             being addressed through enhanced prison officer  training  and
             the introduction of 'dynamic security' methods. It is vital to
             understand what this might mean. The term dynamic security  is
             in a prison context used to refer to control and  surveillance
             reliant on  a  continuous  and  pervasive  staff  presence  of
             contact with prisoners - that is, Control through interaction.
             It follows that real dynamic security can only be  secured  by
             both the training and greatly increased staff numbers. Nowhere
             in the Government response to the CPT, however, are there hard
             data promising a commitment to greatly increased staff numbers
             and consequently incurring the substantially  increased  costs
             involved. For that reason, on the basis of past experience, it
             is reasonable to be sceptical that fundamental change will  be
             achieved, not least  because  the  problem  (inadequate  staff
             numbers)  and  the  outcome  (high  levels  of  inter-prisoner
             exploitation and violence) have been identified by the CPT for
             20 years now."

     43. Professor Morgan concludes in his report:

             "5.2 No great  confidence  can  be  placed  in  the  reformist
             Lithuanian Government responses  to  successive  CPT  reports,
             including those stated in 2016 with regard to  staff  training
             and the use  of  'dynamic  security'.  Provision  of  enhanced
             dynamic security would require a very substantial increase  in
             staff, which would be costly. It  is  precisely  on  budgetary
             grounds that the Lithuanian prison authorities have failed  to
             deliver the reforms promised and planned in the past."

     44. Professor Morgan elaborated on the  meaning  of  dynamic  security,
         which as a term of art  requires  significant  personnel  input  to
         detained prisoners. The Lithuanian government is working  with  the
         Norwegian government on that model. Professor  Morgan  acknowledged
         the Lithuanian authorities were willing but the difficulty, in  his
         view,  was  a  lack  of  funding;   although   they   had   reduced
         substantially the number of detained convicted prisoners  and  thus
         there  had  been  an  improvement  in  the  ratio  of  officers  to
         prisoners, there remained a significant shortfall in his view  such
         that the criteria of dynamic security as utilised by the  Norwegian
         authorities could not be met. He confirmed that the  focus  of  the
         CPT had become that of violence rather than overcrowding.

     45. He provided the example of past CPT reports which had  concentrated
         on  remand  prison  conditions  and  prisoners  which  had  led  to
         assurances being sought in extradition proceedings  for  extradited
         non-convicted prisoners to be held in  particular  remand  centres.
         Such assurances were no longer sought. Professor Morgan referred to
         a report he contributed to which confirmed that conditions in which
         remand prisoners were held were  no  longer  of  such  concern.  In
         remand prisons, detainees were allocated a cell and there were very
         tightly controlled regulations as to  what  categories  of  alleged
         criminal could be placed together.

     46. In so far as conditions for convicted prisons  were  concerned,  he
         said that there wasn't the hard evidence to support the  view  that
         the Lithuanian authorities had done what they said they would do in
         their response to the 2016 report on convicted prisoners.

     47. Professor Morgan confirmed that the  CPT  had  not  identified  any
         particular issues arising out of sexual offence convictions or LGBT
         prisoners. He said the reports had referred to sexual  exploitation
         although he  commented  that  homophobia  was  a  problem  in  most
         jurisdictions. He also  commented  that  it  was  not  possible  to
         identify how frequent  any  such  attacks  were,  but  that  inter-
         prisoner  violence  was  acknowledged  to  be  a  serious  problem.
         Prisoners could be put in  segregated  units  for  punishment,  for
         identifying threats or fear of violence and there was some evidence
         that prisoners self-harmed to be put into segregation  units  where
         conditions would be similar to those for remand prisoners.

     48. The CPT has expressed serious concerns at the lack of  availability
         of psychiatric  services,  and  that  the  physical  conditions  in
         Vilnius prison hospital were appalling.  Professor  Morgan  pointed
         out that the Lithuanian authorities had said they were committed to
         closing the wing but that it had continued for years.  He  referred
         to the appointment of an ombudsman. He said the ombudsman  did  not
         seem "frightfully  effective'  but  the  post  was  there  and  was
         encouraged and has been quite active in the past. He said there was
         not a lot of evidence to consider with  regard  to  the  ombudsman,
         particularly  in  translation,  in  connection  with  the  hospital
         establishments but there had been some damages awards made.

     49.  Professor  Morgan  did  not  feel  qualified  to  comment  on  the
         availability of the mental health services that the appellant might
         require - he had not seen the medical evidence the appellant relies
         upon. He confirmed the CPT had not  identified  LGBT  prisoners  as
         having any particular additional problems such as to be of  concern
         to the CPT. He commented that homophobia was no less a  problem  in
         UK prisons.

The relevant legal principles:

     50. Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights provides:

             "No one shall  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or
             degrading treatment or punishment".

     51. The test for a breach of Article 3 ECHR on removal to an EU  state,
         as explained by  the  Supreme  Court  in  R(EM)  (Eritrea)  v  Home
         Secretary [2014] UKSC 12, [2014] 2 All ER 192, [2014] 2 WLR 409  at
         41 and 58, is not whether the violation  of  Article  3  rights  is
         "systemic" or "systematic" in a country, but simply whether  it  is
         shown that there are substantial grounds for believing  that  there
         is a real risk that the person surrendered would  suffer  treatment
         contrary to  Article  3,  in  the  presence  of  a  presumption  of
         compliance  with  international  standards  on  the  part  of   the
         receiving state ( see  also  Tarakhel  v  Switzerland  [2014]  ECHR
         1185.)

     52. As set out in the decision of the Grand Chamber in Mursic v Croatia
         (7334/13)  judgment  20th  October  2016),  torture,   inhuman   or
         degrading treatment or punishment is prohibited irrespective of the
         circumstances and the victim's behaviour. Ill treatment must attain
         a minimum level of severity to fall within the scope of Article  3.
         To conclude that there has been a breach of Article 3 there must be
         an assessment which takes into account all the circumstances of the
         case which include the duration of the treatment, its physical  and
         meant effects and in some cases the age,  sex  and  health  of  the
         victim. It usually includes bodily injury or  intense  physical  or
         mental suffering, but even if these are absent a violation  can  be
         found where there is a diminishing of human dignity so as to  raise
         fear and anguish capable of  breaking  an  individual's  moral  and
         physical resistance. An absence of  an  intention  to  humiliate  a
         detainee by placing him in poor conditions  does  not  conclusively
         rule out a finding of a violation of Article 3. It is incumbent  on
         a government to organise its penitentiary system in such a  way  as
         to ensure respect  for  the  dignity  of  detainees  regardless  of
         financial and logistical difficulties.

     53. A summary of the general propositions, addressed  by  both  parties
         and taken into account by us in the context of extradition cases is
         set out in Elashmawy v Court of Brescia [2015] EWHC 28.

     54. We also take into account that prison conditions are unlikely to be
         static and to make a conclusion about the real risk test the  Court
         has to examine the present and prospective position as best  as  it
         can on the materials available, (see Elashmawy v Italy at paragraph
         90) and that the view of any Court, including the ECtHR  on  prison
         conditions in a country can only be definitive at the time that the
         view is expressed.

    Domestic authorities and ECHR case law:

     55.  We  observe  that  there  have  been  number   of   domestic   and
         international cases  that  have  considered  prison  conditions  in
         Lithuania. We do not intend to carry out a full analysis  of  those
         authorities for the purposes of this decision, a significant number
         of which consider remand prisoners, with which we are not concerned
         here, or were decided in terms of conditions that  existed  several
         years ago. A  summary  is  set  out  in  the  decision  of  Jane  v
         Prosecutor  General's  Office  [2018]  EWHC  2691,  which  includes
         decisions pre and post 2015 (hereinafter referred to as "Jane"). Of
         the cases relied upon Ms Asanovic in her written submissions, these
         relate  to  remand  prisoners  or  to  detention   in   overcrowded
         conditions, that pre-date the most recent CPT report  and  response
         and the evidence of Professor Morgan. The detentions complained  of
         are historic in nature. The evidence  before  us,  as  referred  to
         below,  does  not  support  the  contention  that  such  conditions
         continue to exist.

Discussion

     56. We have been greatly assisted by the skeletons both parties  relied
         upon, together with the oral and written submissions. We have  read
         these with care, and in the context of the evidence before  us,  in
         reaching our conclusions. We do not  refer  in  our  discussion  to
         every point made but have taken them fully into account.

     57. We note that Ms Asanovic states that she relies  upon  the  Refugee
         Convention in her written closing submissions. We are surprised  at
         this assertion given that the issues we are addressing are  as  set
         out in  [2]  above;  this  was  agreed  with  the  parties  at  the
         commencement of the hearing and so we proceed  on  the  basis  that
         reference to the Refugee Convention is in error. Nor do  we  accept
         Ms Asanovic's assertion in her  written  submissions  that  stating
         that the appellant has been wearing a tag since  his  release  from
         prison in the UK supports the appellant's submission that he has  a
         real subjective fear of prison in Lithuania. We note  that  in  the
         appellant's bundle, although not referred to by Ms Asanovic,  there
         are a number of documents relating to  homophobic  attacks,  inter-
         prisoner violence and violence meted out to  sex  offenders  in  UK
         prisons. We note the appellant was of the view that his  experience
         of a UK prison regime was positive  but  take  the  view  that  his
         opinion of that is his subjective view which  may  or  may  not  be
         supported by objective evidence - a matter upon which  we  make  no
         findings and do not express an opinion other than to  observe  that
         the appellant himself has experienced no such difficulty.

     58. In so  far  as  the  respondent  sought  to  rely  upon  unreported
         decisions, magistrates' decisions and the extradition  hearing,  we
         note their content but place little weight upon  them  in  reaching
         our decision. They do not address Article 3 issues in  the  context
         of the evidence that we have before us.

     59.  We also note that  the  case  law  relied  upon  by  Ms  Asanovic,
         although reported relatively recently, is of some vintage and  does
         not refer to the most recent report of the CPT or the  response  by
         the Lithuanian Government.  As  emphasised  by  both  parties,  the
         decision before us is  fact  specific  and  we  are  not  bound  by
         decisions as to prison conditions in Lithuania  where  the  factual
         matrix significantly pre-dates the evidence before us.

     60. In general terms we accept the proposition that a response to a CPT
         report should not be taken "at face value". The response has to  be
         considered in the context of the evidence as a whole. It must  also
         be  recalled  that  the  CPT  is  the   body   charged   with   the
         identification of significant issues,  making  the  recommendations
         and dealing with the issue of whether  those  recommendations  have
         been carried out. The CPT reporting process is  indicative  of  the
         extent of the concerns identified;  there  is  no  indication  that
         there are significant concerns of an Article 3 breach that are  not
         identified in the CPT reports. Although there were individual press
         reports and articles referred to by Ms Asanovic, these reports  are
         subjective reports of individuals  and  in  some  cases  relate  to
         incidents that occurred some time ago. We have placed little weight
         upon them;  the  accounts  they  give  are  not  reflected  in  the
         generality of the CPT reports but  are  reports  of  a  very  small
         number of individuals, particularly in the context of the number of
         prisoners in Lithuania, and their content is not reflected  in  the
         bulk of the evidence before us.

     61.  Reference is made by Ms Asanovic to the question of  mutual  trust
         and that there is an obligation on the  judiciary  to  examine  the
         'plain meaning of the  words  of  the  assurance'  and  whether  it
         addresses the identified risk. She accepts that the appellant  will
         not be sent to a remand detention centre. We note that in the past,
         the  assurances  of  the  Lithuanian  government  with  regard   to
         individuals being extradited to Lithuania that they would  only  be
         sent to certain specified centres, were  accepted  (see  Jane).  We
         also note that, as referred to by Professor Morgan,  conditions  in
         the remand centres have now improved to the extent that  assurances
         in connection with remand prisoners are no longer deemed necessary.
         We also note that individual assurances for convicted prisoners are
         not considered, by the UK  government,  to  be  required  from  the
         Lithuanian government.  In  this  circumstance  we  have  taken  Ms
         Asanovic's submission as made in her closing written submission  to
         relate to  the general assurances given in the response to the 2016
         CPT report. We address this in reaching our  conclusions  and  make
         our findings taking into account the specific  factual  matrix  for
         this particular appellant in the context of the evidence before us.
         We do not accept 'at face value' the assurances given as being  the
         defining and conclusive factor.

     62. We accept, as does the respondent, that there is discrimination and
         homophobia in Lithuanian society. We do not accept, and it was  not
         submitted to us, that the level of  discrimination  and  homophobia
         rises to the level of persecution of gay men.

    Medical issues

     63. Professor  Katona  is  clearly  an  experienced  psychiatrist  with
         considerable expertise both in the examination of  individuals  and
         in the writing of reports for the Upper Tribunal. We have not  been
         provided with all the  evidence  that  he  was  provided  with,  in
         particular he makes reference to GP records that were  relevant  to
         the appellant's mental health that have not been provided to us  in
         the documentary evidence the appellant has chosen to submit. We  do
         not know what consultations took place between  the  appellant  and
         his GP, whether the GP discussed the possibility of  CBT  or  other
         therapies or what information the appellant gave  to  the  GP  that
         resulted in him being prescribed medication.  Professor  Katona  in
         his oral evidence said that even though the NICE recommendation  is
         that there should be consideration of  'talking  therapies'  before
         medication, a GP's intervention would be at a much lower level than
         is required to engage with therapy. Whilst this may be correct as a
         general view, we have not seen the appellant's GP records and so do
         not know whether that was the case for him.  Professor  Katona  did
         not say whether there was something more specific  in  the  records
         which he had seen which supported his general view.

     64. Professor Katona  said  that  the  appellant  understood  that  the
         consultations he had were not for therapeutic purposes but for  the
         purpose of writing a report for his court proceedings. We note that
         Professor Katona did not use an interpreter for his  consultations,
         but his evidence was that because of his skills he was sure that he
         was able to obtain a clear account from the appellant. We have some
         concerns about this. Only 6 months earlier, the appellant had  been
         interviewed by his skilled and experienced immigration  and  asylum
         legal advisors, without an  interpreter,  in  connection  with  his
         asylum claim. It has not been  suggested  that  his  legal  advisor
         lacked the necessary skills firstly, to be able  to  identify  that
         the appellant was having difficulty expressing himself or  secondly
         that he was unable to give a  true  and  accurate  account  of  his
         asylum claim and his  response  to  the  respondent's  reasons  for
         refusal letter. Yet in a handwritten statement/letter  in  February
         2017 the appellant states  that  there  had  been  difficulties  in
         understanding in the preparation of that witness statement  because
         there had been no interpreter, such that his account of  consensual
         sex with the  man  in  the  railway  sleeping  compartment  changed
         fundamentally to there being no more than flirtation which had then
         led to an altercation which in turn had led to an  assault  and  an
         unjustified allegation of sexual assault. If  correct,  this  is  a
         fundamental misunderstanding  by  the  immigration  legal  advisor.
         Although the appellant's appeal in Lithuania was dismissed and  his
         account of the incident on which he now appears to be  relying  was
         disbelieved, this reference to interpretation  difficulties  causes
         us concern in our assessment  of  the  weight  to  be  placed  upon
         Professor Katona's assertion that his  skills  were  sufficient  to
         ensure that he  obtained  a  clear  and  accurate  picture  of  the
         appellant's account and so of his mental health.

     65.  We raised  with  Professor  Katona  the  question  why  a  skilled
         psychiatrist would not be able to provide the relevant  explanation
         to  the  appellant  of  the  benefits  of  therapeutic   treatment.
         Professor Katona explained the necessity of a person  feeling  safe
         in order to be able to obtain the benefit of such therapy and  that
         the  mental  health  problems  the  appellant  was  suffering  from
         stretched  back  many  years.  We  of  course  accept   that   many
         individuals may not seek treatment unless they feel safe  and  that
         this may well be the case  generally,  as  evidenced  by  Professor
         Katona's extensive experience and expertise. But this appellant has
         not  provided  personal  evidence  why  he  has  not  sought   such
         treatment. In this case:

           o The appellant self-referred himself to a GP and,  through  his
             solicitors, obtained a report  from  Professor  Katona  having
             disclosed  mental  health   problems   to   the   respondent's
             interviewing officer;

           o The appellant has repeatedly said that he feels safe  here  in
             the UK;

           o The appellant's GP record that has been  disclosed  says  that
             the appellant was told by his  solicitors  that  there  was  a
             likelihood of a positive outcome, yet despite that he did  not
             seek the therapeutic treatment suggested by Professor Katona;

           o The appellant did not seek  treatment  during  the  couple  of
             years he was in the UK prior to his arrest at Gatwick  airport
             despite saying he felt safe here;

           o The appellant is reported by  Professor  Katona  as  suffering
             from chronic discrimination for years and  having  a  fear  of
             homophobic rape in  prison,  yet  despite  Professor  Katona's
             report in 2016 and despite the appellant having been in the UK
             since January 2012 and despite his solicitors advising him, in
             late 2017/early 2018 that they were of  the  view  that  there
             would be a positive outcome to his appeal,  he  did  not  seek
             therapeutic treatment and there is no indication that  his  GP
             advised him to or referred  him  for  such  treatment  and  no
             indication in  Professor  Katona's  report  whether  this  was
             explored with him and what the outcome  of  those  exploratory
             examinations were;

           o The appellant has not  identified  to  Professor  Katona  what
             discrimination he was subjected to other  than  a  generalised
             perception  of  discrimination  in  Lithuania;  there  is   no
             indication in Professor Katona's  report  that  the  appellant
             has, for the last 7 years felt discriminated  against  in  the
             UK;

           o The appellant has not  identified  to  Professor  Katona  what
             impact the fear of extradition had upon him since his  arrival
             in the UK and the knowledge that he had been  sentenced  to  1
             year in prison, given that he said that  his  arrest  was  not
             unexpected. There is no indication of the impact on his mental
             health or his behaviour during those couple of years prior  to
             arrest when on his own evidence he felt  his  arrest  was  not
             unexpected,  or  why  he  did  not  seek  assistance  from  GP
             services;

           o The appellant has provided no explanation why he felt able  to
             disclose issues to Professor Katona, (although we accept  that
             Professor Katona explained to the appellant the  consultations
             were  of  non-therapeutic  nature),   who   then   recommended
             therapeutic treatment when he felt safe and  yet  he  did  not
             then seek such treatment.

         We do not know  whether  the  GP  suggested  treatment  other  than
         medication, if not why not, or if so what the appellant's  response
         was. Professor Katona's report does not indicate that  he  explored
         the possibility of treatment with the appellant either in the UK or
         in Lithuania. We do not know from the appellant (or his solicitors)
         whether Professor Katona's first report in 2016 was sent to the  GP
         and if not why not or if  it  was,  whether  the  appellant  had  a
         consultation with the GP to discuss the possibility of  therapeutic
         treatment. Professor Katona's report indicates long-standing mental
         health problems for which he did not  seek  help  until  after  his
         arrest, but there is little to explain  why,  given  the  appellant
         felt safe in the UK, he had not sought treatment.

     66. The appellant claims to have suffered discrimination and  there  is
         little reason to doubt that there is  discrimination  in  Lithuania
         against gay men. The appellant did not describe a  single  incident
         of harassment or violence save for the incident in  1999  and  that
         which led to his arrest. He  came  to  the  UK  in  2007   -  after
         Lithuania joined the EU - but returned to Lithuania after  a  short
         while. He did not seek to leave Lithuania  again  until  after  his
         arrest and conviction despite saying that he hated  his  life.   He
         had been in the UK before and knew the relative freedom to  express
         himself. Yet he waited  until  his  arrest  and  conviction  before
         coming back. Professor Katona does not record in  the  reports  why
         the appellant should behave in such a way or how such mental health
         problems he has should manifest themselves in that way. The  travel
         to the UK after arrest and conviction are not the actions of a  man
         who fears for his life or feels himself to  be  at  risk  of  being
         persecuted or a man who has serious mental  health  problems.  They
         are the actions of a man fleeing imprisonment.

     67. We recognise the appellant said to Professor Katona that his arrest
         was not unexpected; he however did not say that despite this he did
         not feel safe in the UK. Even though he knew he had been  sentenced
         to a year in prison, he reiterated that he felt safe in the UK. The
         appellant remained in Lithuania for some 2 weeks after his  arrest;
         he then returned to Lithuania for the trial. His evidence was  that
         after the trial he was not strong enough to be able to  handle  the
         impact on his family and neighbours or the publicity which included
         newspaper reports and that was why he left Lithuania.  He  did  not
         state that he had attempted suicide at that time and  there  is  no
         indication in Professor Katona's report  that  this  was  something
         that the appellant had even considered at that time. Yet  Professor
         Katona has concluded that the appellant is now at  serious  suicide
         risk because of a description of an attempt in 2002/3 following the
         break-up of  a  relationship  together  with  a  statement  by  the
         appellant of that intention now. Professor Katona does not, in  his
         report, explore whether the attempt in 2002/3 was  because  of  the
         break-up of the relationship or because the appellant was gay or  a
         combination of both. The appellant is recorded as  saying  that  he
         felt that he needed a loving relationship  which  is  what  he  had
         lost. Although the report refers to the appellant's fear of  return
         to a Lithuanian prison and that the appellant has been  stockpiling
         pills and indicated an intention to kill  himself  with  pills  and
         alcohol, the reports do not explore the impact  of  the  homophobic
         abuse he says he sustained in 1999 in  terms  of  possible  suicide
         risk, or the impact of the assault if his  current  description  of
         the offence is correct, or the impact of a claim that he  has  been
         wrongly convicted or the breakdown of his relationship in  the  UK.
         The reports make reference to these incidents but  do  not  analyse
         the impact or effect of those save to support the  contention  that
         the appellant has suffered  mental  health  difficulties  for  many
         years. There is no  indication  that  the  appellant  had  suicidal
         thoughts around those incidents. It is difficult to  conclude  that
         such mental health problems as he now claims to have are sufficient
         to require treatment given his lack of any  documented  attempt  to
         obtain treatment or any documented evidence that he  exhibited  any
         adverse mental health problems prior to his arrest  other  than  in
         2002/3 following the breakdown of a relationship. It  is  difficult
         to conclude, and we do not do so given the paucity of  evidence  of
         mental health problems prior to his arrest  at  Gatwick,  that  his
         mental health problems  now  are  a  culmination  of  his  previous
         history and are of such severity as to result in a serious  suicide
         risk.

     68. Professor Katona records the appellant's extensive work commitments
         and what the appellant says  about  this;  in  particular  that  he
         doesn't want time to think. Yet the appellant  also  describes  his
         social life and that he has had a boyfriend.  It  does  not  appear
         that there has been any  exploration  with  the  appellant  of  the
         possibility of treatment being available in Lithuania.

     69. We  reiterate  that  Professor  Katona  has  extensive  and  expert
         experience and knowledge and he would in  many  cases  be  able  to
         obtain sufficient information to be able to  provide  the  kind  of
         detailed diagnosis that he has done for this appellant. But  we  do
         have  concerns  that  the  lack  of  detailed  exploration  of  the
         significant  incidents  in  the  appellant's  life,  the  lack   of
         exploration as to why the recommended therapeutic treatment has not
         been undertaken and the possibility of misunderstanding through the
         lack of an interpreter means that we are unable to  place  as  much
         weight upon his report as the appellant requests.

     70. We have no doubt that  the  appellant  is  suffering  distress  and
         anxiety at the possibility of return to a Lithuanian prison;  quite
         possibly increased by his perception of  what  may  happen  to  him
         there. We have no reason to doubt that he swallowed pills in 2002/3
         in a suicide attempt, which he then  vomited  up.  But  we  do  not
         accept that he is a serious suicide risk if he is now extradited to
         Lithuania. The appellant's history does not, in our view,  indicate
         an increased risk - the other traumatic events in his life have not
         resulted in suicide attempts. The pivotal incident appears to  have
         been the extradition proceedings. We do  not  find  that  Professor
         Katona's report, for the reasons given above,  provides  sufficient
         basis upon which to find that the appellant is at risk  of  suicide
         either in the UK or during the removal process.

     71. If we are wrong in this finding, we are nevertheless satisfied that
         the authorities in the UK will provide the adequate  care  that  is
         required; they will notify the authorities  in  Lithuania,  in  any
         event, of the appellant's stated intentions and we are satisfied  -
         see below - that there  are  adequate  facilities  to  manage  that
         stated intention.

     72. In so far as the appellant's mental health generally is  concerned,
         we are satisfied (see below) that there are adequate mental  health
         facilities available to treat such mental  health  problems  as  he
         has, in the event that he does subsequently choose to seek  it.  We
         are satisfied that expert skilled psychiatrists in  Lithuania  will
         be able to elucidate as much, if  not  more,  information  for  the
         appellant so as to enable a programme of treatment to be devised.

     73. We do not accept that the appellant's risk of suicide in  Lithuania
         is such as to amount to an Article 3 risk. We do  not  accept  that
         there is a sustainable  objective  foundation  to  the  appellant's
         subjective fear of Article 3 risk for mental health reasons

    Prison conditions in Lithuania

     74. Professor Morgan  in  his  evidence  was  unaware  of  one  of  the
         detention centres referred to in the CPT  report.  We  accept  that
         this may be because of a slight difference in name and  we  do  not
         find that his lack of knowledge of the prison  by  the  exact  name
         referred to in the CPT report in any way undermined  his  evidence.
         If anything, his ready acknowledgement that he was unaware of  this
         reinforces the reliability of his  views  expressed  upon  asserted
         knowledge of relevant facts.

     75. Professor Morgan's report and  oral  evidence  confirmed  that  the
         situation had changed for remand prisoners. He made the point  that
         there had been  a  number  of  promises  made  over  the  years  in
         connection with remand prisons which had not been complied with  by
         the time they said they would  be.  From  this  he  also  drew  the
         comparison with the assurances given to the CPT in the responses to
         the  2012  and  2016  reports  dealing  with   convicted   prisoner
         conditions that various matters would be addressed. He acknowledged
         there was no bad faith involved but  that  there  were  significant
         funding issues which meant, when considered in the context  of  the
         historical  approach  by  the  Lithuanian  authorities  to   remand
         centres, their current assurances could  not  be  relied  upon.  He
         expressed little concern over the  issue  of  overcrowding;  little
         concern was expressed by the  CPT  of  this  issue  in  the  latest
         report. His interpretation of the lack of any public follow  up  to
         the high-level  talks  as   a  helpful  sign  that  the  Lithuanian
         authorities are sufficiently willing to follow up  what  they  have
         said they will do.

     76. There has been no further announcement by the CPT since their high-
         level talks in 2017.  There  has  been  a  further  visit.  If  the
         concerns expressed by the CPT in their 2016 report and the response
         by the Lithuanian authorities which  then  led  to  the  high-level
         talks had continued to raise significant concern to the extent that
         there was a real risk of Article 3 prohibited treatment, we are  of
         the view that the CPT would have done more than arrange  a  further
         visit in 2018. Having visited again after those  high-level  talks,
         had there been continuing cause for concern - as  for  example  was
         the case mentioned by Professor Morgan in relation  to  Turkey  and
         Greece - then it  is  reasonable,  in  our  view,  that  a  further
         announcement would have  been  made  or  further  high-level  talks
         arranged. That has not happened.

     77. We acknowledge Professor Morgan's scepticism  that  the  Lithuanian
         authorities either would be doing or would be able to do that which
         they say in their response. Nevertheless, we note  that  work  they
         did  around  remand  prisons  was  undertaken,   that   issues   of
         overcrowding in convicted prisoner prisons no longer form  a  focus
         of the CPT report and that there has been continued work  with  the
         Norwegians. We also note that there has been  a  reduction  in  the
         overall number of prisoners and that there  have  been  no  further
         high-level talks arranged and no public announcement.

     78. The 2016 report did  not  identify  particular  problems  regarding
         prisoners convicted of sexual offences or LGBGT prisoners.  Whilst,
         as Professor Morgan says, that does not mean that there is no inter-
         prisoner violence, or homophobia or targeting of those convicted of
         sexual offences, such is a common occurrence in prisons around  the
         world (with the notable exception  of  the  Scandinavian  countries
         according to Professor Morgan).  It  is  not  the  fact  that  such
         violence exists generally that is of our concern in this case,  but
         whether  there  are  in  place  sufficient  resources   to   enable
         sufficient protection to be provided for this appellant.

     79. We have taken note of the evidence regarding segregation.  We  note
         that segregation can occur in a number of instances including self-
         referral as well as through punishment. Ms Asanovic did not in  her
         closing submissions submit that segregation itself was inhuman  and
         degrading rather the mechanism for getting into  such  units  meant
         that prisoners had sometimes to resort to self-harm. We  note  that
         segregation is an occurrence in many instances  for  convicted  sex
         offenders. We do not accept that segregation itself is inhuman  and
         degrading.

     80. Ms  Asanovic  submitted  that  without  a  proper  system  for  the
         recording of injuries and incidents, effective control over  inter-
         prisoner violence would not exist.  She  drew  attention  to  there
         being a lack of commitment to enable reporting  of  allegations  of
         ill-treatment. There was  some  reference  in  the  CPT  report  to
         consistency between the allegations and the records; we  note  that
         there does not appear to be an independent system for dealing  with
         allegations of prison guard violence. We do note Professor Morgan's
         reference to an ombudsman which he referred to in  the  context  of
         questions about prison hospitals and that although not 'frightfully
         effective" there had been reports and it has  been  active  in  the
         past. It seems from this that  there  is  record  keeping  of  some
         adequacy.

     81. The response to the CPT report refers to refurbishment of  prisons,
         reduction in prisoners and increased education courses. Ms Asanovic
         submitted that pressure on accommodation would increase during  any
         refurbishment and that the increase in education courses had to  be
         seen in the context of reduction in  prisoners.  Whilst  we  accept
         that there will be pressure on accommodation and that the situation
         in the prisons is far from ideal, we cannot accept  the  submission
         that there is a real risk that detention in a Lithuanian prison for
         a convicted prisoner will be a breach of Article  3.  The  lack  of
         follow up by the CPT to the very real problems they  identified  in
         the 2016 report which led to the high-level talks in 2017  was  not
         and has not been further publicised despite the powers the CPT  has
         and despite a further investigation in 2018. The CPT  identified  a
         lack of progress since the 2012 report despite assurances given  by
         the Lithuanian Government then. The response to the 2016 report led
         to high level talks in 2017 by the CPT. It appears likely,  to  us,
         that the high-level talks ensued because of  the  history  of  non-
         compliance with earlier assurances given. The fact that no  further
         public steps have been taken by the CPT since their follow-up visit
         in 2018 suggests to us that the assurances given by the  Lithuanian
         authorities in the response to the 2016 report were acceptable  and
         were being acted upon. If matters remained as serious as identified
         by the CPT we consider that further public announcements would have
         been made rather than enable an EU country to treat  its  convicted
         prisoners in a manner which breached Article 3. If  that  were  not
         the case, we would expect at the very least an indication  to  have
         been made that specific assurances for individual prisoners  should
         be obtained before extradition.

     82. That is not to say that we accept  unconditionally  the  assurances
         given by the Lithuanian authorities. It is not for the CPT, the  UK
         Government and the Lithuanian Government to determine whether there
         is a possibility of a breach of Article 3.  The evidence before us,
         including the evidence from Professor Morgan,  does  not  point  to
         prison conditions generally being such as  to  render  a  convicted
         prisoner as being at risk of serious harm/persecution.

     83. There was a lack of evidence to support the contention that  as  an
         LGBGT prisoner there was additional vulnerability. The CPT  reports
         isolated incidents, so they were clearly aware that there might  be
         a problem. But the evidence to support the  submission  that  being
         gay was an identifiable aspect of vulnerability that would mean the
         person ran the risk of Article 3 persecution was absent.

     84. Professor Morgan had been told the appellant suffered from PTSD and
         was at high risk of suicide. For the reasons we have given above we
         do not accept the appellant is at high risk of suicide. But in  any
         event, we take note of the fact that the CPT  report  records  that
         the picture for medical treatment is mixed.  Professor  Morgan  did
         not feel able to offer an expert opinion  on  the  availability  of
         medical treatment for mental  health  problems.  We  note  that  Ms
         Asanovic accepts that transfer of the prison hospital  materialised
         in 2016 although it had been promised earlier. But the fact is that
         it has occurred. Again, the lack of any public reference by the CPT
         to lack of adequate treatment following the response  to  the  2016
         report is an indication that the assurances given have been or  are
         being complied with  and  there  are  adequate  facilities  for  an
         individual with mental health problems, including someone  at  high
         suicide risk. We also note that there is no real evidence before us
         that there are significant difficulties or problems in the handling
         of mental health  problems.  We  cannot  conclude  that  there  are
         problems in the absence of relevant evidence.  That  a  significant
         problem in the past has now been resolved does not mean that it  is
         possible to make a finding that the problems continue.

     85.  We   have   carefully   considered   this   appellant's   personal
         characteristics in reaching our conclusions. We accept that he  has
         mental health problems but not to the extent set out  in  Professor
         Katona's report. We do not accept that he is a high suicide risk or
         that he would be on removal  or  whilst  in  prison.  The  evidence
         points to there being psychiatric treatment available and,  if  the
         appellant  requires  therapeutic  treatment,  we  find  that   such
         treatment would be available to him. If he continues to choose  not
         to undertake such treatment that is a matter for him.

     86. The appellant has said, and we accept, that he would  disclose  his
         sexuality. We do not accept that being gay would in and  of  itself
         render the appellant more at risk of inter-prisoner violence.  That
         is simply not established by the evidence before us.

     87. As a convicted sex offender, we accept that he would be  likely  to
         be identified as such at some point and, in common with many prison
         regimes, may well be at higher risk of inter-prisoner violence than
         had that not been the case. But  there  are  segregation  units  to
         which the appellant can be allocated.  Such  allocation  would  not
         result in an Article 3 breach.

     88. We were not presented with  significant  evidence  that  as  a  gay
         convicted sex offender that personal factual matrix would result in
         him being perceived as more vulnerable, although we are prepared to
         accept that because of his mental health problems (even though they
         are not to the extent described by Professor Katona) he may be less
         able to cope with prison and thus present as  vulnerable.  However,
         we find that segregation is available from self-referral.  We  have
         taken account of the references to self-harm being used in order to
         obtain transfer to segregation but the evidence before us  did  not
         indicate what the basis for such desire to be  transferred  stemmed
         from or how long ago that was or the individual  case  studies.  We
         have  taken  account  of  the  reduction   in   overcrowding,   the
         involvement of the Norwegians in  the  structuring  of  the  prison
         system, the increase  on  staffing  and  education/activities,  the
         developed and developing  health  care  and  the  lack  of  further
         notifications from the CPT in reaching this conclusion.

Conclusions

     89. We are not satisfied that there is a real risk  that  detention  of
         the appellant as a gay man in a  Lithuanian  prison  for  convicted
         prisoners will result in Article 3 prohibited treatment;

     90. We are not satisfied that there is a real risk  that  detention  of
         the appellant  as  a  sex  offender  in  a  Lithuanian  prison  for
         convicted prisoners will result in Article 3 prohibited treatment;

     91. We are not satisfied that there is a real risk that  the  detention
         of the appellant as a person  with  mental  health  problems  in  a
         Lithuanian prison for convicted prisoners will result in Article  3
         prohibited treatment;

     92. We are not satisfied that there is a real risk that  the  detention
         of the appellant with all three  characteristics  in  a  Lithuanian
         prison will result in Article 3 prohibited treatment;

     93. We are not satisfied that there is a real risk that  the  detention
         of the appellant as a segregated prisoner in  a  Lithuanian  prison
         for  convicted  prisoners  will  result  in  Article  3  prohibited
         treatment

Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The appeal  is  re-made  as
follows: We substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the appeal.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker; Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds    8th May 2019

-----------------------
[1] Lithuania joined the EU in 2004

