
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03060/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 3 December 2019                   |On 16 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   Mr RHA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A W Khan, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq,  born  on  1  January  1996,  who
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent dated 22 March 2019 to  refuse  the  appellant's  protection
    claim.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 6 June 2019, Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Chapman dismissed the appellant's appeal.

Grounds of Appeal

 2. The appellant appeals with permission from the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    one remaining ground (the judge granting permission having  found  that
    the first ground in relation to irrationality was not made out  -  such
    was not challenged before me).

 3. The remaining ground argued that the judge erred in law in  failing  to
    apply the country guidance cases of AAH [2018] (Iraqi Kurds -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 and AA (Iraq) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944 in assessing how the  appellant
    would be able to obtain re-documentation upon return.  At [49]  it  was
    submitted the judge erred in his approach to AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG
    [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) where Salah Al-din governorate was named  as  a
    contested area engaging Article 15(c), and in seeking  to  depart  from
    the country  guidance  at  [47]  to  [53],  the  judge  relied  on  the
    respondent's Country Policy and Information Note (CPIN) and  failed  to
    give any cogent evidence or very strong grounds for departing from  the
    country guidance and it was submitted  that  arguably  the  CPIN  is  a
    biased document prepared by the respondent.



Error of Law Hearing

 4. Mr Khan relied on his grounds and submitted that in seeking  to  depart
    from the country guidance the judge had failed  to  give  'very  strong
    reasons supported by cogent evidence' as required by SG  (Iraq)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 940.  In seeking to depart from the country guidance the judge
    relied on paragraph 2.3.27 to 2.3.25 of the November 2018 CPIN which is
    set out at page 312 of the  appellant's  bundle  and,  it  was  argued,
    failed to indicate what the material was as there  was  no  independent
    material relied on.

 5. It was submitted that the judge erred in stating that the appellant had
    family at [62] and [64] and stated that there was  no  basis  for  this
    finding.  At question 75 and question 76 of the  asylum  interview  the
    appellant had stated that he thought his family were in the IKR but  he
    doubted it and therefore the highest that this could be put at is  that
    we do not know and the  judge  therefore  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant had family and that there was no evidence for  the  judge  to
    state that the family were in the IKR.  Although Mr Khan conceded, that
    at [55] and [57] the judge had rejected the appellant's account and had
    found that he did have family including in the IKR, Mr  Khan  attempted
    to distinguish these findings which he asserted were in relation to the
    core of the claim from consideration of risk on return.

 6. In relation to the judge's departure from the country guidance Mr  Khan
    reiterated that there was no source material in the CPIN in relation to
    the judge's specific findings in stating  that  at  [51]  to  [53]  the
    appellant's home area was no longer under the control of Daesh and that
    it no  longer  reached  the  level  required  to  justify  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection.  Mr Khan submitted that this  was  simply  the
    respondent's view with no source material and not sufficient to  depart
    from the country guidance.  In relation  to  the  judge's  findings  on
    return, Mr Khan pointed out that the appellant would not be 'returning'
    to the IKR because he was not from the IKR and the judge erred in  this
    respect.  And that his findings at [57]  were  inadequate.   The  judge
    again departed from AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) (above)  in
    finding that the appellant could fly directly to Erbil.

 7. Even if the judge's alternative findings were considered that he  would
    be returned to Baghdad the judge  failed  to  adequately  consider  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) including how the  appellant  could
    get to the IKR, how he could obtain documentation and other problems.

 8. Mrs Aboni relied on the respondent's Rule  24  response,  although  she
    accepted it did not specifically address the  CSID  point.   Mrs  Aboni
    submitted that there was adequate evidence for the judge to depart from
    the country guidance including as set out in his finding  at  [51]  and
    [52].  In addition, the judge had taken into account that the appellant
    himself had said that he had experienced no  problems  in  Tuz  between
    November 2017 and  August  2018  which  would  support  the  Tribunal's
    finding.  Even if the judge was in error in this finding this  was  not
    material as from [59] the judge had considered relocation  to  the  IKR
    including to Baghdad and onwards to the IKR and it was  submitted  that
    this reasoning was adequate.  Mrs Aboni underlined that the  judge  had
    made negative credibility findings and had  found  that  there  was  no
    evidence the appellant did not have a family network both in  Iraq  and
    the IKR and that the appellant had failed to discharge the burden  that
    he would have difficulty in  obtaining  documentation  because  he  has
    family support to help him do so within a reasonable period  of  return
    and to support him so that he is not at  risk  of  becoming  destitute.
    Those findings were not challenged and stand.

 9. In  respect  of  documentation,  Mrs  Aboni  submitted  in  respect  of
    documents the judge further considered at [62] that the  appellant  had
    previously had a CSID and that it was open to the judge  to  find  that
    the appellant could obtain such  re-documentation.   The  reasons  were
    adequate.



Error of Law Decision

10. Although Mr Khan sought to distinguish the judge's negative credibility
    findings including at [55], [56] and  [57],  that  the  judge  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had lost contact with his family  members,
    that the judge found that the appellant does have a family  network  of
    support both in Iraq and the IKR and that he had  failed  to  discharge
    the burden that he would have any difficulty in obtaining documents, Mr
    Khan was attempting to draw a false distinction that such finding  were
    separate from the judge's findings on risk on return  as  the  findings
    were made in the core of the appellant's account.  There  is  no  basis
    for such  a  distinction;  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  unequivocal
    evidence-based findings of fact.   Those  findings  of  fact  are  very
    relevant and go to the core of the judge's findings on risk on  return.



11. Even if the judge erred in the adequacy of his reasoning for  departing
    from country guidance, in finding that the appellant would  not  be  at
    risk on return to his home  area  (although  such  is  not  a  foregone
    conclusion as it is notable the judge  also  took  into  consideration,
    which he was entitled to do, that  the  appellant  had  experienced  no
    problems in Tuz between November 2017 until August 2018) any such error
    is immaterial given the judge's findings  on  internal  relocation  via
    Baghdad.

12. Although the judge at [61] purported to departed from AAH (Iraqi  Kurds
    - internal relocation) in relation to the fact that there was  evidence
    that flights now can take place directly to Erbil and noted  that  this
    was not disputed by the appellant's representative, such  a  point  was
    not argued in the grounds of appeal and was  arguably  not  before  me.
    Even if it was and even if that was an error (although the evidence  in
    relation to flights to Erbil is perhaps in a different category)  again
    it cannot be material given the judge's specific findings  on  risk  on
    return via Baghdad.

13. The fact that the judge did not specifically set  out  each  and  every
    ground in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) does  not  mean  that
    the country guidance was not correctly applied.  The relevant  question
    is the issue of the CSID which was considered in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 as follows:

         "Section C of country guidance annexed to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is  supplemented  with  the
         following guidance:

          1) Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances.  Factors to be considered include:

               i)  whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register.  An INC, passport,  birth/marriage  certificates
                  or on expired CSID would all be of substantial assistance.
                   For someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents  the  process  should  be  straightforward.    A
                  laissez-passer should not be counted for  these  purposes:
                  these can be issued without any other  form  of  ID  being
                  available, or not of any assistance in 'tracing  back'  to
                  the family record and  are  confiscated  upon  arrival  at
                  Baghdad;

              ii) the location of the relevant civil registry office.  If it
                  is  an  area  held,  or  formally  held  by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?

             iii) Are there male  family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether the relevant relative is from the  mother
                  or father's side.  A maternal uncle  in  possession  of  a
                  CSID would be able to  assist  in  locating  the  original
                  place of registration of the individual's mother, and from
                  there the trail would need to be  followed  to  the  place
                  that her records were transferred upon marriage.  It  must
                  also be born in mind that a significant number of IDPs  in
                  Iraq are themselves undocumented; if that is the  case  it
                  is unlikely that they would be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to assist with the process of  the
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all."

14. The judge's consideration of the relevant  factors  is  evident  in  my
    view, including from his findings in reference to the risks  associated
    with a returnee being unable to obtain documentation such as a CSID and
    to access basic services in Iraq on return (paragraph [57]).  The judge
    also makes reference to family support and the fact  that  such  family
    support would be  relevant  which  is  a  reference  to  the  case  law
    guidance.

15. The judge was also entitled to take into  account  that  the  appellant
    previously had a valid CSID, and Iraqi national identification  and  to
    take into account that this would assist with  obtaining  replacements,
    as would the fact he has 'family members who can assist'.

16. There was no error in the judge's finding that the appellant's evidence
    that he had no contact with his family in Iraq  was  not  accepted  and
    that he has a family network both in Iraq and  the  IKR.   Even  taking
    into account the appellant's claim that his documents  were  all  burnt
    'when Hash'd Al Shaabi attacked my house and burnt down my village' the
    judge comprehensively rejected the appellant's claims and found,  inter
    alia, that it had not been established  that  he  was  of  any  adverse
    interest to Hash'd Al Shaabi [45].  This strongly suggests in  my  view
    that the appellant has his own CSID and other documents.  Even if  that
    is not the case there is nothing in the evidence to  suggest  that,  at
    the very least, the appellant's remaining 'network' of relatives  would
    not be able to assist in providing  the  information  that  would  make
    obtaining a new CSID "straightforward".

17. The fact that the judge went on to find at [63] that the only  relevant
    risk factor was at paragraph 7 of AAH  in  relation  to  the  appellant
    being a single male of fighting age but went on  to  dismiss  that  for
    adequate  reasons  (which  were  not  challenged  before  me)   further
    highlights that the judge  had  in  mind  the  relevant  test  and  was
    satisfied that the appellant  would  be  able  to  successfully  obtain
    documentation and relocate through Baghdad if  required.   The  judge's
    sustainable findings were available to him.

18. Therefore, any arguable errors in the judge's approach to  the  country
    guidance cases of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) as
    revised by AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] and AAH,  are  not  in  my  findings
    material.



Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                      Date:  11 December 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee has been paid and the appeal is dismissed  no  fee  award  can  be
made.

Signed        [pic]                 Date:  11 December 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

