
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/03202/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1st October 2018                     | On 18th October 2018               |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                  Mr I D I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, HOPO

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rothwell dismissing his  appeal  against  the
    refusal of the respondent on 20 February 2018 to grant him  asylum  and
    leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  He states that he left  Somalia
    at the start of 2016 and went to Ethiopia where  he  stayed  for  about
    seven months.  He applied for an EEA family permit on 14 November 2016,
    on the basis of his marriage to a Norwegian citizen.  This was  granted
    on 16 November 2016 and expired on 15 May 2017.  He applied for an  EEA
    residence card on 8 March 2017 which was refused on 4 August 2017.

3.   He claimed asylum on 1 September 2017 and a  screening  interview  took
    place on the same day.  The substantive  interview  took  place  on  31
    January 2018 and the claim was refused on 20 February 2018.

4.   He claimed that he is in fear because  of  his  clan  membership  as  a
    member of the Dhulbahante clan  and  he  is  a  singer.   He  had  been
    attacked in Somalia by groups affiliated to Al-Shabaab.   Some  of  his
    songs are politically motivated and Al-Shabaab see his songs  as  anti-
    Islam.  Also, some of his songs support self-governance for Dhulbahante
    clans.  He has been performing on Horn Cable TV which is watched across
    Somalia.  He plans to carry on singing such songs  if  he  were  to  be
    returned to Somalia.

5.   The judge accepted the centrepiece of the appellant's claim.   She  was
    shown a YouTube video of the appellant singing at the Horn  TV  contest
    and accepted that he is a singer.  The judge  also  accepted  that  the
    appellant sings songs that make political statements against rulers  in
    Somaliland and for self-determination by the appellant's clan.

6.   The judge considered the appellant's evidence that he was  attacked  in
    2014 after the TV show but he also said  the  TV  show  took  place  in
    summer 2015.  She did not  find  that  this  discrepancy  affected  his
    overall credibility about this event.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant was attacked  by  unknown  persons.   There  was  no  medical
    evidence, but she accepted that the interviewing officer saw a scar and
    he attempted to show the scar to her.  He gave a  detailed  account  of
    the gun with a knife on the end and they were holding him back  by  his
    chest, which is how the injury occurred.

7.   The judge noted that the appellant stated in his interview that he  was
    unsure who the persons were, but he  now  stated  that  he  heard  from
    people in his community in Somaliland that they were  from  Al-Shabaab.
    There was no evidence from his community supporting this.  However, the
    background evidence  supported  the  appellant's  contention  that  Al-
    Shabaab act  under  cover  and  sometimes  wear  uniforms  to  disguise
    themselves.  The judge was willing to give the appellant the benefit of
    the doubt that his community in Somaliland believed that  such  attacks
    have been carried out by members of Al-Shabaab.

8.   The judge noted the appellant's evidence that after the attack he  went
    into hiding for two weeks, but then returned to his home town where  he
    lived until he left at the beginning of 2016.  He  said  that  he  kept
    things secret and said that he was well-known because of  his  singing.
    But he also stated that it was a small town.  The judge  said  she  had
    accepted that he appeared on  Horn  Cable  TV.   Therefore,  given  the
    background evidence that Al-Shabaab have  very  extensive  networks  of
    informants and intelligence she could not see  how  the  appellant  was
    able to continue living in Somaliland for about one or two years if  he
    had seriously upset Al-Shabaab because of his singing which was  viewed
    as anti-Islamic.

9.   The judge considered the appellant's evidence that he was at risk  from
    the authorities as musicians and artists have been arrested on  return.
    She found that she could not see how the appellant was able to live  in
    Somaliland for about one or two years  after  his  appearance  on  Horn
    Cable TV if the authorities were concerned about such persons.

10.  She considered the  submission  in  relation  to  HJ  (Iran),  but  the
    appellant had continued to sing and perform in Somaliland  and  he  was
    not at risk.  There was no evidence that he would be at risk because of
    his protest songs about Sool and Sanaag.  The judge said  she  was  not
    referred to any evidence about the appellant's clan or  that  this  was
    related to  the  situation  in  Sool  and  Sanaag.   She  assessed  the
    background material but could find no reference to whether they  are  a
    majority or a minority  clan.   There  was  no  expert  evidence  which
    explained this further.

11.  The judge said that in submissions Mr Aslam referred  to  the  case  of
    MOJ and Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT  00442  (IAC).
    She said that although  the  appellant  was  born  there  he  moved  to
    Somaliland.  There was no evidence that he would be returned  there  or
    evidence from the appellant about any situation  there.   The  evidence
    seems that there are flights from Mogadishu to Hargeisa.

12.  The judge did not find on the current evidence that the appellant is  a
    refugee.  She did not find that he is a person in need of  humanitarian
    protection and did not find that there would be a breach of  Article  3
    because there was no evidence that he would be returned  to  Mogadishu.
    She has not found him to be at risk in Somaliland.

13.   The  judge  said  there  was  the  discreet  issue  relating  to   the
    appellant's health condition.  As the medical evidence stood he was due
    to have a pre-operative assessment on 10  April  2018.   The  documents
    state that he has prostate cancer and will be  having  surgery.   There
    was not enough medical evidence currently before  her  that  shows  the
    appellant  would  need  chemotherapy  or  radiotherapy  on  return   to
    Somaliland or Mogadishu.  The background evidence has said this is  not
    available.  There was no evidence about the type  of  surgery  he  will
    need, but it appeared to her that this would happen in Leicester in the
    very near future as he was due to have a pre-operative assessment on 10
    April 2018.  Therefore, as matters stand she did not find that  the  UK
    will be in breach of her obligations under Article 3.

14.   She  found  that  the  appellant  does  not  fall   within   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) as he has not been here for twenty years.  He  does  not
    fall within paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) as the situation  currently  stands
    she found  that  he  would  not  face  very  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration in Somalia.

15.  Permission was granted on a very narrow ground.  On the basis  that  it
    is  arguable,  that  the  judge  has  not  adequately  dealt  with  the
    appellant's evidence in interview as to how it was that he had not come
    to the adverse attention of the authorities and Al-Shabaab for  one  to
    two years prior to leaving Somalia, and that in circumstances where the
    core of the appellant's account was accepted, including in  respect  of
    him having been previously attacked,  and  considering  the  background
    evidence as to risk upon return as a singer who  is  singing  political
    songs supporting self-determination, the judge was  wrong  to  conclude
    that the appellant would not be at risk upon return.

16.  Mr Aslam relied on paragraph 7 of the grounds  which  argued  that  the
    judge failed  to  consider  the  appellant's  evidence  in  his  asylum
    interview at questions 31, 52, 56, 58 and 94 in which he stated that he
    kept a low profile, was in hiding and slowed his  activities.   He  did
    not sing in public, but did sing privately to earn a living.

17.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge at paragraph  43  was  willing  to
    give the appellant the benefit of  the  doubt  that  his  community  in
    Somaliland believed that such attacks have been carried out by  members
    of Al-Shabaab.  At paragraph 42 she had accepted that the appellant was
    attacked by unknown persons and the appellant had said in his interview
    that he was unsure who the persons were.

18.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge's findings at paragraph 44 and  45
    were sufficient.

19.  Having considered the submissions by both  parties,  I  find  that  the
    judge did not err in law.

20.  I find that the judge's findings at paragraph 44  and  45  sufficiently
    dealt with Mr Aslam's submissions. The judge held as follows:

         "44. The appellant said after the attack he went  into  hiding  for
             two weeks, but then returned to his home town where  he  lived
             until he left at the beginning of 2016.  He said that he  kept
             things secret and he states that he was well-known because  of
             his singing.  But he also states that it was a small town.   I
             have accepted that he appeared on Horn  Cable  TV.   Therefore
             given the background evidence that Al-Shabaab  have  extensive
             networks of informants and intelligence I cannot see  how  the
             appellant was able to continue living in Somaliland for  about
             one or two years if he had seriously upset Al-Shabaab  because
             of his singing which was viewed as anti-Islamic.


         45.  The appellant states that he is at risk from  the  authorities
             as musicians and artists have  been  arrested  on  return.   I
             cannot see how the appellant was able to  live  in  Somaliland
             for about one or two years after his appearance on Horn  Cable
             TV if the authorities are concerned about such persons".


21.  I find that the appellant would not  have  been  able  to  keep  a  low
    profile, be in hiding and slow his activities and still earn  a  living
    by singing privately without coming to the attention of Al-Shabaab with
    their extensive networks of informants  and  intelligence  in  the  two
    years prior to his departure from Somalia if he had  indeed  upset  Al-
    Shabaab.   I find that the judge's decision was  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.

22.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose an error of law.

23.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date:  15 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun


Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date:  15 October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
