
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/03283/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 January 2020                          |On 13 January 2020               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     AA
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Alban, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                                CONSENT ORDER

    1. Pursuant to Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 and by the consent of the parties the following order is made:

        a. Upon the parties agreeing that the decision of First-Tier
           Tribunal Dorrington promulgated on 13 August 2019 discloses a
           material error of law and should be set aside.

        b. And upon the parties agreeing that the appeal against the
           decision to refuse asylum should have been allowed by the First-
           tier Tribunal.

        c. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for legal
           error and I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I
           allow the appeal against the decision to refuse asylum.

   Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008

   Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
   granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
   indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
   applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
   with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Summary of decision

 2. Appeal allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

 3. I remake the decision and I allow the appeal.






Signed                                  Date: 2 January 2020


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



