
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03181/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing at Bradford IAC |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On the 25 August 2021                     |On the 5 October 2021            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                    L MF
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Patel, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant, a citizen of the  Central  African  Republic("CAR"),
         appeals with permission against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Caswell) (hereinafter referred to  as  the  "FtTJ")
         who dismissed his protection and human rights appeal in a  decision
         promulgated on the 15 March 2021.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 25August 2021, by means  of  teams  which
         has been consented to and not objected to by the parties. A face-to-
         face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and  both
         parties agreed that all issues could  be  determined  in  a  remote
         hearing.  The advocates attended remotely via video. There were  no
         issues regarding sound, and no technical problems were  encountered
         during the hearing, and I am satisfied both advocates were able  to
         make their respective cases by the chosen means. I am  grateful  to
         both advocates for the clear  and  helpful  submissions  they  have
         provided.

Background:

      4. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle.

      5. The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  the  Central  African  Republic
         (hereinafter referred to as "CAR"). He and his family members  were
         all Christians and in 2012 -2013 when staying at the  home  of  his
         aunt and uncle the appellant witnessed an attack  upon  his  family
         members by the Muslim militia called Seleka. They  raped  his  aunt
         and attacked his uncle and other family members  were  killed.  The
         appellant asserted that the appellant's uncle was the leader  of  a
         political group. The appellant escaped  and  ran  into  the  forest
         where he stayed for a month and later went to  live  at  a  refugee
         camp. He later went to Ghana in 2016 and studied there.

      6. In 2018 the appellant returned  to  CAR  and  attended  the  Fatima
         church. The church was attacked by the Muslim militia in  May  2018
         and many people injured and killed. The appellant claimed  to  have
         been stabbed in the arm.

      7. In his oral evidence the appellant stated that  in  or  about  June
         2019, he sustained another attack and was tortured.

      8. He left CAR in July 2019 travelling to Cameroon and other countries
         before eventually arriving in the  UK.  He  did  not  claim  asylum
         immediately on arrival, as he did not know the process and was  not
         sure what to do. However, on being questioned, he claimed asylum.

      9. The appellant is an active  Christian  in  the  UK  and  attends  a
         church.

     10. The appellant fears that he will be killed and/or tortured  by  the
         Muslim militia.

     11. The respondent considered his claim in a decision  dated  19  March
         2020 and whilst the evidence as to his religion as a Christian  was
         considered to be detailed and consistent, the  respondent  did  not
         accept that the appellant  had  given  a  consistent  and  credible
         account that he was present at an attack upon his family  relatives
         in 2012 - 2013 nor that he was present or attacked in the church on
         the date the appellant gave as March 2019. The respondent cited the
         background country material which referred  to  an  attack  on  the
         church but that it was in May 2018 and not 2019 as he had  claimed.
         The decision letter concluded that the  appellant's  fear  was  not
         subjectively genuine as the evidence did not confirm that he was  a
         direct  known  target  for  the  Seleka  group.  Furthermore,   the
         respondent considered that  his  fear  was  not  objectively  well-
         founded because there were sufficiency of  protection  provided  by
         the authorities in the CAIR for the reasons set out  at  paragraphs
         69 - 88. The remainder of the decision letter considered Article 8.

     12. The appellant appealed that decision came before the FtT by way  of
         a hearing on 10 March 2021.

     13. In a decision promulgated on the 15 March 2021 the  FtTJ  dismissed
         his appeal. In summary, the judge rejected his account having found
         that he was not a credible or reliable witness relating to  matters
         that went to the heart of his case. The  judge  was  not  satisfied
         that he was ever attacked by Seleka in 2018 and also  rejected  his
         claim that there was any subsequent attack on him shortly before he
         left the country. The judge set out the inconsistent evidence given
         by the appellant concerning the factual aspects of  his  claim.  At
         [24] the judge also concluded that the appellant  would  not  be  a
         target for any violent groups.

     14. Permission to appeal was sought and permission was refused by  FtTJ
         but on renewal was granted by UTJ Keith  on 21 June  2021  for  the
         following reasons:

         "It is at least arguable that in her decision the judge  failed  to
         make findings in relation to the claimed  attack  in  2012/13;  and
         relatives being granted refugee status in France. The  FTT  records
         these issues at [5] and [14], but arguably fails to  resolve  those
         issues,  which  may  be  relevant  to  the  central  issue  of  the
         appellant's credibility. While the  1st  2  grounds  appear  to  be
         weaker, the grant of  permission  is  not  limited  in  its  scope.
         Permission to appeal is granted on all grounds."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     15. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 30 June 2021, inter alia, indicating that it  was
         of the view that the error of law issue could be determined without
         a face-to-face hearing and that this could take place via Microsoft
         teams. Further directions were given for the service of documents.

     16. Both parties have indicated that they were content for the  hearing
         to proceed by this  method.  Therefore,  the  Tribunal  listed  the
         hearing to enable oral submissions to  be  given  by  each  of  the
         parties. I am grateful for their assistance and  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

     17. M Patel, who appeared on behalf of the appellant  before  the  FtTJ
         and had drafted the grounds appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant.
         She relied upon the written grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal
         dated 15 May 2021.

     18. Her oral submissions followed the matters set out  in  the  written
         grounds of challenge. She  submitted  that  there  were  2  grounds
         relied upon; firstly the judge failed to consider material  matters
         and secondly,  the  judge  failed  to  make  findings  on  material
         evidence.  Dealing with the 1st  ground,  she  submitted  that  the
         assessment  of  credibility  failed  to  take  into   account   the
         circumstances surrounding the interview  which  gave  rise  to  the
         issue  of  whether  or  not  the  appellant  had  given  discrepant
         evidence. The interview lasted for a very long period of  time  and
         whilst there were 2 breaks on any account it was a long  interview.
         During the interview itself the appellant had taken painkillers for
         the reasons given at question 42 that he got headaches  when  asked
         to recall events. She  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  failed  to  take
         account of that evidence. Miss Patel, in  particular,  referred  to
         paragraph [19] and the explanation given by the appellant  that  he
         did not raise the issue with the interviewer because he  felt  that
         it would be held against him. She submitted that whilst  the  judge
         made reference to it the appellant was not  complaining  about  the
         interviewer himself but the way that he would be perceived.

     19. Ms Patel submitted that it had been accepted by the respondent that
         traumatic events and anxiety and depression may affect the  ability
         to recall specific detail, but the judge did  not  take  that  into
         consideration.  She  submitted  during  the   hearing   he   became
         distressed when talking about the events in 2019. This was accepted
         in the decision letter at [48] but the judge had not looked at what
         the respondent had accepted about the effect  of  traumatic  events
         and the ability to recall greater detail.

     20. Ms Patel submitted that the judge failed to consider  that  he  was
         taking medication for  depression  /anxiety  and  that  this  might
         impact his recall. There were photos of the  medication  which  was
         consistent with his oral evidence. Whilst the judge mentioned there
         was no medical report before the  tribunal,  the  absence  of  such
         evidence did not mean that the tribunal could  not  consider  other
         evidence available such as the photographs of  his  medication  and
         also the photographs of the injuries  of  his  scarring.  Thus  she
         submitted  the  errors  were  material  to  the  outcome  and   the
         assessment of credibility.

     21. As to ground 2, she submitted the judge failed to make findings  of
         fact on material evidence and that at both paragraphs [5] and  [14]
         of her decision the judge noted the factual evidence relied upon by
         the appellant concerning an earlier attack in 2012 - 2013 and  that
         the appellant's account was that following the  events  his  family
         relatives were then accepted as refugees in France and had provided
         evidence in support in the bundle. Whilst the  respondent  had  not
         accepted this,  the  judge  made  no  factual  findings  upon  this
         previous attack or made any reference  to  the  activities  of  his
         family members including his uncle and aunt.

     22. During her submissions Ms Patel indicated to the tribunal the parts
         of the lengthy interview where the appellant gave a factual account
         of what had occurred in the CAR during  that  period  of  time  and
         where he had given an explanation of the reasons  for  the  attack.
         However the judge made no factual findings on that issue,  nor  the
         relevant documentation provided  to  demonstrate  that  his  family
         relatives had been granted asylum.

     23. The last point made by Miss Patel was at the judge did not make any
         findings on the injuries the appellant claimed to  have  sustained.
         She submitted that whilst there was no medical report it would  not
         have assisted the judge in any event in light of the  timescale  of
         the injuries to the appellant.

     24. Ms Patel invited the Tribunal to set  aside  the  decision  and  to
         remit the appeal to the FtT.

     25. Mr Kotas stated that he did not rely  upon  the  Rule  24  response
         issued on behalf of the respondent dated 13 July 2021  because  the
         finding at paragraph [24] could not be considered as an alternative
         finding taking the appellant's account at its highest.

     26. When considering the 2nd ground raised by Miss Patel  he  submitted
         that if there was an error in relation  to  that  ground  he  would
         accept that it was material as this was evidence or material  which
         had not been considered and was relevant to  the  asylum  claim  in
         relation to the appellant's family members.

     27. Dealing with 1st ground he submitted that the judge did  take  into
         account the  length  of  the  interview  but  that  the  FtTJ  gave
         consideration to the appellant's evidence but did not accept it  to
         be the case. As to the issue of his mental  health,  there  was  no
         medical evidence in support of his claim and  the  judge  expressly
         took into account the photographs provided in the  appeal  and  the
         submission that the appellant  had  memory  problems.  However  the
         critical point to take into account was that there was  no  medical
         evidence on this point as identified by the FtTJ. He submitted that
         there were no GP notes, and it would have been  an  error  for  the
         judge to make the evidential leap  that  in  the  absence  of  that
         evidence his reliance on medication would  impact  his  ability  to
         recall events. This was out with the judges domain.

     28. As to the failure to consider  the  photographs  of  his  injuries,
         there was no medical evidence in respect of this either. An  expert
         would be able to look at the scarring and provide a  diagnosis.  It
         was not a matter for the judge  to  assess  in  the  absence  of  a
         medical report.

     29. In his oral submissions he returned to ground 2 and  accepted  that
         the judge did not deal with the factual account  referring  to  the
         events that took place in 2012 - 2013. However  he  submitted  that
         the events did not cover the discrepancies in his evidence and  the
         documents in the bundle referred to  a  grant  of  asylum,  but  no
         explanation was given in the documents  as  to  the  basis  it  was
         granted. Thus he questioned the materiality of the omission.

     30. By way of reply to Ms Patel submitted that the omission to consider
         that  part  of  account  was  relevant  to  the  central  issue  of
         credibility and also related to the issue of whether  he  had  been
         targeted by the militia group and as a result not be protected  and
         therefore it was material to the outcome.

     31. In relation to the photographs of the scarring, she submitted  that
         the appellant in his asylum interview had shown the  scars  to  the
         interviewing officer a question 103.

     32. At the conclusion of the submissions, I reserved my decision  which
         I now give.

    Decision on error of law:

     33. The first ground challenges the FtTJ's  assessment  of  credibility
         set out in paragraphs [8]-[23] on the basis that the  judge  failed
         to consider material matters. Ms Patel  summarised  those  material
         considerations as follows; the length of the asylum interview of  6
         and half hours and that the appellant had been asked 195  questions
         and at one stage took painkillers (question  42);  his  explanation
         that it would have negatively affected his case if he  stated  that
         he was not well enough to continue with the  asylum  interview  and
         for it to be adjourned to a different day; that the judge failed to
         consider the medicine taken  for  his  anxiety/depression  and  the
         appellant's account  was  described  as  a  chaotic  situation  and
         therefore the appellant was not able to give a coherent account  in
         chronological order and there was also a risk of re-traumatisation.

     34. Having read the decision of the  FtTJ  and  in  the  light  of  the
         evidence I am satisfied that  the  grounds  of  challenge  in  this
         respect are not made out.

     35. At [18] the FtTJ recorded the appellant's  claim  that  the  events
         which caused him to  leave  his  country  of  nationality  in  2019
         occurred in March 2019 during the attack by the Seleka and that  he
         left in July 2019. No other  references  were  made  to  any  other
         attack and the  judge  contrasted  the  evidence  set  out  in  the
         objective material which stated the attack on the church identified
         by the appellant took place in May 2018 and not March 2019  as  the
         appellant had claimed. The judge also recorded that after this  had
         been pointed out to the appellant in the decision letter, he stated
         that he was mistaken about the date in the interview because he was
         "stressed and confused" and that he was there in May 2018.

     36. Contrary to the submission made  by  Ms  Patel,  the  FtTJ  plainly
         engaged with the explanation offered by the  appellant  to  explain
         the inconsistency in his evidence which was set out at [19] and the
         judge also properly engaged with the submission made by Ms Patel to
         support his explanation. Rather than failing to take account of the
         length of the interview as the grounds assert, the judge  did  take
         that into account and also referred to the appellant having  taking
         paracetamol during the questioning. However in my view it was  open
         to the FtTJ to consider the interview as a  whole.  The  judge  was
         entitled to identify that  the  interviewer  had  been  careful  to
         confirm with the appellant that he  understood  the  questions  and
         that he understood the French  interpreter  and  that  he  was  fit
         enough to continue with the interview. The judge was also  entitled
         to place weight on the absence of any reference to  being  stressed
         and confused during the interview or the failure to mention  having
         any problems with his memory.

     37. Furthermore and contrary to the grounds, the FtTJ expressly engaged
         with the appellant's explanation given in his oral evidence when he
         was asked to account for his failure to mention any problems to the
         interviewer. The judge recorded  his  evidence  at  paragraph  [19]
         where the appellant stated that he  thought  if  he  mentioned  any
         problems it would be held against him. I can see no  error  in  the
         FtTJ's assessment of that evidence, and she was entitled  to  reach
         the conclusion based on the overall conduct of the interviewer, who
         the judge described as "sensitive and solicitous  on  a  number  of
         occasions" that this undermined the explanation as to  why  he  had
         failed to mention the problems to the interviewer.

     38.  In  this  context  Ms  Patel  submitted  it  was  the  appellant's
         perception that was important. Be that as it  may,  the  judge  was
         entitled to reject the explanation or  the  appellant's  perception
         based on her assessment of the evidence concerning the  conduct  of
         the interview taken as a whole.

     39. As Mr Kotas submitted, there was no  medical  evidence  before  the
         tribunal (or  now)  to  demonstrate  that  the  appellant  had  any
         problems  with  his  memory  or  was  suffering  from  any  medical
         condition which affected his recall or ability to  give  consistent
         evidence.

     40. At [20] the FtTJ reached  a  further  adverse  credibility  finding
         taking into account the appellant's corrected claim that it was May
         2018 and not March 2019 that he was attacked and when asked if  any
         other events had occurred, he then for the 1st time stated had been
         tortured in June 2019.

     41. Ms Patel submits that  the  FtTJ  erred  in  law  in  reaching  her
         conclusion at [23] by rejecting his account of  being  attacked  in
         the church in 2018 and the subsequent attack. The  challenge  again
         is based on the assertion  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
         account material or relevant evidence.

     42. Again I am not satisfied that that submission is made out. At  [20]
         the judge recorded the appellant's account and that  this  was  the
         first time that he had ever mentioned an attack in June  2019.  The
         judge also recorded the appellant's explanation for the failure  to
         mention such a  relevant  incident  and  that  it  would  make  him
         "stressed and give him flashbacks" and that he had not mentioned it
         earlier because he had not been asked about  it  but  that  he  had
         mentioned it to his solicitor.

     43. At paragraphs [20 - 22] the judge plainly engaged with the evidence
         and the submissions made by Ms Patel. The judge was correct to find
         that contrary to the appellant's account that he had  mentioned  it
         to his solicitor, there was no such incident  referred  to  in  the
         witness statement filed on his behalf nor was there a  "corrections
         letter" sent  by  his  solicitors  (see  FtTJ  decision  at  [20]).
         Furthermore the FtTJ properly engaged with the point raised  by  Ms
         Patel that those who  suffer  from  PTSD  or  experienced  dramatic
         events may struggle to recount them due to the risk of  flashbacks.
         However, in my judgement the FtTJ was  entitled  to  consider  that
         submission in the light of the evidence given of the incident.  The
         judge noted that the description of  the  June  2019  incident  was
         "very vague" and only emerged after the gap of over a year  between
         the attack in the church and the appellant leaving the country. The
         judge was entitled to take into account that there was no reference
         to this incident having taken place despite  the  appellant  having
         been represented throughout the appeal process.

     44. A more  relevant  consideration  is  the  absence  of  any  medical
         evidence advanced on behalf of  the  appellant  (then  or  now)  to
         support the  claim  that  he  suffered  from  stress  or  that  any
         condition he suffered from affected his ability to recall incidents
         with any consistency.

     45. As the FtTJ observed at [22] there no medical report and not even a
         prescription list or GPs notes in support of such a claim.  If  the
         appellant had been suffering  from  any  relevant  condition  which
         affected  his  ability  to  give  evidence  and  recall   incidents
         consistently, it was reasonable to assume that that would have been
         evidenced during the appellant's representation through the  asylum
         process.

     46. In  her  submissions  Ms  Patel  submitted  that  in  reaching  her
         conclusions on this issue the judge ignored the  evidence  relating
         to his medication. I do  not  accept  that  submission.  The  judge
         plainly engaged with the evidence at [22] where she referred to the
         photographs of the medication. I have  looked  at  the  photographs
         exhibited at page 21 showing amitriptyline and  Propranolol  and  I
         observe that they give no indication as to when the medication  was
         prescribed or  for  what  purpose.  Ms  Patel  submitted  that  the
         medication he takes impairs his concentration and  recall.  However
         there is no medical evidence to support such a  submission  and  it
         was not for the judge to speculate about this in the absence of any
         such evidence.

     47. In any event  the  FtTJ  did  refer  to   the  photographs  of  the
         medication and whilst they may be prescribed for depression that by
         itself did not itself support the claim made that  the  appellant's
         mental health was such that the appellant  could  not  remember  or
         recount his experiences. I find no error in the  FtTJ's  assessment
         based on the submission that the judge  failed  to  consider  those
         material matters.

     48. In this context I have considered  the  submission  made  that  the
         judge failed to treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness.  I  am
         satisfied that this submission is also not made out. I can  see  no
         reference to this issue being raised  before  the  tribunal  either
         before the hearing or at the hearing itself as consistent with  the
         practice  direction  and  the  decision  of   AM  (Afghanistan)   v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123  in
         which Sir Ernest Ryder, Senior President,  referred  to  the  Joint
         Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010: Child,  Vulnerable  Adult
         and Sensitive Appellant ("the guidance note") and also the Practice
         Direction, First-tier and Upper Tribunal  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult
         and Sensitive Witnesses.

     49. The only evidence that was advanced on behalf of the appellant  was
         a photograph of the medication and in the  absence  of  any  cogent
         medical evidence in the support of any  vulnerability  which  might
         affect his evidence, I can see no basis upon which the judge  could
         properly have treated the appellant as a vulnerable witness.

     50. I also reject the submission made by Ms Patel that the judge failed
         to make a finding on the photograph of the injuries.

     51. At [22] the judge considered the evidence to support his  claim  to
         have been tortured and properly noted the absence  of  any  medical
         evidence in support of the causation or timing of the scarring.

     52.  Ms  Patel  in  her  submissions  to  this  tribunal  repeated  the
         submission that she made to Judge Caswell and which was recorded at
         paragraph [22] that several years after the event  there  would  be
         little value in obtaining such a report.  Mr  Kotas  has  made  the
         point that the colour photographs showed what could be described as
         legions but that it was not clear on the photographs  whether  they
         were birthmarks or what in fact they were.  The  assertion  by  the
         appellant did not take matters any further and this is  why  expert
         evidence is necessary. He submitted that  it  would  have  been  an
         error for  the  judge  to  make  an  assessment  of  the  scars  as
         corroboration of his account in the absence of expert  evidence.  I
         agree with that submission. Whilst judges of the FtT are likely  to
         have experience in considering scarring it is  in  the  context  of
         expert evidence which  is  undertaken  by  taking  account  of  the
         Istanbul Protocol and setting  out  the  likely  causation  of  the
         injuries and the consistencies  of  those  injuries  taken  in  the
         context of the account given by the particular appellant.  In  this
         appeal there was no such evidence  before  the  FtTJ  and  thus  it
         cannot be said that the FtTJ was in  error  in  making  no  further
         assessment of those photographs.

     53. I now turn to the last ground advanced on behalf of  the  appellant
         and this relates to paragraph 8 of the grounds  where  it  is  said
         that the judge failed to make a finding on the previous attack upon
         the appellant which took place in 2012 - 2013 due to the activities
         of his uncle and aunt.

     54. Ms Patel behalf the appellant submits the appellant gave an account
         in his interview at length where he described  the  nature  of  the
         attack, the people who were involved in the reasons for the attack.
         She also pointed out that he had provided documentary evidence that
         his family relatives had been granted refugee status in France as a
         result.

     55. As Upper Tribunal Judge Keith observed  when  granting  permission,
         the judge did record those issues at paragraphs [5] and [14] of her
         decision but did not make findings of fact upon that  part  of  his
         factual claim.

     56. Mr Kotas on behalf of the respondent accepted that  the  judge  did
         not deal with the evidence relevant to  those  factual  issues  and
         further submitted that if this was material evidence that the judge
         had not considered which referred to his asylum claim  and  related
         to members of his  family,  he  could  not  say  that  it  was  not
         material.

     57. However he properly made 2 points. Firstly that  the  evidence  did
         not account for the  discrepancies  identified  by  the  judge  and
         secondly the documents in the bundle did not demonstrate the  basis
         upon which the family relatives had been granted  asylum.  Thus  he
         questions the materiality of this.

     58. In my judgement those points made by Mr Kotas are  entirely  valid.
         However the point also relied upon by Ms  Patel  that  this  was  a
         relevant part of the appellant's history and claim relating to have
         been targeted by the Seleka group in 2012 - 2013 in  the  light  of
         his membership of the family. The interview questions identified by
         Ms Patel and accepted by Mr Kotas go  into  detail  concerning  the
         events that allegedly occurred in 2012 - 2013 and the  reasons  for
         the attack. The appellant had stated also made reference to some of
         the people responsible he had known from the local area. It is  not
         the case of a passing  reference  in  the  appellant's  claim,  but
         detailed evidence was given in his interview about that attack  and
         that it was this which had led  to  the  appellant's  relatives  to
         leave the country and to subsequently claim asylum in France.

     59. I have had to consider with care this omission  from  what  was  an
         otherwise very careful decision of  the  FtTJ.  Having  done  so  I
         consider that Mr Kotas was right to accept if material evidence had
         not been considered in relation to the appellant's asylum claim and
         which related to family members, it is difficult to  say  it  could
         not be material to  the  outcome  as  it  related  to  the  overall
         credibility assessment.

     60. Therefore having considered the second ground advanced on behalf of
         the appellant I am satisfied that the FtTJ fell into error  in  the
         way the ground  sets  out  and  given  the  central  importance  of
         credibility to the appellant's claim, the error was or  could  have
         been material to the outcome.

     61. Consequently, I am satisfied that as this was  a  protection  claim
         and thus the requirement of anxious scrutiny applied, the  decision
         cannot stand.

     62. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision should be set aside.

     63.  I have considered whether any  of  the  factual  findings  can  be
         preserved and in doing  so  have  considered  the  decision  in  AB
         (preserved  FtT findings; Wisniewski principles ) [2020] UKUT  268.
         The decision makes it plain that there is no hard- edged answer  to
         whether findings of fact have been "undermined"  or  "infected"  by
         any "error or errors of law".  The  decision  also  identifies  the
         legal error in  the  task  of  assessing  an  individual's  overall
         credibility is in general likely to affect the  conclusions  as  to
         credibility reached by the First-tier Tribunal. When looking at the
         decision in  this  appeal,  the  grounds  of  challenge  sought  to
         undermine the approach to the appellant's credibility taken by  the
         FtTJ by reference to the omission of any  factual  assessment  made
         relating to his account of events in 2021-2013.  Having  considered
         this issue I have reached the conclusion none of  the  findings  of
         fact should be preserved.

     64. I have therefore considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

             "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that:-

             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

     65. Ms Patel submits that the venue for hearing the  appeal  should  be
         the FtT.  I  have  carefully  considered  the  submissions  of  the
         advocates and have done so in the light of the  practice  statement
         recited above and by reference to the appeal. It  will be necessary
         for  the  appellant   to  give  evidence  and   to  deal  with  the
         evidential issues,  and  therefore  further  fact-finding  will  be
         necessary alongside the analysis of risk on return in the light  of
         the relevant documentary evidence,  and in my  judgement  the  best
         course and consistent with the overriding objective is for it to be
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall be set  aside.
The decision shall be remitted to the FtT.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated    26 August 2021
