
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03212/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th December 2017                         |On 30th January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     c t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford, Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of  Vietnam  born  on  [  ]  2000.   He
    entered the UK illegally on 17th September 2016 and applied for asylum.
     That application was refused on 17th March 2017 for the reasons  given
    in the Respondent's letter of that date.  However, owing to the age  of
    the Appellant, he was granted discretionary leave to remain until  12th
    July 2017.  The Appellant appealed the refusal of asylum and his appeal
    was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Gribble  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 2nd May 2017.   She  decided  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and Articles 2  and  3  ECHR
    grounds, but to allow it on Article 8  ECHR  grounds  for  the  reasons
    given in her Decision dated 27th May 2017.  Both the Appellant and  the
    Respondent  sought  leave  to  appeal  that  decision  and   eventually
    permission was granted to the Respondent alone.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be  set  aside.   The  only  issue  is
    whether the Judge erred in law in allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR
    grounds.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  because  she
    found that the Appellant had a private life in the UK  which  would  be
    interfered with by the  Respondent's  decision  to  such  a  degree  of
    gravity as to engage the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR  rights.   Further,
    the Judge found that  such  interference  was  not  proportionate.   In
    reaching that conclusion, the Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  would
    return to Vietnam as a lone child without family  support.   The  Judge
    also found that the Appellant was a victim of trafficking, and that his
    best interests lay in maintaining his education  and  accommodation  in
    the UK.  The Judge  took  into  account  the  public  interest  and  in
    particular the factors mentioned at  Section  117B(1)  to  (5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. At the hearing, Mrs Aboni argued that the Judge erred in law in  coming
    to this conclusion.  The fact of the  matter  was  that  the  Appellant
    would not be returned to Vietnam until he was an adult of 18  years  of
    age, and therefore the Judge had erred  in  treating  him  as  a  child
    returning to Vietnam and in considering his best interests as a  child.



 5. In response, Mr Bedford referred to the decisions in AM (Afghanistan) v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 and CL (Vietnam) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  1551
    in both of which it was held that:

         "The fact that the removal of the Appellant may only take place  at
         some time in the future does not relieve the Immigration  Judge  of
         his burden of making a decision on the human rights claim".

 6. Mr Bedford argued that there was therefore  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the Judge.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  Mrs Aboni's argument was that the Judge had erred in
    law in treating the Appellant as  a  child  and  considering  his  best
    interests as such.  However, it is clearly established by the cases  of
    AM and CL that this is exactly what  the  Judge  was  required  to  do.
    There is therefore no error of law in the decision of the Judge.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the same reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 29th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
