
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03245/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (Hybrid Hearing) |Decision promulgated                 |
|On 13 July 2021                      |On 13 August 2021                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     BAF
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Johnrose instructed by Broudie Jackson & Canter

For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. By a decision  made  pursuant  to  Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal  (Upper
      Tribunal) Procedure Rules, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker  set  aside  a
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal for the following reasons:

        Error of law


        5.    The appellant did not seek permission to appeal the  findings
             of the FtT Judge rejecting his account of  events  in  Iraq  or
             that he had not lost contact with his mother, or the  dismissal
             of his Article 8 claim.


        6.   The  grounds  relied  upon,  and  upon  which  permission  was
             granted, centre of the alleged failure  of  the  FtT  judge  to
             consider the appellant's explanation about the CSID as given to
             the respondent during the asylum interview,  the  reference  by
             the judge to the appellant retaining possession of his ID  card
             without considering that it would have  been  retained  by  the
             respondent on claiming asylum if that were the case, that  such
             a proposition was not put to the appellant during the course of
             the hearing and the respondent relied upon the appellant  being
             able to obtain a replacement CSID on return to Iraq,  not  that
             he retained his CSID.


        7.   The respondent, in her submissions, although  commenting  that
             she does not have access to the  full  file,  accepts  the  FtT
             judge erred in law insofar as the CSID is concerned.


        8.   I am satisfied the judge failed, in paragraph 20 and 21 of her
             decision, to properly approach  the  question  of  whether  the
             appellant had access to his CSID and the extent  to  which  and
             how he could obtain a CSID, the necessity of having a  CSID  or
             other identity documents to enable him to travel to Kirkuk.

   2. Judge Coker continued later in the decision. "I set aside the decision
      insofar as the only issue to be determined is  that  relating  to  the
      availability of a CSID or other ID documentation".
   3. Directions were given for the appellant to file an up-to-date  witness
      statement regarding the  CSID  or  other  identity  documents,  as  so
      advised.
   4. Following notification by Mr McVeety of a need for him to isolate,  of
      which he was only himself aware on the morning  of  the  hearing,  the
      hearing was converted to a hybrid  hearing  with  the  appellant,  Mrs
      Johnrose,  the  interpreter,  myself  and  the  court  clerk  in   the
      courtroom, with Mr McVeety attending remotely. Once  technical  issues
      had been resolved  the  hearing  proceeded  and  I  am  satisfied  the
      appellant received a fair hearing.

Discussion

   5. It is  a  preserved  finding  that  the  appellant's  account  of  his
      difficulties in Iraq was rejected as  not  being  credible  for  which
      adequate reasons were given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  which
      nothing I have heard today warrants a different finding being made.
   6. The appellant claimed before the First-tier Tribunal that when he  and
      his mother fled Iraq they packed their identity documents and that his
      mother kept the documents when they separated in  Turkey.  The  First-
      tier Tribunal also did not accept that the appellant had  been  honest
      in this part of his claim at [20], which is a preserved finding.
   7. It was not disputed before the Judge that the appellant  is  an  Iraqi
      citizen of Kurdish ethnicity from Kirkuk.
   8. It follows from the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that  he  also
      remains in contact with his mother with no evidence of  his  facing  a
      real risk for the reasons claimed in his home area.
   9. I did not find the appellant's evidence concerning his CSID  credible.
      The appellant was self-employed in Iraq and the country guidance  case
      of SMO highlights the importance of  this  document.  The  appellant's
      claim that he only took his CSID out from where it  was  kept  in  his
      home occasional when needed is contrary to the country evidence  where
      such a document had to be produced if a person was  challenged  as  to
      their identity or for undertaking normal transactions. The appellant's
      claim is externally inconsistent.
  10. This was highlighted by Mr  McVeety  who  referred  to  the  fact  the
      appellant had mentioned fighting in Kirkuk, where he lived, and  there
      being checkpoints all over the place, which with the  appellant  would
      have needed his CSID to pass in addition to  being  able  to  purchase
      items from the shop and pay money into his bank.
  11. I reject the appellant's claim that he kept his CSID in a plastic  bag
      with his mother, and find it is more likely that he retained his  CSID
      on his person.
  12. I also find the appellant's claim to have passed all his documents  to
      his mother when they left Iraq together and travelled to  Turkey,  yet
      to  have  left  without  any  form  of  identity  documents,  to  lack
      credibility.
  13. The appellant and his mother also had mobile telephones and it is  not
      implausible that the appellant would  have  had  contact  details  for
      family members or his mother on his telephone including  his  mother's
      telephone number.
  14. There is no evidence the appellant handed over his identity  documents
      in the United Kingdom, or that his CSID is not available to  him  even
      if he has to make contact with family members in Iraq, or that  family
      members will not be able to assist him with the re-documenting process
      (see below).
  15. It is not disputed that the appellant  will  not  be  able  to  get  a
      replacement CSID in the United Kingdom from the Iraqi Embassy,  if  he
      has lost his original, but the CPIN, June 2020, at 2.6.15 states:

        2.6.15    Since  SMO  was  promulgated  in  December  2019  further
             information regarding the issuance of CSIDs in the UK has  been
             obtained by the Home Office in April 2020 [see Annex  I].  When
             asked to describe the process of  obtaining  a  CSID  from  the
             Iraqi  Embassy  in  London  the  Returns  Logistics  department
             stated:


             'CSID cards are being phased out and  replaced  by  INID  (Iraq
             National Identification) cards. It is not currently possible to
             apply for an INID card outside of Iraq. As a result, the  Iraqi
             embassy in London are advising their nationals  in  the  UK  to
             apply instead for a 'Registration Document (1957)'  which  they
             can use to apply for other documents such as  passports  or  an
             INID card once they have returned to Iraq.


             'The registration document (1957) must be applied  for  on  the
             applicant's behalf by a nominated representative  in  Iraq.  In
             order  to  start  the  application,  the  individual  requiring
             documentation would normally provide at least  one  copy  of  a
             national identity document [see paragraph 2.6.24  for  list  of
             national identity documents] and complete a power  of  attorney
             (to nominate a representative in Iraq)  at  the  Iraqi  embassy
             along with the embassy issued application forms. If  they  have
             no copies  of  identity  documents  they  also  would  need  to
             complete a British power of attorney validated by the  FCO  and
             provide parents  names,  place  and  date  of  birth  to  their
             nominated representative in Iraq.


             'Once  issued  the  nominated  representative  will  send   the
             registration document (1957) to the applicant in  the  UK.  The
             process  takes  1-2  months.   'The   HO   cannot   apply   for
             documentation other than Laissez Passers  on  someone's  behalf
             but the embassy is willing to check to see  if  the  individual
             already holds documents and provide copies if necessary.'


        2.6.16    Based on the above information,  it  is  highly  unlikely
             that an individual would be able to  obtain  a  CSID  from  the
             Iraqi Embassy while in the UK. Instead a person would  need  to
             apply for a registration document (1957) and would  then  apply
             for an INID upon return to their local CSA office in Iraq.

  16. The appellant failed to establish that he would not be able to  obtain
      a registration document (1957), which is not the  same  as  a  laizzer
      passer which is a one-use document, but an official identity  document
      issued by the authorities in Iraq.
  17. It was not made out that his mother or other family members would  not
      be able to assist in obtaining a registration document 1957.
  18. The appellant's case is that he lost contact with his mother, but that
      was found to lack credibility. Although it was argued by Mrs  Johnrose
      that the fact the appellant and his mother were separated has not been
      challenged the preserved finding is that the  appellant  is  still  in
      contact with his  mother.  That  must  be  via  the  mobile  telephone
      referred to by the First-tier Judge which it reasonable to  find  will
      contain contact numbers. I find the appellant has  failed  to  provide
      sufficient evidence to establish that his mother or family members are
      not in Iraq or cannot be contacted by him or on his behalf.
  19. Mrs Johnrose submitted that it was necessary to view the merits of the
      appellant's appeal through  the  prism  of  the  reasons  for  refusal
      letter, but that document is dated 29th March 2019 and is important to
      consider the merits of the claim  on  the  basis  of  the  information
      available at the date of the hearing,  which  includes  the  preserved
      findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  up-to-date  oral  and
      documentary evidence. There is  no  preserved  finding  the  appellant
      could not contact his family. This is the position on the evidence  he
      sought to rely upon today.
  20. The scope of this hearing may relate to a narrow point, but the burden
      is still upon the appellant to establish his claim, which I  find  had
      not done on the evidence.
  21. The adverse credibility findings made against  the  appellant  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge illustrate that care needs to  be  taken  in
      relation to matters the appellant asserts are  true,  which  has  been
      shown not to be the case.
  22. Mrs Johnrose  submission  regarding  the  difficulty  in  obtaining  a
      registration document 1957 are not made out. The appellant  claims  to
      be undocumented but that issue has been discussed above and it was not
      made out, in any event, that  he  could  not  obtain  assistance  from
      family members to redocument himself if required.
  23. As the appellant is not from the IKR he will be returned  to  Baghdad.
      It was not made out he will not be able to travel from  there  to  his
      home area to obtain a new or replacement IND, for which is  biometrics
      are required. The submission by Mrs Johnrose that the appellant  would
      not be able to leave Baghdad without a CSID or ID card may be  correct
      if this was the situation, but that submission does not deal  with  is
      the fact the appellant can obtain a  registration  document  1957  and
      that the appellant has not produced sufficient  evidence  to  show  he
      would not be able to travel to his home area  with  family  assistance
      using this document.
  24. The appellant has failed to establish he cannot  return  to  his  home
      area; therefore, the issue of internal relocation does not arise.
  25. Having assessed the evidence carefully I find the appellant has failed
      to establish he is entitled to a grant of international protection  or
      for leave to remain in the United Kingdom and any other basis.




Decision

  26. I dismiss the appeal.

   Anonymity.

  27. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

      I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 28 July 2021












