
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/03752/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Oral decision given following hearing   |                                    |
|On 10 October 2019                      |On 26 November 2019                 |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                    mr M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel instructed by Yemets
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Ukraine who appeals against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley  promulgated  on  12
    July 2019, following a hearing at Hatton Cross two days earlier  on  18
    July in which the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision
    refusing asylum and was dismissed on Article 3 human rights grounds.

 2. Put very briefly, the basis of the appellant's application was that  he
    would be at real risk on return of being imprisoned for draft  evasion.



 3. The grounds, while succinct to  the  extent  of  concentrating  on  the
    relevant issues are nonetheless lengthy, because there are a number  of
    areas where the judge is said to have fallen into error.  When granting
    permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Landes  also  gave
    lengthy reasons for finding  that  the  majority  of  the  grounds  are
    arguable.  It is not necessary, by reason of what is set out below,  to
    list Judge Landes' reasons in any detail.

 4. At the hearing before this Tribunal, on behalf of  the  respondent,  Mr
    Bramble very fairly stated as follows:

         "I agree with the  error  of  law  as  set  out  in  the  grant  of
         permission, on grounds 1, 2, 6 and 5 in that order.

         The first ground regards the adverse credibility  findings  on  the
         evidence.  This ground relates to  the  judge's  finding  regarding
         when the appellant's sister became aware and what actions she  took
         with regard to the appellant's  case.   The  sister's  account  was
         consistent with what was said by the appellant, and so this was not
         in fact an inconsistency [as the judge had found].

         With regard to ground 2, that the judge had  failed  to  take  into
         account when dealing with problems arising out of having a  Russian
         interpreter within the screening interview  the  evidence  recorded
         within the interview itself that problems had arisen.  That was  an
         error also.

         It is accepted on behalf of the respondent that the judge applied a
         higher standard of proof than  required  in  protection  cases  for
         example where the judge had found that  the  appellant  'could  not
         find' his actual call up papers (see at paragraph 53).

         Finally, with regard to ground 5, that the judge failed to consider
         the relevant country guidance, the premise of this ground  is  that
         if there had been a finding that he would go to prison,  the  judge
         has ignored what prison conditions are like in  the  Ukraine  (with
         reference to paragraph 67).  This ground is also accepted."

 5. In my judgment, Mr Bramble was correct to make  these  concessions.   I
    have in mind in particular that at paragraph 53 the judge had stated in
    terms his finding "that credibility issues are especially live in  this
    appeal".  Accordingly, it  was  very  important  that  his  credibility
    findings were sustainable because in  a  case  which  might  be  finely
    balanced it is always difficult to know precisely  what  material  tips
    the balance one way or another.  At paragraph 54 the judge  found  that
    the appellant had changed his evidence significantly about when he  had
    learnt about the sentence on him, but as  Judge  Landes  when  granting
    permission to bring this appeal correctly stated:

         "The evidence at [54] which the judge said  seriously  damages  the
         appellant's credibility is not in fact an inconsistency.   This  is
         because there is no inconsistency between  the  appellant's  sister
         obtaining the court verdict in January [and]  the  appellant  [not]
         being informed about it until one month later.  The appellant  does
         not appear to have changed his evidence about when he was  informed
         of the verdict."

 6. Also with regard to the difficulties concerning  the  interpreter,  the
    appellant had immediately in  his  screening  interview  corrected  his
    answer by explaining that Russian was not his  first  language  and  he
    also had stated that he had difficulties at the  interview  itself  and
    gave his explanation as to why it was  that  he  said  he  could  speak
    Russian.  This is dealt with at paragraphs 11 and 12  of  the  grounds,
    where there is reference to paragraph 4.1 of the  interview  where  the
    appellant had stated "it is very difficult.  Russian is  not  my  first
    language I probably did not understand the interpreter".  He was  asked
    at the substantive interview why he had said he  could  speak  Russian,
    and had stated that "during the time I was here I attempted  to  get  a
    Ukrainian interpreter it was  not  possible  so  that  is  why  I  said
    Russian.  I apologise.  I probably overestimated my Russian."  It seems
    that the judge failed to take  this  explanation  into  account.   With
    regard to ground 6, there is in my judgment force in this  argument  as
    well.

 7. With regard to the final ground, that the judge had failed to take into
    account relevant country guidance, that goes to the alternative finding
    at paragraph 67, which as Mr Bramble stated would only come  into  play
    in the event that the judge had found the appellant to  be  a  truthful
    witness, as follows:

         "67. Having considered those individual  facts,  I  find  that  the
             appellant has not provided a genuine and  credible  claim  for
             international protection, but even if his account was in  fact
             truthful, and for the avoidance of doubt I find it is  not,  I
             nonetheless conclude, for the  reasons  stated,  that  removal
             would not give rise to a  risk  of  Article  3  protection  on
             return."

 8. Although at paragraph 63 the judge has mentioned the  country  guidance
    case of BB and Another (draft evaders in prison conditions: Ukraine) CG
    [2017] UKUT 79 and at paragraph 65 has referred to the decision  in  PK
    (Draft evader);  punishment,  minimum  severity)  Ukraine  [2018]  UKUT
    00241, there is no  detailed  consideration  of  the  effect  of  these
    decisions and in particular the conclusions that have  been  made  that
    prison conditions within Ukraine are sufficiently harsh  that  if  this
    appellant was to be sentenced to a term of imprisonment that  would  be
    likely to be in breach of his Article 3 rights.

 9. For these reasons, I consider that this decision must be set  aside  as
    containing material errors of law and must be remade.

10. Although a previous decision in respect of this appellant was also  set
    aside and the appeal was remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    regrettably because there will have to be completely fresh  findings  I
    consider  it  appropriate  to   remit   this   case   yet   again   for
    reconsideration in the First-tier Tribunal.  However, because this is a
    second remittal I shall make a direction that the appeal should now  be
    heard by a Designated Immigration Judge to give  the  best  opportunity
    for the parties to have hopefully a concluded and sustainable  decision
    made in respect of this  appeal.   I  accordingly  make  the  following
    decision.

Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as  containing  material
errors of law, and  remit  the  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
sitting at Hatton Cross, where  it  should  be  heard  before  a  Designated
Immigration Judge.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
    Date: 20 November 2019

