
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03417/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27th July 2017                        |On 3rd August 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                   H.A.H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adeboya, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a citizen of Iraq, born [ ] 1996 appeals with  permission
    against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Devlin) dismissing
    his  appeal   against   the   Respondent's   refusal   to   grant   his
    protection/human rights claim.



Background

 2. The Appellant entered the UK illegally on  19th  October  2015,  having
    travelled via Turkey, Greece, Germany, Belgium and France.  He  claimed
    asylum on 20th October 2015.

 3. His claim to asylum amounts to saying the following

       . He is a Sunni Muslim coming from Fallujah in Iraq.  He is an Arabic
         speaker.

       . Neither he nor  his  family  are  involved  in  politics,  but  the
         Appellant describes himself as a well-known sportsman (kick boxer).



       . In July 2015 he attempted to enter Kurdistan but was  turned  away.



       . In August/September 2015 ISIS approached him to join them and fight
         against the Iraqi Government.

       . He did not refuse ISIS, being afraid, but instead left Fallujah two
         or  three  days  after  the  approach  and  before  ISIS  returned.



       . His mother and sister went to Baghdad.  He  followed  a  couple  of
         days later but claimed he could not enter the city because he is  a
         Sunni from Fallujah.  In any event his mother had arranged  an  air
         flight to Turkey for him.  He boarded the flight  to  Turkey  using
         his own passport and from there travelled by sea to  Greece.   Once
         in Greece he travelled across various EU countries staying  with  a
         friend in Germany and travelling across Belgium by train to France.
          He made no claim to asylum in any of the EU countries.



FtT Hearing/Decision

 4. The FtT Judge gave several reasons  for  disbelieving  the  Appellant's
    narrative.  In essence the judge found that he could not  be  satisfied
    to the lower standard of  proof,  that  any  part  of  the  Appellant's
    account of the events that led to his departure from Iraq  were  worthy
    of credence [192].  This led the FtTJ to the conclusion that  he  could
    not be satisfied that there would be a risk on  return  to  Iraq.   The
    appeal was therefore dismissed.

 5. The grounds seeking permission criticised the judge's approach,  saying



       . the judge reached findings contrary to the weight of  evidence  and
         attached undue weight to peripheral matters.

    In substantiating the above generalised claim it was asserted

       . the judge misdirected himself when he made an adverse finding  that
         the Appellant has not produced any independent evidence to show  he
         is from Fallujah; and

       . the most serious criticism of the decision stated in  essence  that
         the Respondent "did not doubt" that the Appellant is from Fallujah,
         nor did she make an issue about this in  the  reasons  for  refusal
         letter.  Therefore there was not a live issue on this  point.   The
         judge of his own accord made it an  issue  and  found  against  the
         Appellant.  This, it is said, was a material error  and  one  which
         required  that  the  decision  should  be  set  aside.   This   was
         especially pertinent in view of the judge's comment at [205],  when
         discussing the question of internal relocation to Baghdad. At [205]
         the judge had said that if "truly the Appellant  is  from  Fallujah
         and a Sunni, he will be more likely to be targeted as  a  suspected
         insurgent."

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by a FtT Judge in the following  terms



         "Whilst I do not accept that the Respondent formally  accepted  the
         Appellant was  from  Fallujah  no  issue  was  raised  about  this.
         However, the judge raised this as  an  issue  in  his  decision  at
         paragraphs 148 to 151 accepting at paragraph  150  that  a  finding
         that the Appellant is from Fallujah has important consequences.   I
         am satisfied the Appellant did not have the opportunity to properly
         answer this issue and that, as a result, there is an arguable error
         of law in the decision which may well have infected  the  remainder
         of it."

    Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether the FtT's decision
    contains such error of law that  it  must  be  set  aside  and  remade.





UT Hearing

 7. Mr Adeboya appeared for the Appellant.  His submissions relied upon the
    grounds seeking permission, and he followed the lines of those grounds.
    He emphasised that the judge's material error was his finding that  the
    Appellant is not  from  Fallujah.   This  in  turn  affected  a  proper
    assessment of risk on return, more especially to Baghdad. He  submitted
    that the judge had ignored  evidence  when  assessing  the  Appellant's
    claim because the judge had wrongly concluded that the only evidence of
    the Appellant's identity was the word of the  appellant  himself.   The
    judge seemingly had failed  to  factor  in  the  "sport's  certificate"
    produced which named him as coming from "Falooja".  The decision should
    therefore be set aside for material error and remade.

 8. Mr Avery filed a Rule 24 response defending the decision.   He  pointed
    out, further, that apart from giving cogent and evidenced reasons as to
    why he had made his findings of adverse credibility, the judge had gone
    on in his decision to set out alternative scenarios concerning risk  on
    return. The judge had in essence covered himself by showing that he had
    looked at all aspects of the appellant's claim. The judge was  entitled
    to make a finding that the appellant was not from Fallujah because this
    was a significant aspect of the appeal.  Mr  Avery  pointed  to  [208],
    [214] and [218].  The criticisms of the judge amounted to no more  than
    a disagreement with what is a  carefully  thought  out  decision.   The
    decision is therefore sustainable and the Appellant's appeal should  be
    dismissed.



Consideration

 9. I begin by considering the FtTJ's decision.  The judge carefully  noted
    the Appellant's claim and fully set out the  oral  evidence  which  the
    Appellant gave.  The judge's findings and reasons are set out in  great
    detail over several paragraphs, noting point by point the reasons  for
    the Respondent finding the  Appellant's  narrative  not  credible.  The
    judge adopted the same format but it is of note that the judge has  not
    simply accepted  the  Respondent's  case.  On  the  contrary  he  gives
    detailed reasons point by point of why he either  agrees  or  disagrees
    with the points set out in the  Respondent's  assessment.   This  shows
    that the judge has approached the evidence with an open mind.

10. From those points the judge made the following findings, all  of  which
    in my judgment are properly reasoned ones:

       . The Appellant's explanation that he had  been  approached  by  ISIS
         with a view to recruitment was not credible.   In  coming  to  this
         decision the judge noted in  particular  that  the  Appellant  gave
         inconsistent evidence on when he, his mother and  sister  left  the
         family home. The judge drew on the background documents  concerning
         ISIS recruitment methods.

       . The Appellant's account of his cousin being targeted, tortured  and
         killed on account of his Sunni ethnicity by Shia militia  was  also
         found to be not  credible.   The  reason  for  this  was  that  the
         Appellant failed to mention this important fact  at  his  interview
         and only brought  it  up  at  a  later  stage.   The  documentation
         produced in respect of his cousin's death was, the judge found, not
         reliable evidence.

       . So far as establishing his identity is concerned,  the  judge  took
         into account the Appellant's narrative that he  had  used  his  own
         passport to exit Iraq but lost it "overboard" on the  journey  from
         Turkey to Greece. He had then lost his nationality  certificate  in
         Belgium on a train, and his national ID  card  which  he  said  was
         being sent to him by his mother, never arrived.  This led the  FtTJ
         to the conclusion that the Appellant was being untruthful about his
         identity.  The  judge  acknowledged  the  documentation  which  was
         produced, which included photographs and sports certificates one of
         which contained the word "Falooja" but found they did not  outweigh
         the lack of credibility  shown  in  the  Appellant's  narrative  of
         losing or being unable to access his official identity documents.

11. The judge was very careful to set out his reasons for the findings made
    above and there was  much  evidence  to  support  those  findings.   In
    drawing this evidence together the judge said at [174] it follows  that
    the "only evidence that the Appellant is a Sunni Muslim from  Fallujah,
    is the evidence of the Appellant himself."

12. The judge then directed himself at paragraphs [175] to [188] as to  why
    the Appellant's account of being a famous sportsman  was  not  credible
    and further undermined the Appellant's claim.

13. Drawing all these points together, the judge made  a  finding  that  he
    could not be satisfied that  the  Appellant  is  a  Sunni  Muslim  from
    Fallujah.  I find that there is  nothing  to  show  that  this  was  an
    improper finding against the weight of evidence.

14. Mr. Adeboya in his submissions made much of saying that the  Respondent
    "did not doubt that the appellant is from Fallujah."  I  gave  him  the
    opportunity to point out where in the RFRL this was said.  So far as  I
    can see the Respondent merely accepted that the appellant is from  Iraq
    but made no express finding as to  any  specific  area  or  city.   The
    criticism levelled at the judge is that he misdirected himself when  he
    made his adverse finding as to where the Appellant came from.  I do not
    agree.  I find that the judge has made  well-founded  adverse  findings
    regarding the Appellant's credibility and, in this context,  was  quite
    entitled to consider this aspect of the claim  and  then  draw  such  a
    conclusion.

15. The judge then properly directed himself that he had to turn  his  mind
    as to whether there is risk on return to this Appellant.  He took  into
    account the CG cases of AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544
    (IAC) and BA (Returns to Baghdad Iraq CG) [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) and then
    at [195] he further directed  himself  that  he  should  do  so  on  an
    alternative basis that the Appellant is a Sunni  Muslim  from  Fallujah
    "lest he is wrong in his original assessment."

16. I accept that it is hard to see why the judge took the approach he  did
    by setting out alternative scenarios after he had made  clear  findings
    that the Appellant's account was not credible.  On a  full  reading  of
    the decision, it appears to amount to an anxiety on  the  part  of  the
    judge to show that he had considered all aspects of the claim by giving
    the matter  the  "most  anxious  scrutiny"  and  after  evaluating  the
    evidence as a whole.  This is not something  to  be  held  against  the
    judge nor does it detract from the decision as a whole.

17. For the foregoing reasons therefore I find that the decision of the FtT
    contains no material error of law requiring it  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

Decision

18. The decision of the FtT stands.  This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     02 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


