
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03017/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On the 10 February 2021                     |On 01 March 2021                |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                      x
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction:

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dearden) (hereinafter referred to as the
         "FtTJ")  promulgated  on  the  28  January  2020,  in   which   the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  her  protection
         claim was dismissed. It is common ground  that  the  appellant  has
         been granted discretionary leave until a date in September 2021.


      2. The FtTJ did not  make  an  anonymity  order  but  upon  a  written
         application made to the Upper Tribunal made on the 6 February 2020,
         Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor made an anonymity order  as  set
         out  in  the  directions.  Neither  party  have  made  any  further
         submissions regarding this and for the purposes of this decision  I
         maintain the order. Accordingly for the  purposes  of  anonymity  I
         shall refer to the appellant as "X" and her child as "Y".

      3. The direction regarding anonymity under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 shall continue  as  the
         proceedings relate to the circumstances  of  a  minor  and  also  a
         protection claim. Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
         otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
         proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or her family
         members. This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings.

      4. The hearing took place on 10 February 2021, by means of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not object1d  to  by  the
         parties. A face -to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video. There were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

Background:

      5. The appellant is a national of Nigeria. The appellant's immigration
         history is set out within the decision of the FtTJ, the
         accompanying papers and the decision letter of the Secretary of
         State dated 15 March 2019. It is not necessary for me to set out
         the factual evidence in any detail.


      6. The appellant whilst in Nigeria held a Bachelor of Science degree
         in community health and in 2016 completed her master's degree in
         Public Health. For the three years prior to arrival in the United
         Kingdom she worked as a community health officer.

      7. While studying at university for her master's degree she met a man
         with whom she had a relationship and the couple embarked on IVF
         treatment in 2016 with the appellant becoming pregnant with
         quadruplets.

      8. When it was discovered that she was expecting quadruplets, the
         appellant was informed by her doctors in Nigeria that they could
         not cope with such complicated birth and such a high-risk pregnancy
         (as set out in the press records and tv programme records).

      9. The appellant had a visa for the US where she had a friend, and it
         is said that she went to America for a medical procedure. It is not
         known what type of visa had been granted but it is recorded that
         the immigration officers at the airport upon arrival refused her
         entry and she was immediately turned round and put on the next
         flight to Nigeria. The press records make reference to the
         immigration officers not being satisfied that the appellant had
         produced documentary evidence to demonstrate that she could meet
         the financial expenditure for any medical treatment.

     10. There is no dispute that whilst en route to Nigeria via London, the
         appellant had a medical emergency, that she went into labour and
         had to disembark in London and was admitted to a hospital. Despite
         the medical interventions that were undertaken, only one of the
         four children survived, and Y was born on the xxxx.

     11. During her time in hospital, the appellant participated in a TV
         programme which broadcast information concerning her pregnancy and
         treatment. The arrival of the appellant, her condition and
         treatment and the high cost of the treatment to the NHS was also
         the subject of some newspaper articles.

     12. On 7 April 2017, the appellant claimed asylum. The respondent
         considered the basis of her claim in a decision letter of 15 March
         2019 but for the reasons set out in the decision letter the
         Secretary of State refused her asylum claim but granted her
         discretionary leave until September 2021.

     13. The appellant appealed that decision before the FtT (Judge
         Dearden).

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

     14. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         her protection claim came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Dearden) on the 23 January 2020.

     15. In a  determination  promulgated  on  28  January  2020,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed the appeal.  The issues identified  before  the  tribunal
         related to fear of harm to the appellant and  her  child  owing  to
         public perception of her child's  illness,  fear  of  harm  to  the
         appellant and her child as a result of the public perception of the
         media attention (publicity) surrounding her case, and fear of  harm
         to her and her child owing to the  public  perception  of  her  own
         mental health difficulties.

     16. The FtTJ had the assistance of a medical  report  relating  to  the
         appellant and as recorded at [11] in accordance  with  the  medical
         evidence and the practice direction, the FtTJ treated the appellant
         as a vulnerable witness. The appellant gave  brief  oral  testimony
         and the judge heard submissions from each of the advocates.

     17. The FtTJ's analysis and assessment of  the  case  are  set  out  at
         paragraph 27 under  particular  headings  relating  to  the  issues
         identified by the advocates.  At  paragraph  27  (1)  A,  the  FtTJ
         considered the evidence which is relevant to  the  claim  that  the
         appellant and/or her child would be at risk of persecutory harm  in
         Nigeria because of the huge debt incurred as a result of  treatment
         provided by the NHS and the publicity which surrounded her  appeal.
         On his  analysis  of  the  evidence  and  in  accordance  with  the
         appellant's own expert, the  judge  found  that  the  BBC  did  not
         broadcast in Nigeria and that the reports in the  bundle  concerned
         events which had taken place over three years ago. Whilst the  term
         "health tourism" had been used in the report, many of the  articles
         were sympathetic to the appellant and whilst it was suggested  that
         she had made money by selling her account the newspapers, the judge
         found that the appellant was silent as to whether she was paid  for
         any  cooperation.  He  considered  the  photographic  evidence  but
         concluded that he was  unable  to  link  the  photograph  with  the
         appellant. He finally concluded that there  was  little  chance  of
         anyone  in  Nigeria,  three  years  after  the  event  linking  the
         appellant with a large NHS  bill.  Later  on  in  his  decision  at
         paragraph 27 (2) A, the FtTJ returned to this issue and  cited  the
         expert report set out at paragraph 9.3  that  it  was  likely  that
         "only a relatively small percentage of people may be aware  of  her
         case."

     18. At paragraph 27 (1) (B) the FtTJ considered the  medical  condition
         of the appellant did so in the  context  of  a  psychiatric  report
         provided by a consultant ( not  a  treating  physician).  The  FtTJ
         noted that the treatment the appellant was  undergoing  was  for  a
         prescription for an antidepressant and that  at  the  time  of  the
         examination she was undergoing a severe depressive episode  and  it
         had not been disclosed whether that had continued  through  to  the
         date of the hearing. The conclusion from the report  was  that  she
         needed to continue consultations with her GP and to undergo CBT. On
         the evidence before him the judge concluded that there was  medical
         treatment available to the appellant in Nigeria.

     19. At paragraph 27 (1) (C) the FtTJ gave further consideration to  the
         psychiatric report and the issue raised as  to  whether  she  would
         have to live independently. On the  evidence  the  judge  concluded
         that the appellant had stated  that  her  family  in  Nigeria  were
         "annoyed" and stopped communication with her when it  was  revealed
         that she ran up a bill, but the judge found that  when  considering
         the evidence it did not mean  that  the  relationship  between  the
         appellant, her parents and  siblings  was  completely  and  utterly
         broken, merely that it was strained. The judge  made  reference  to
         views of her husband and that the press reports had indicated  that
         he could not afford  to  fly  to  the  United  Kingdom.  The  judge
         considered that he was capable of supporting himself in Nigeria and
         that he bore a huge responsibility for jointly taking part  in  the
         IVF treatment and  bore  responsibility  towards  their  child.  In
         conclusion, the judge found that she had family  and  husband  upon
         whom she could rely upon return to Nigeria and that they  would  be
         able to support her.

     20. At paragraph 27 (1) (D) the FtTJ addressed the  psychiatric  report
         in the context of her removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  any
         medical consequences  that  may  result.  The  judge  undertook  an
         analysis of the medical evidence in did so  in  the  light  of  the
         decision in J [ 2005] EWCA Civ 629 and reached the conclusion  that
         on the evidence arrangements could be made to meet any fears at the
         various stages and that the appellant  had  people  upon  whom  she
         could rely on if returned Nigeria and that suitable arrangements be
         made between psychiatric services in the  UK  and  in  Nigeria.  At
         paragraph 27(1) (E ) the FtTJ addressed the availability of medical
         treatment in Nigeria in the context of article 3 and  the  relevant
         case law.

     21. At paragraph 27(2)(A)-(E), the FtTJ addressed the circumstances  of
         the appellant's child ( referred to  as  "Y").  He  considered  the
         circumstances by reference to the expert report and in the light of
         the medical reports. As set out at (A) the medical  reports  relied
         upon by the expert were out  of  date  and  inconsistent  with  the
         appellant's recent evidence and also as recorded at (B)  there  was
         no up-to-date medical evidence detailing Y's medical condition  nor
         was there any prognosis as to any future problems that he may have.
         The FtTJ assessed the evidence and found that Y was fed by  a  tube
         concealed underneath his clothing but that there was nothing as  at
         the date of hearing about his appearance that would reveal that  he
         was disabled to the extent that  would  lead  to  a  real  risk  of
         persecution or serious harm.  At (C) the FtTJ addressed the  expert
         report concerning the level  of  violence  to  those  perceived  as
         witches or possessed by evil spirits and at (D) made  reference  to
         witchcraft accusations and  persecutions  in  Nigeria.  However  by
         reference to the particular circumstances of child Y, he found that
         the tube would be concealed underneath his clothing, and  he  would
         be able to rely upon his family members including  the  appellant's
         parents and sibling. The judge found that whilst the appellant  had
         low level psychiatric difficulties, she was a woman of considerable
         intelligence having 2 degrees and having held  regular  significant
         employment (in community  health  and  public  health).  Whilst  he
         accepted there had been medical trauma in the past,  he  considered
         that it would be reasonable to  expect  her  to  recover  with  her
         family in Nigeria. At section ( E )  the  FtTJ  considered  that  Y
         would not be perceived as someone exhibiting "special  supernatural
         powers" and considered this in the light of the expert evidence but
         that there was no risk of that occurring.  Reference  was  made  to
         protection by the state against the  backdrop  of  the  appellant's
         personal circumstances and at (G) again referred to  the  available
         treatment to the appellant in Nigeria.

     22. In conclusion, the judge, having assessed the psychiatric  evidence
         and  the  physical  condition  of  her  son  alongside  the  expert
         evidence, he was not satisfied that the appellant demonstrated that
         return to Nigeria would result in a real risk of  persecutory  harm
         to either the appellant or her child. The FtTJ therefore  dismissed
         the appeal.

     23. The appellant has discretionary leave until September 2021.

     24. Permission to appeal was sought and on 4 May  2020,  permission  to
         appeal was refused by FtTJ Beach but on renewal of the  application
         was granted by UTJ Bruce.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     25. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 15 July 2020, inter alia, indicating that it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face -to face -hearing. On  1  September  2020
         directions were given for a remote hearing to take place  and  that
         this could take place via Skype. Both parties have  indicated  that
         they were content for  the  hearing  to  proceed  by  this  method.
         Therefore,  the  Tribunal  listed  the  hearing  to   enable   oral
         submissions  to  be  given  on  behalf  of  the  parties  by  their
         advocates.

     26. Mr Holmes, of Counsel, who had appeared before the  FtTJ,  appeared
         on behalf of the appellant, and relied upon the written grounds  of
         appeal and his skeleton argument dated 6 October 2020.

     27. There was a written response filed  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
         dated  8  July  2020.   I  also  heard  oral  submission  from  the
         advocates, and I am grateful for their assistance and  their  clear
         oral submissions.

     28. The appellant advances 5 grounds of appeal. I  intend  to  consider
         each of the grounds separately and address the submissions made  by
         the advocates under each ground.



Decision on error of law:

Ground 1:


     29. The first ground advanced on behalf of the appellant  is  that  the
         judge failed to  ask  the  correct  question  when  considering  at
         paragraph 27 (2) (B) of his decision whether  the  appellant's  son
         disability may give rise to  persecutory  treatment  on  return  to
         Nigeria.




     30. Mr Holmes submits that the focus of the judge was  on  whether  the
         disability  could  be  discerned   from   the   appellant's   son's
         appearance. He submits that this is too narrow an approach and that
         the relevant question was whether the disability would come to  the
         attention of others in the community by any means.




     31. In his oral submissions, Mr Holmes submitted that there  may  be  a
         number of ways in which an individual would  become  aware  of  the
         child's disability, for example, at attendance at  school  he  will
         need assistance and also that on a future date he will need further
         medical care and therefore there would be  additional  factors  and
         therefore the judge's enquiry did not go far enough.




     32. Ms Pettersen  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  made  the  following
         submissions. Firstly, the appellant's submission  ignore  the  fact
         that at his age his focus was primarily on his  mother  and  family
         and that his mother as his primary carer would largely control  any
         interactions that he would have with the community.  Secondly,  the
         submission made ignores the lack of evidence before the  judge  who
         had stated there was no medical evidence giving any details of  the
         child's up-to-date medical condition (see  paragraph  27  (2)  (B).
         Thirdly, she  submits  the  judge  was  required  to  consider  the
         circumstances as at the date  of  the  hearing  and  the  appellant
         cannot point to circumstances in a school setting where  there  was
         no evidence to base such a scenario.




     33. I have considered with care the submissions made by the  advocates.
         I am satisfied that there is no error in the decision of  the  FtTJ
         on the basis advanced on behalf the appellant.




     34. The grounds only seek to challenge part of the FtTJ's  analysis  by
         reference to paragraph 27(2) (B) entitled "gastric  tube  "but  the
         grounds do not make reference to the other  part  of  the  analysis
         which included analysis of the expert report.




     35. The FtTJ considered the expert report (related  to  witchcraft  and
         the risk of  harm  as  a  result  of  the  child's  disability)  at
         paragraphs 27 (1) (A-E)  of  his  decision.  The  judge  noted  the
         general contents  of  the  expert  report  and  that  the  children
         labelled as witches in Nigeria were described as  being  abandoned,
         shunned by society, and alleged to be at risk of inhuman abuse  but
         the judge was entitled to consider that report in  the  context  of
         the appellant's child's condition.


     36. I observe that the grounds do not  seek  to  challenge  the  FtTJ's
         assessment of the expert report. As the judge set out,  the  report
         was based on medical information provided about the appellant's son
         which was out of date (see paragraph 27 (2) (A) and which  was  not
         consistent with the appellant's own evidence.




     37. Furthermore, as a judge noted at paragraph 27 (2) (B), despite  the
         reports provided on behalf of the appellant, there was  no  medical
         report in relation to the appellant's son which was  up-to-date  or
         gave any further prognosis as to his condition.  The  only  medical
         evidence available to the expert and  before  the  tribunal  was  a
         letter dated 4/6/18 referring to him as "remaining oxygen dependent
         due to chronic lung damage due to prematurity" and that  he  had  a
         "nano gastric tube". There was a letter dated 25/2/19 was  referred
         to the child as being "ex-Prem" (meaning  X  premature  baby)  with
         improving chronic lung disease who may need it a gastrostomy.  None
         of that evidence was up to date nor did it set  out  any  prognosis
         for the child  for  the  future  in  terms  of  any  disability  or
         condition.




     38. Against that background the judge was correct to identify that  the
         only up-to-date evidence of any disability the child may have, came
         from the appellant herself who referred to  him  being  fed  via  a
         gastric tube under his clothing and that  there  was  nothing  else
         beyond that which revealed any disability.


     39. I also observe that the judge noted the submission made  on  behalf
         the appellant at paragraph [25] which is recorded as follows "I was
         asked to accept however that the gastric tube  marked  him  out  as
         different." It is therefore not surprising that the judge expressly
         addressed  the  issue  of  the  gastric  tube  on  account  of  the
         submission raising this issue explicitly.




     40. The FtTJ also set out at paragraph 27 (2)(D) by  reference  to  the
         expert report, that there would be nothing to  identify  to  anyone
         outside of the family that he had a disability and that this  would
         be managed by his mother  who  had  training,  both  practical  and
         academically in community health management.




     41. This was significant because the  expert  report  referred  to  the
         children  at  risk  with  specific  disabilities  such   as   being
         communication  challenges,  learning  difficulties,  children  with
         autism (see paragraph 13.1 and 13.2)  and  identified  disabilities
         which the appellant's child did not have and as the judge  properly
         identified, the  expert  report  was  in  any  event  relying  upon
         evidence was out of date.


     42. In my judgment the FtTJ properly considered the evidence  including
         the expert report within  his  decision  properly  identifying  the
         weaknesses in that report  most  notably  in  the  context  of  the
         appellant's child's disability. It was therefore open to  the  FtTJ
         to reach the findings he did that there was no real risk of Y being
         subjected to persecution or serious harm on account of his  medical
         condition.



     43. Consequently there is no error as asserted in ground 1.




Ground 2:


     44. As to ground 2, it is submitted that there was consensus in the
         background evidence as the treatment facing those with disabilities
         in Nigeria and that the Human Rights Watch report ("HRW") set out
         in the appellant's bundle was not mentioned in the FtTJ's
         assessment despite it providing support for the material discussed
         in the country background evidence.


     45. I am satisfied that there is no material error of law in the
         decision by any failure to reference the HRW report.


     46. I can find no reference to any submission made which highlighted
         this particular report. Furthermore, as set out in my analysis of
         ground 1, the judge properly had regard to the generalised
         background evidence set out in the report of the expert Mr Foxley
         concerning the treatment of those with mental health problems and
         disabilities in the context of children and adults.


     47. Mr Holmes identifies in the grounds the following matters from the
         HRW report:

         a) there is "misconception" that mental health conditions "are
            caused by evil spirits or supernatural forces";
         b) the restraint of mental health patients by change their beds or
            similar, including children, in some cases without supervision;
         c) the use of chains is found to be standard, both adults and
            children, in 27 of 28 facilities visited;
         d) such restraint can be fixed any period of time, for example 10
            months with periods of detention reaching up to 15 years;
         e) in 28 facilities the residents were exclusively detained and
            lawfully
         f) treatment infection in patients includes physical abuse, forced
            medication and electroconvulsive therapy without consent.


     48. Mr Holmes submits that the report was directly material to the
         issues.


     49. When the HRW report is read in its entirety, in my judgement that
         material is generalised background evidence, and the judge was
         entitled consider the evidence as to risk based on this particular
         child and the evidence before the Tribunal concerning his
         disability. As the respondent submitted, the HRW report principally
         referred to people with mental health conditions, the highlighted
         examples relate to those in "rehabilitation centres" and
         "traditional healing centres". The evidence before the judge did
         not state that the appellant's child had any mental health
         difficulties. Indeed as the FtTJ noted the medical evidence
         concerning Y was demonstrably lacking.

     50.  Furthermore, the judge considered the circumstances of the
         appellant's child in the light of his mother's background in
         community health. The appellant had worked in community health
         three years prior to her arrival in the UK and also had a BSC
         degree and a Master's degree in public health and therefore the
         judge's assessment was that Y would be able to rely upon his
         mother's background in public health and thus there was no basis
         for finding that the child would be required to be placed or would
         be placed in any rehabilitation centre or traditional healing
         centre.


     51. The ground is advanced on the basis of the treatment facing those
         with disabilities (see paragraph 24 the skeleton argument produced
         by Mr Holmes). This was in the context of the appellant's child
         having a disability.


     52. I have therefore addressed that ground in the particular context as
         set out above. Mr Holmes did not make any oral submissions in
         support of the ground but stated that he relied upon the written
         grounds and skeleton argument.


     53. However, in the event of there being any ambiguity raised as to
         whether it was being said that the evidence was relevant to the
         appellant's circumstances and her mental health,  I am equally
         satisfied that there is no material error of law in that context
         either.


     54. The judge carefully considered the medical evidence advanced on
         behalf of the appellant and at (B) set out the salient parts of the
         consultant psychiatrist's report. The FtTJ's analysis of the
         psychiatric evidence has not been challenged in the grounds. The
         judge found that at the time of the report the appellant was
         undergoing a severe depressive episode but that it had not been
         said that the episode had continued as to the date of the hearing.
         The judge identified that the only treatment the appellant was
         undergoing was a prescription for an antidepressant drug and that
         the doctor considered that for future treatment she should continue
         consultations with her GP and undergo cognitive behavioural
         therapy.


     55. The psychiatric report referred to medical treatment for mental
         health being "widely available in Nigeria" (see page 180 AB;para11
         of the report) which was a point echoed in the decision letter and
         in the decision of the judge (see decision at paragraph 27 (2)
         (B)).


     56. Whilst the doctor considered that she was vulnerable as a "lone
         woman", the judge addressed this at paragraph 2(2) (C) finding that
         she was not a lone woman nor would she be required to live
         independently of family members. At section D of his decision, the
         judge address the consequences of removal in the context of the
         medical report. Again the grounds do not seek to challenge the
         FtTJ's analysis of the medical evidence and this paragraph
         referring to the consequences of removal upon the appellant and the
         safeguards/support that was likely to be put in place, both in the
         UK and in Nigeria.


     57. The grounds also do not address the question of how, in the light
         of the medical evidence, the generalised material in the HRW report
         would have any bearing on the risk to this particular appellant.
         The FtTJ reached the conclusion that on the evidence, the appellant
         had a relatively low level of mental health needs and there was no
         evidence of psychosis. The evidence in the HRW report as I have
         stated when read is aptly described as generalised evidence
         concerning the treatment of those with mental health difficulties
         and that those with such conditions, (actual or perceived) who have
         been placed in facilities usually by relatives and that they may be
         shackled (page 270 and 221) and that there was violence in
         rehabilitation centres (page 223).


     58. In the light of the analysis of the medical evidence which
         expressly referred to this particular appellant's condition, which
         has not been challenged on the grounds, in my judgement the ground
         fails to identify how such generalised material could possibly
         undermine the judge's assessment of the risk to the appellant.

     59. I am satisfied that the grounds do not demonstrate any material
         error of law in the decision of the FtTJ.



Ground 3:

     60. As regards ground 3, it is submitted that the judge made two
         mistakes of fact or in the alternative, failed to have regard to
         material evidence.


     61. Mr Holmes on behalf of the appellant identifies the first mistake
         of fact at paragraph 19 where he submits the judge suggested that
         she had travelled to the US to give birth by stating that "I  very
         much doubt whether (the appellant) informed that US immigration
         authorities that she wished to enter so that she could give birth
         to quadruplets."


     62. He submits that the appellant's evidence was that she had not
         suggested that she had gone to the US to give birth but that she
         was going for a medical procedure (set out at question 18 of the
         interview). Mr Holmes further makes the point that the children
         were born a month after the attempted trip and were born
         prematurely and therefore this further detracts from the suggestion
         that the trip to the US had been to give birth.


     63. The second mistake of fact or failure to consider material evidence
         relates to paragraph 27 (1) (c ) and the judge's consideration of
         the appellant's husband where the judge stated; "the appellant is
         silent as to the view of her husband regarding the situation... The
         only information I have about the husband comes in the press
         reports which indicate that he cannot afford the flight to the
         United Kingdom....  The husband.... bears a huge responsibility for
         jointly taking part in the IVF treatment... He also bears a
         responsibility towards the sole surviving child."


     64. Mr Holmes submits that the FtTJ failed to have regard to the
         appellant's direct evidence at question 26 that the relationship
         broke down because the father of the child took the view that
         medical care should be withdrawn on account of the expense.
         Therefore he submits the appellant was not "silent" about her
         husband, but the evidence suggested that her husband place little
         weight on the child's welfare.


     65. I have considered the evidence before the judge and have considered
         the points identified by Mr Holmes and have done so in their
         particular context. Dealing with the first point, I am not
         satisfied that there is an error of any materiality. Mr Holmes
         relies upon paragraph 19 and submits that the judge suggests there
         that the appellant had travelled to the UK to give birth. However
         paragraph 19 is contained in the section entitled "appellant's
         case" and where the judge is plainly setting out the factual parts
         of the case which did not form any part of his eventual analysis or
         findings of fact.


     66. Furthermore, what the judge had stated at paragraph 19 was not in
         error but was supported by evidence in the appellant's bundle which
         was contained in the press reports. As the respondent identifies,
         at page 28 it was recorded "she claims that she planned to have
         babies in Chicago after being warned that the Nigerian hospital did
         not have the facilities to care for the child." Similarly at pages
         35, 39 and 44, and further reports made reference to the appellant
         intending to give birth in the United States. An article at page 48
         referred to her "scheduling to give birth in the United States".
         Paragraph 59 also recorded that she had said that her doctor had
         warned her against having the four babies in Nigeria.


     67. Whilst Mr Holmes submits that that information may not necessarily
         have come from the appellant, one of the sources comes from a
         direct quote attributable to the appellant (page 28).


     68. Furthermore, the judge was not in error when he stated at the first
         part of the sentence which is not recorded in the grounds where he
         said, "the appellant does not tell me the basis upon which she
         applied to enter the USA...". While she had a valid Visa, her
         evidence interview was that the Visa was one that she had obtained
         in January 2016, valid for two years, but no proper explanation was
         given as to the basis upon which the visa was granted. The
         inference that it was not a medical Visa is based on the fact that
         when she arrived (as  set out in the press reports and in
         interview),  she did not have sufficient evidence of her finances
         to pay for any medical treatment and was refused entry (see pages
         61 and 64 of the appellant's bundle).


     69. As to the second point, the judge was not an error in identifying
         that in the newspaper reports the evidence concerning her husband
         was to the effect that he wanted to be with his wife but could not
         do so because of lack of funding to travel. The appellant expressly
         stated in answer to such a question concerning his whereabouts
         "will you give him a visa and money to come" (see page 59 of the
         appellant's bundle).


     70. However, Mr Holmes is right to state that at question 26 in the
         interview which took place in 2017,  she said her husband did not
         have the money to pay for the children's treatment and that
         thereafter he had blocked her calls and emails. Whilst that was the
         evidence in 2017, the judge was right to say that the appellant had
         not stated whether she was separated or divorced from her husband
         in evidence given two years later in 2019.


     71. In my judgement, the issue is whether the failure to consider the
         replies at Q18 and/or Q26  was material to the overall assessment
         made by the judge. As to Q26, even if it could be said at the date
         of the interview that that  her husband had been blocking her
         calls,  the judge did not assess the support the appellant would
         have in Nigeria solely on the basis of the support that she would
         have from her husband. At part [C] of his decision, the judge
         considered more recent evidence set out in the psychiatric report
         concerning other family members who were reported as being
         "annoyed" when being told about the appellant running up the debt
         in the United Kingdom. The judge carefully considered that evidence
         but reached the conclusion that the use of the word "annoyed" did
         not mean that the relationship between the appellant, her parents
         and sibling was "completely and utterly broken, merely that it is
         strained." The judge therefore made findings on the evidence and he
         was entitled to reach the conclusion that the appellant would
         likely have support and assistance from family members in Nigeria,
         even if it did not include her husband.


     72. As I have set out the judge was not wrong when he stated that the
         appellant had not said whether she was separated or divorced from
         her husband and whilst the evidence in the interview made reference
         to her husband blocking her calls, the evidence given two years
         later in 2019 was silent on whether they were separated or whether
         a divorce was in contemplation.


     73. When looking at the issue in the context of the claim as a whole, I
         am not satisfied that even if the judge did overlook the answer at
         question 26, that this undermined the other findings he made of
         support available to the appellant from her other family members
         and that as she herself was health professional both practically in
         terms of expertise and through her academic qualifications, that
         she was in a better placed position than others who did not have
         the experience or expertise in this area (see paragraph 27 (2) (D).


Ground 4:

     74. Ground 4 has an overlap with ground 3. Mr Holmes submits that the
         judge had referred to a number of irrelevant factors at paragraph
         27 (1) (A) and that as this was not a case where credibility was
         part of each party's case, the judge was wrong to take such factors
         or matters into account. He submitted that there was no dispute as
         to the relevant material facts which were that the appellant had
         given birth to quadruplets, she had become pregnant through IVF,
         three children had died upon birth and that her surviving child is
         unwell. Therefore he submits, that the matters set out by the judge
         were of no relevance to the issues and it was difficult to see how
         credibility issues arose from such factors.


     75. The respondent submits that the points raised on behalf of the
         appellant do not suggest any bias, apparent or otherwise on the
         part of judge and if those factors were irrelevant, which is the
         point made in the grounds (set out both at paragraph 7 of the
         grounds and paragraph 9 of the skeleton argument), it it cannot be
         said that there was any material error.


     76. Mr Holmes counters by way of reply that the irrelevant factors
         became relevant because it affected the judge's view of the
         appellant's credibility and thus could possibly have infected his
         factual findings.


     77. I have given careful consideration to this submission and have
         reflected upon the decision of the judge and the evidence. The part
         relied upon by Mr Holmes is that set out at paragraph 27 (1)(A)
         where the judge was considering the issue of publicity and whether
         the appellant would be at risk of persecutory treatment in Nigeria
         as a result of the debt that she had incurred from the medical
         treatment in the UK. For the  reasons the judge set out at that
         paragraph, he found that she would not be at risk in Nigeria from
         any publicity, relying partly on the expert evidence of Mr Foxley
         set out at paragraph 9.3 of his report and as further analysed in
         the judge's decision at paragraph 27 (2) (A). The grounds do not
         challenge that assessment or the conclusions that she would not be
         at risk of persecutory treatment due to any publicity surrounding
         the circumstances in which she gave birth in the United Kingdom. It
         is after those unchallenged findings that the judge went on to
         express thoughts about the lack of evidence from the appellant. The
         judge stated "one wonders why she embarked on IVF treatment in 2016
         when her date of birth is xxxxx. The appellant does not tell me
         whether she deliberately had four eggs fertilised, when she was
         advised to have four eggs fertilised, or whether her doctors were
         unlucky or incompetent."


     78. When looking at those matters, they seem to me to reflect the judge
         thinking out loud. I accept that some of the matters set out had no
         relevance to any issues such as why she embarked on IVF treatment
         in 2016 in the light of her age, or whether she had four eggs
         fertilised or not or whether she declared to the aircraft operators
         her medical condition. To some extent, the judge was right that
         there were a number of unanswered questions which he identified
         such as whether there were any links between her employment in the
         hospital and her IVF treatment and nor did she have any further
         explanation as to the way in which she had sought entry to the US.


     79. It seems to me that the important issue is whether any of that
         thinking out loud had any material relevance or impact upon the
         judge's assessment or factual findings.


     80. Having carefully looked at the analysis of the evidence, much of it
         being unchallenged in the grounds, I have concluded that those
         matters had no material bearing on the issues that the judge went
         on to determine.

     81. As can be seen plainly from the decision, those thoughts or
         questions followed his factual findings on the issue of publicity
         which in turn partly relied upon the appellant's own expert
         evidence. The judge found that the BBC did not broadcast in Nigeria
          (a point set out in the expert report at paragraph 9.3 "it is
         likely that only a relatively small percentage of people may be
         aware of her case"), and that the reports provided by the
         newspapers were all dated around 1 February 2017 which meant that
         the events described were three years old. The judge considered the
         contents of those news reports and whilst the term "health tourism"
         had been used, the judge concluded that "in many ways are
         sympathetic, because the appellant was on her way back to Nigeria
         at the time the medical emergency arose." The judge also made
         reference to a photograph of the appellant in one of the reports,
         but that he was unable to link the photograph with the appellant's
         appearance. Thus he concluded that there was "little chance of
         anyone in Nigeria, three years after the event, linking the
         appellant with a large NHS bill."


     82. Therefore the unanswered queries he pondered upon had no material
         effect upon that analysis which was firmly based on the evidence
         and also is unchallenged in the grounds.


     83. The respondent submits that there is no allegation of bias that has
         been made on behalf of the appellant and that is the position. The
         respondent also submits that the appellant's argument fails because
         ground 3 expressly states that credibility was not an issue and
         therefore it must follow that such thinking out loud was therefore
         wholly irrelevant. The respondent also submits that neither the
         skeleton argument nor the grounds elaborate further as to what
         findings, if any, were affected by the judge's reference to those
         unanswered questions. I agree with those submissions, and at its
         highest, Mr Holmes in his oral submissions sought to identify the
         finding made by the judge concerning family support as one that
         could potentially be affected.  However in my judgement even if it
         could be said the judge's thinking aloud did affect the credibility
         generally of the appellant, when looking at the issue of family
         support, the judge was expressly considering the later evidence
         given by the appellant herself to the psychiatrist concerning her
         family and their feelings of being "annoyed". He went on to set out
         how that could be considered in the context of factual
         circumstances and in my view, it was reasonably open to the judge
         to conclude that the description given by the appellant did not
         mean that the family were likely not offer support and help to her.
         That was a finding that also had not been challenged in the
         grounds. It follows that it has not been demonstrated that the
         finding as to family support was affected by any of the questions
         the judge raised.


Ground 5:


     84. Dealing with ground 5, it is submitted on behalf of the appellant
         that the judge failed to apply the correct test were looking at the
         issue of sufficiency of protection (see paragraph 27 (2) (F)).


     85. The written grounds assert that it is unclear what test the judge
         was applying. In his oral submissions, Mr Holmes submitted that the
         judge gave inadequate consideration to the issue and that it was
         relevant to the expert report at paragraph 17.3. At that paragraph,
         the expert states that the legislation available did not reduce the
         belief in witchcraft or provide a deterrent to accusations of
         witchcraft and related violence.


     86. I asked Mr Holmes to confirm the context in which ground 5 was set
         and he confirmed that the issue was focused on the position of the
         child and that sufficiency of protection was in relation to that
         issue.


     87. Having given careful consideration of the submission, I am
         satisfied that it fails to properly consider the decision of the
         FtTJ as a whole and the context in which the issue of sufficiency
         protection was in fact considered.


     88. The FtTJ considered the risk to the appellant from members of the
         community due to adverse publicity concerning the debt incurred set
         out at paragraph 27 (1) (A). Again, there is no challenge to the
         assessment made by the judge. I have set out earlier in this
         decision the factual findings made by the judge and that were made
         by reference to the material in the appellant's bundle including
         the newspaper reports but also in the context of the expert report
         of Mr Foxley. He therefore concluded that in the light of the
         evidence, and the length of delay that there was little chance of
         anyone in Nigeria linking the appellant to such a large bill.
         Therefore based on those factual findings, the appellant was not in
         need of any protection and was supported by the expert report at
         paragraph 9.3 and the analysis further set out by the judge at
         paragraph 27 (1) (a).


     89. Mr Holmes however puts it in the context of the child and the risk
         of being perceived as a witch. However, again, the issue of
         sufficiency protection has to be considered in the context of the
         FtTJ's factual assessment which was that notwithstanding the report
         of Mr Foxley and the generalised evidence, that this particular
         child and on the basis of his characteristics and the medical
         evidence, that he would not be at risk of harm because there was
         nothing to mark him out as disabled (see section entitled "gastric
         tube").


     90. At paragraph 27 (c) the FtTJ considered the general evidence
         relating to the persecution of disabled children and that the
         expert had collated 67 reports. The judge considered that whilst
         this was "67 children to many" but in a population of 197,000,000
         67 cases did not amount to a "real risk" and the FtTJ stated "no
         state can guarantee hundred percent protection; I am looking at
         protection to a practical standard under the Horvath guidelines."


     91. At section E of his decision, the judge further considered how the
         child would be perceived but for the reasons set out there found
         that there was no real risk of any harm occurring.


     92. Therefore whatever the judge had stated at section F in respect of
         state protection, on the factual findings made, the appellant's
         child was not at real risk of being persecuted as a result of his
         disability, perceived or actual, in the context of witchcraft in
         the country. That being the case, it was not necessary for the
         judge to make any further assessment of the issue of sufficiency of
         protection.  I am therefore satisfied that ground 5 is not made
         out.

     93. As identified by the judge this was a most unusual case  and I am
         satisfied that when the decision is read as a whole and in the
         context of the evidence that was before the judge, this was a
         decision that was properly open to him to reach. The grounds do
         not, in my judgement, demonstrate any error of law of any
         materiality to undermine what was a careful consideration of the
         circumstances of both the appellant and her child and in the
         context of the traumatic circumstances following her arrival in the
         United Kingdom.

     94. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the decision of
         the FtTJ did not make an error on a point of law and therefore the
         decision stands. The appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision.

     95. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision stands.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated 15 February 2021

Direction regarding anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008: an anonymity order has been made  as  the
proceedings relate to the circumstances of a minor and a  protection  claim.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or her family members. This direction  applies  both
to the appellant and  to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.



