
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/03481/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 October 2019                        |On 6 November 2019                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                   Mr B M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G. Brown, counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
solictors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born on 1 January 1991.  He arrived
    in the UK and claimed asylum on 23 February 2016 on the basis  that  he
    is of Kurdish ethnicity and had worked as a kolbar - an illegal  trader
    or smuggler, smuggling alcohol and cigarettes and sometimes petrol from
    Iran to Iraq by horseback, that he had been obliged or forced  to  take
    arms and ammunition by armed men who he thought were Peshmerga.   There
    was an attempt by security guards to stop them whereupon  there  was  a
    shooting  between  the  security  guards  and  the  Peshmerga  and  the
    Appellant and the other kolbars ran away.  The Appellant  fled  to  his
    cousin's house for two days during  which  time  he  heard  his  fellow
    kolbars had been arrested and that security guards had  called  at  his
    house looking for him.  The Appellant's cousin arranged for an agent to
    help him leave the country and he left Iran illegally.

 2. The Appellant's asylum claim was rejected by the Secretary of State  in
    a refusal decision dated  26  January  2019.   The  Appellant  appealed
    against this decision and his appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Siddiqi for hearing on 11 July 2019.  In a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 12 August 2019 the judge dismissed the appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  the  judge
    had made material  errors  of  law:  firstly,  in  failing  to  provide
    sufficient or sustainable reasons for adverse credibility findings  cf.
    SR Iran [2005] EWCA Civ 982 and had failed to consider or give  reasons
    for departing from the country guidance decision  in  HB  Kurds  (Iran)
    [2018] UKUT   00430 (IAC). In particular,  issue  was  taken  with  the
    judge's findings at [22] of the decision and reasons.

(ii) At [22](a) the judge based an adverse credibility finding on  what  she
considered  to      be  a  significant  inconsistency  in  the   Appellant's
evidence which was that at interview    question 45,  the  Appellant  stated
he smuggled items across the border between Iran      and  Iraq  once  every
two or three months, but in cross-examination  the  Appellant  was     asked
how often he made journeys to the border, once a  week,  twice  a  week,  to
which the  Appellant  replied  sometimes  once,  sometimes  twice.   It  was
submitted that    this was not inconsistent given that kolbars often do  not
physically cross the border     but operate in the border area  between  the
two countries collecting and delivering      goods at the border.  Thus  the
judge's analysis was materially flawed.

(ii) Secondly at [22](b) the judge found  an  alleged  inconsistency  as  to
whether or not the     Appellant knew that  the  armed  men  whose  arms  he
transported were Peshmergas.    However  this  was  not  inconsistent.   The
Appellant knew that they were Peshmergas     but not  to  which  group  they
belonged in light of the fact that there  are  many  different     Peshmerga
groups active in that area fighting to improve the plight of Kurds.  It  was
     submitted that the judge materially erred in failing to recognise  that
in Kurdish    culture Peshmerga is a generic term for armed fighters.

(iii)    At [22](c) the judge made an adverse credibility finding  again  as
to an alleged     consistency in the evidence  as  to  whether  or  not  the
Appellant was forced to help  the     Peshmergas  which  again  was  not  an
inconsistency, in that the Appellant stated he   felt he had a duty to  help
them because  they  fight  for  the  rights  of  Kurds,  which  is       not
inconsistent with the fact that the Peshmergas required their assistance  as
     kolbars.

(iv) At [22](d) the judge found there was a discrepancy in  the  Appellant's
evidence in   relation to his knowledge of the location of the ambush.   The
judge materially erred     in misunderstanding the Appellant's  evidence  on
this.  The Appellant stated he did  not know where Peshmergas  wanted  their
goods to be taken but as he worked  extensively in that area he  knew  their
location at the time of ambush.  Therefore it    was not discrepant for  the
Appellant to say he knew  how  to  get  to  his  cousin's  house       after
escaping from the ambush.

(v)   At [22](e) the judge found a discrepancy in the  Appellant's  evidence
as to why he  did not return home after the ambush, but in  fact  there  was
no discrepancy.  It is     clear that the Appellant  went  to  his  cousin's
house and did not go to his home     address  because  he  feared  that  his
friends would be arrested.  So this  was       precautionary  on  the  basis
that they might be arrested.

(vi) It was further submitted the judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
decision in HB    Kurds (Iran) and  that  permission  to  appeal  should  be
granted.

4.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
Nightingale in the     following terms

     "It is arguable that the judge fell into error at 22(a) in finding a
discrepancy when it appears     that two separate questions had in fact
been asked with regard to the Appellant's smuggling   activities and
crossing the border.  It is also arguable that the judge may have fallen
into error    in failing to appreciate that the word Peshmerga is a generic
term for armed fighters active in   the border region.  These grounds are
arguable.  Whilst there is less immediately identifiable  merit in the
remaining grounds, this is an appeal in which it was accepted credibility
was key.      In view of what are argued two misunderstandings leading to
adverse credibility findings    permission is granted on all grounds
pleaded".

     Hearing

5.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, I informed the parties that
the judge's   Record of Proceedings had recorded the cross-examination in
relation to the point  raised at  [4] of the grounds of appeal viz that the
Appellant had been asked how    often did you make the journey, once a
week, twice a week.  The judge had,     therefore,    not specified where
the journey was to or from.

6.   Mr Brown sought to rely on the grounds of appeal but equally raised
concern about     the manner in which the judge had dealt with the
Appellant's sur place activities,   albeit this had not been raised as a
ground of appeal.  Mr Brown submitted this was   relevant to the issue of
risk on return and should have been properly addressed.  He    further
submitted that the judge had made no real finding in relation to the
Appellant's illegal exit which had not been accepted by the Respondent but
it was   clear from the decision in HB (Kurds) that this needed to have
been determined by     the judge in order to properly assess risk on
return.

7.   In his submissions, Mr McVeety ultimately accepted that there was an
error of law in   relation to the first ground of appeal [22](a) of the
judge's decision and reasons, in    that the alleged inconsistency was not
put to the Appellant in order to give him the    opportunity to comment or
clarify.  Mr McVeety accepted that it was possible to     smuggle both to a
border and over it and there again there was not necessarily   discrepant
evidence in that respect.  Mr McVeety also accepted that the judge's
finding at [22](d) was also problematic in relation to the finding that
there was a   discrepancy in the evidence in relation to the Appellant's
knowledge of the  location of the ambush.  Mr McVeety submitted that
overall the judge seems to have     focused more on minor inconsistencies
when perhaps they were not really   inconsistencies, whereas there were
other issues raised in the refusal decision which     were perhaps more key
in terms of going to the credibility of the Appellant's claim  and on that
basis he accepted there were material errors of law.

8.   I accepted Mr McVeety's concession and agreed that it did appear that
the Judge's   focus was on perhaps more minor aspects of an assessment of
the credibility of the     Appellant in the round and that the assertions
of inconsistencies were not made out    on the basis of a reading of the
evidence as a whole. I agreed with the joint     submission of both parties
that, as a consequence, the appeal should be heard de novo     before the
First-tier Tribunal.

     Decision

9.   I find for the reasons set out above and the express concessions by  Mr
McVeety on    behalf of the Secretary  of  State  that  there  are  material
errors of law in the decision of    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Siddiqi.   I
set that decision aside and remit  the  appeal  for  a     hearing  de  novo
before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  Manchester.   I  make  the  following
directions:

                                    DIRECTIONS

1. The hearing should be listed for two hours.

2. A Kurdish Sorani interpreter.

3. Any evidence upon which the parties wish  to  rely  should  be  submitted
five working days before the remitted hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 3 November 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

