
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03334/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th September 2016               |On 29th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ALAY [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Adewoyle, Prime Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant is a  citizen
    of Eritrea aged 20. His appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    deport him as a foreign criminal was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Rourke in a decision promulgated on 20th January 2016.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that  the  judge  failed
    to provide adequate reasons on material matters.  The  evidence  before
    the judge demonstrated a significant change  in  the  approach  by  the
    Eritrean authorities on the issue of illegal exit and draft evasion  to
    the extent that there was ample evidence to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance of MA (Draft evaders - illegal departures - risk)  Eritrea  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00059.

3.   The judge had  failed  to  make  clear  in  his  decision  the  precise
    criticisms levied at the Danish FFM report which was relied on  by  the
    Respondent. In addition the judge had before him the September 2015 CIG
    on national service and illegal exit. This report took into  account  a
    range of sources and demonstrated  that  the  Eritrean  government  was
    adopting an  increasingly  pragmatic  approach  to  draft  evasion  and
    desertion (paragraph 2.6.5). The judge had failed to adequately  engage
    with this report and it was clearly relevant  material  which  rendered
    the judge's assessment incomplete.

4.   Further, the judge found that the Appellant would be unable to pay  the
    diaspora tax, but this failed to take into account the availability  of
    funds from the Appellant's family members, in  particular  his  brother
    who was employed in the UK and  had  indicated  a  wish  to  visit  his
    siblings. The judge had further taken into account  irrelevant  matters
    in finding that the Appellant would be at risk as a trouble maker.  The
    judge had failed to provide sufficient reasons  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant would be subject to false  labour,  in  failing  to  identify
    cogent objective evidence to suggest  that  the  Appellant  would  fall
    within the rare number of cases where conditions  of  national  service
    coupled with its duration would amount to forced labour.

5.   Permission to appeal  was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein  on
    the following basis: "In view of the present uncertainties  as  regards
    the situation as it relates to risk  on  return  to  Eritrea,  and  the
    shortly pending consideration of the issue by the Upper Tribunal, I  am
    persuaded that in such circumstances, Ground one, that challenges inter
    alia, the First-tier Tribunal Judge's reliance on the  guidance  in  MA
    (Draft evaders -illegal departures -  risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    00059 (that was not in any event  the  most  recent  guidance:  See  MO
    (Illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011]   UKUT  00190  (IAC))
    are arguably not least as to whether in such  circumstances  the  judge
    was entitled in law to reach  the  conclusions  that  he  did  for  the
    reasons given."

6.   Mr Clarke relied on the  grounds  and  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    dismissive of the Respondent's evidence without  appreciating  that  it
    was premised and supported by other evidence. Further, the judge failed
    to consider that the Appellant's brother could support him and pay  the
    diaspora tax and the judge has failed to give proper reasons for why he
    concluded that the Appellant would be a trouble maker. His finding that
    the Appellant would be subject to forced labour was not reasoned on the
    basis of the available evidence in the CIG.  There were strong  grounds
    to depart from the country guidance at paragraph  2.5.13  of  the  CIG.
    The evidence which was before the judge was not  miles  away  from  the
    country guidance. The  Danish  Report  indicated  a  softening  of  the
    government approach. If  the  judge  refused  to  depart  from  country
    guidance then the Appellant's appeal would be successful. However,  the
    judge wrongly concluded that the  Danish  Report  was  insufficient  to
    depart from country guidance and accordingly he had erred in law.

7.   Given the judge's reasons at paragraph 28 of the decision, I  concluded
    that it was not necessary to hear oral submissions from Mr Adewoyle and
    he relied on his Rule 24 response which in essence submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had  considered  all  the  evidence  and  his
    conclusions were open to him. The judge had  properly  applied  country
    guidance  because  there  was  no  clear  evidence  of  a   change   in
    circumstances.  It was clear from  both  country  guidance  cases  that
    those who exited illegally and returnees who are to undertake  military
    service may be ill-treated contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

8.   In his Rule 24  response,  Mr  Adewoyle  relied  on  MO  which  states:
    "Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum seekers as such
    are not generally at real risk of persecution or serious harm on return
    on present evidence the great majority of such persons are likely to be
    perceived as having left illegally and this fact,  save  for  the  very
    limited exceptions, will mean that on return they  would  face  a  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm."

9.   It was submitted that following MA: "Illegal exit  continued  to  be  a
    key factor in assessing risk on return. A person who fails to show that
    he or she left illegally will not in general be at real risk even if of
    draft age and whether or not the authorities are aware that he  or  she
    has unsuccessfully claimed asylum in the United Kingdom."

10.  Mr Adewoyle submitted that the  judge  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
    country guidance case given that the objective evidence in the  current
    CIG of 2015 and the CIO of September 2015 was not of a  certain  nature
    and it was unclear if the situation had changed from the  situation  in
    MA. The judge took  into  account  the  evidence  before  him  and  was
    entitled to choose the version he preferred in the objective  evidence.
    There was other objective evidence at pages 42 to 58 of the Appellant's
    bundle which gave credence to the fact that illegal exit, draft evasion
    and conditions of military service would amount to treatment in  breach
    of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

11.  The judge was also entitled to rely on the well documented  behavioural
    pattern of the Appellant, which had landed him in trouble in the UK, to
    predict a profile that would  attract  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    Eritrean authorities. The judge had the benefit of  the  OASys  Report,
    Risk Assessment Report and the sentencing remarks, including a  special
    needs assessment and the poor grasp of local language, to fit into  the
    profile of those  who  will  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities if returned to Eritrea and undergo military service.

12.  The reference to diaspora tax by the judge was  correct.  The  evidence
    was unclear as to who benefits from the chance to pay the tax.  It  was
    unclear whether this is limited to those who had left a long time  ago,
    those who exited illegally, or those who had evaded draft  or  will  be
    treated as such. The judge was entitled  to  find  that  the  Appellant
    would be unable to pay or simply refuse to pay as a  rebellion  against
    constituted authority.


Discussion and Conclusions

13.  At the beginning of the hearing Mr Clarke applied  for  an  adjournment
    on the basis that permission had been granted on the grounds that there
    was country guidance from the Tribunal under consideration and  that  a
    decision was expected in the near future. He sought an  adjournment  to
    await  promulgation  of  that  decision.  Mr  Adewoyle   resisted   the
    application for the adjournment on the basis that it was unknown when a
    decision would be promulgated and  that  the  Appellant  was  currently
    detained pending the appeal by the Respondent and would  be  prejudiced
    by any delay. The issue was whether the judge had applied the  relevant
    guidance at the time of the decision and whether there was an error  in
    his decision. If it subsequently transpired from the  imminent  country
    guidance case that there had been a change  in  circumstances  and  the
    Appellant no longer succeeded, then it would be open to the  Respondent
    to curtail any leave  that  was  given.  An  adjournment  was  not  the
    appropriate course of action and the appeal should go ahead.

14.  I considered the matters, but concluded that  it  was  unclear  when  a
    country guidance decision on Eritrea would be handed down and therefore
    it would be prejudicial to the  Appellant  to  keep  him  in  detention
    pending his case being resolved. The issue was whether  the  judge  had
    made an error of law on the basis of the material that was  before  him
    and a decision could be made in relation to that without  awaiting  any
    country guidance, particularly where it was  unknown  when  a  decision
    would in fact be promulgated.  Accordingly, I refused the adjournment.

15.  The issue in this case is whether the  judge  had  sufficient  evidence
    before him to depart from country guidance.   It  was  conceded  by  Mr
    Clarke that, applying country guidance in  MA  and  MO,  the  Appellant
    would succeed in his claim. The issue  before  the  judge  was  whether
    there was evidence sufficient to demonstrate a change in  circumstances
    such that country guidance should not be followed.

16.  I find that it is clear from the judge's decision at paragraph 28  that
    he considered all relevant evidence, but concluded it was  insufficient
    to enable him to depart from country guidance.   At  paragraph  28  the
    judge states:

         "I find that the Appellant is entitled to  humanitarian  protection
         and/or the UK would be in breach of Article 3 or 4 of the  ECHR  if
         the Appellant were  deported  to  Eritrea  and  I  do  so  for  the
         following reasons.


           i.  While I do not consider there to be  a  great  risk  of  the
             Appellant being treated as  a  draft  evader  if  returned  to
             Eritrea (because of his age when he left the country - the age
             of  8  being  regarded  as   the   minimum   to   which   such
             considerations  would  apply  (MA  (Draft  evaders  -  illegal
             departures - risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059) the  country
             guidance indicates that such risk  cannot  be  discounted  and
             bearing in mind his now relatively poor  grasp  of   Tigrinya,
             (and indeed difficulty in even  expressing  himself  in  clear
             English); his complete lack of knowledge of the country and, I
             accept, the lack of any family or other support there and  his
             likely inability to pay any 'diaspora  tax',  there  is  every
             chance he  would  fall  foul  of  the  authorities.  In  those
             circumstances, the bulk of the  objective  evidence  indicates
             that he could face torture or inhuman or degrading  treatment.
             I note the Danish FFM Report, but that report  seems  to  have
             been 'cherry picked' from  others  of  the  same  vintage,  as
             perhaps it paints a slightly  more  favourable  view  of  this
             scenario. However, even that report is far  from  unequivocal,
             laced as it is with terms such  as  'unclear',  'some  sources
             indicate they might; others indicate they may not', 'difficult
             to establish', 'no information is available'.  Other  reports,
             such as one from the UN 2015 Commission  of  Enquiry  [13.2.1]
             indicate that 'national service conscripts may be detained for
             a variety of reasons, including  for  desertion,  unauthorised
             movement or absence, insubordination or for asking  questions.
             The Commission documented many cases of detention in  military
             training camps prisons and others for  the  reasons  mentioned
             above, often accompanied  by  torture  and  ill-treatment.'  I
             consider therefore that particularly taking into  account  the
             Appellant's troubled profile, he will be at unacceptable  risk
             of such treatment.


         ii.      In any event, even if not regarded as a draft  evader,  he
             is highly likely to be conscripted. The  country  guidance  is
             again equivocal on what the consequences of what that might be
             for  the  Appellant.   It  does  however  state  [2.5.3]  that
             'dissent, attempted escape and disobedience  can  be  punished
             severely.   Even   minor   transgressions   against   military
             discipline  or  any  form  of  criticism  may  attract  severe
             punishment including ill-treatment and torture.'  The bulk  of
             the Appellant's life since his early teenage  years  has  been
             one of disobedience, disruption, rule and  law-breaking,  with
             little apparent self control on  his  part.  He  also  has  no
             experience of life in Eritrea and (I accept) is likely to have
             a poor grasp of the language (at least for an initial period).
             It seems overwhelmingly likely therefore that he  would  quite
             likely come to the attention of  his  military  superiors,  be
             identified as a 'trouble-maker' and be treated accordingly.


         iii.   The Country Guidance indicates [2.5.12 and 2.5.14] that  the
             current model of national service is  of  such  duration  that
             when coupled with poor conditions, may in some cases amount to
             forced labour.  Those who  are  more  likely  to  escape  that
             combination of poor  conditions  and  excessive  duration  are
             conscripts with connections, or the educational qualifications
             to merit higher level civilian posts, but  the  Appellant  has
             neither. The indications are therefore, that he  will  be  the
             'lowest of the low', left  to  perform  the  most  menial  and
             manual  work,  for  an  unknown  duration.  I  consider   such
             treatment would amount to forced labour, in breach of  Article
             4."

17.  Accordingly, I find that the judge has assessed  whether  the  evidence
    before him was sufficient to depart from country guidance and  he  gave
    sufficient reasons for his conclusions that it was not.

18.  The Respondent relied on paragraph 2.5.13 of the CIG which states  that
    the Eritrean government has stated that  from  November  2014  national
    service will has reverted to eighteen months only and be based  in  the
    military i.e. no civic or government postings. There is  evidence  that
    this has been communicated to some conscripts. The  new  approach  will
    reportedly include  those  who  have  not  yet  reported  for  national
    service, but it is unclear as to whether it will  apply  to  deserters,
    existing conscripts or returnees.

19.  The judge's conclusion that the evidence  was  insufficient  to  depart
    from the country guidance was a conclusion which was open to the  judge
    on the evidence before him.  The CIG does not support a  departure  the
    country guidance.

20.   The  judge  properly  applied  country  guidance   relevant   to   the
    Appellant's case and there was no error of law in the judge's  decision
    to allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds. The Respondent's appeal against that decision is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 27th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



