
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/03965/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 31st  July 2017                        |On 04th August 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     MN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Head, Counsel instructed on behalf of appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.

 2. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination promulgated on the 8th June
    2017 dismissed his claim for protection.  The  Appellant's  immigration
    history and the basis of his claim is set out in  the  decision  letter
    issued by the Secretary of State.  It  can  be  summarised  briefly  as
    follows.

 4. The Appellant is from Afghanistan. He arrived in the United Kingdom  on
    29 August 2006 and claimed asylum the same day. The basis of his  claim
    was that he was at risk on return because members of  his  family  were
    senior members of a political  party  in  Afghanistan  and  that  their
    enemies were seeking  revenge  on  his  family  and  the  appellant  in
    particular. The claim was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  and  he
    exercised his right to appeal which came before an Immigration Judge on
    22 January 2007. In a determination promulgated on 30 January 2007, the
    judge dismissed his appeal on all grounds finding  that  the  appellant
    had never been involved in any political activities himself and that he
    was of a young age at the material times and thus  did  not  find  that
    there was a "shred of evidence "to suggest that he would be at risk  on
    return (paragraph 10.16). The judge considered his account was  "vague"
    (see paragraph 10.21).

 5. Following that decision, the appellant was removed  to  Afghanistan  in
    2007. He travelled back to Europe in 2007, claiming asylum in Italy and
    Norway before travelling to the UK; he  travelled  to  France  in  2016
    claimed asylum but was returned to the UK under the Dublin  Convention.
    The Secretary of State treated  his  claim  as  a  "fresh  claim".  The
    factual basis made reference to his family members  and  membership  of
    the Taliban. He asserted that when he returned to Afghanistan  in  2007
    he was at risk from the Taliban and that he had been detained and  ill-
    treated.

 6. The appellant underwent a screening interview on 7th March 2017  and  a
    substantive interview took place on 30th  March  2017.  In  a  detailed
    reasons for refusal letter dated 12th April 2017 the respondent refused
    that application for asylum. In that decision, the respondent  did  not
    accept that he had been targeted by any political party in  Afghanistan
    (paragraphs 38-39). Furthermore, it rejected his  claim  to  have  been
    forced to work with the Taliban or that he had been detained and beaten
    (paragraphs 42-49). In the alternative, it was  considered  that  there
    was sufficiency of protection in Afghanistan or in the  alternative  he
    could internally relocate. The decision letter also considered Articles
    2 and 3 and Article 8 (private life).

 7. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 16th May 2017.

 8. The judge set out his findings at paragraphs [28]  to  [33].  He  found
    that the appellant's credibility was damaged by his  failure  to  apply
    for asylum on his entry to  the  UK  (paragraphs  29  -  30).  He  made
    reference to the previous decision of the Tribunal in  2007  and  that,
    contrary to the appellant's claim that it was a different one from that
    made in 2006, he found that the claim was in essence the same and  that
    the only "real difference" was that he provided a medical  report.  The
    judge considered that medical report at paragraph 33 but  rejected  the
    medical evidence finding that  there  was  "no  alternative  causation"
    given to the injuries and "no alternative scenario" was discussed. Thus
    the claim for protection was dismissed on all grounds.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and the grounds
    are set out in the papers dated 21st June 2017.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by FTT Judge Bird on the 29th June 2017. Those grounds make
    reference  to  the  judges  consideration  of  the  evidence   and   in
    particular, the failure to  have  regard  to  all  of  the  documentary
    evidence before the court, the failure to have  regard  to  the  expert
    evidence and to give sustainable and sufficient reasons  for  rejecting
    the medical evidence and failure to consider Article 3 (suicide risk).

10. At the hearing before this Tribunal Miss Head relied upon  the  grounds
    that were before the Tribunal. In her submissions she made reference to
    the documentary evidence which had not been  considered  by  the  judge
    when reaching a decision on risk on return. At pages D34 and  35  there
    were documents from the Taliban. The judge made no reference  to  those
    documents in reaching any findings of fact. There was  also  an  expert
    report at A233 dated 9 May 2017 which was specific to the appellant and
    made reference to risk on return which included issues  of  sufficiency
    of  protection.  The  report  also  made  reference  to  mental  health
    facilities and risk on return at A266. She submitted that that had  not
    been considered at all in the assessment of risk.

11. As to the medical evidence, the only reference was at paragraph  33  in
    which the judge stated that no alternative causation was given  to  the
    injuries noted. As to the psychological  condition  of  the  appellant,
    again it was noted but that there was no alternative scenario discussed
    in the report. His conclusion was that the report did not  assist  him.
    The report is set out at A189 and is a joint report. At paragraph  4.25
    the report makes reference to head injuries that  were  noted  and  the
    scarring. Contrary to paragraph 33, the report  did  offer  alternative
    explanations for those scars. At A217 the  report  considered  clinical
    features  which  may  explain  inconsistencies  which  was  a  relevant
    consideration  in  considering  the  account.  In  the  light  of   the
    acceptance by the respondent the Rule 35 report did meet the definition
    of torture, it was incumbent on  the  judge  to  consider  the  medical
    evidence.

12. Mr Singh on behalf of the Secretary of State conceded that there was no
    reference in the determination to either the expert report or the other
    documentation relied upon by the appellant. He also noted the  contents
    of the medical report. Having  had  the  opportunity  to  consider  the
    grounds in the light of the determination  and  the  submissions  which
    were directed towards the documentary evidence, including  the  medical
    reports, he conceded that there was a material  error  of  law  in  the
    credibility findings. In those circumstances he invited the Tribunal to
    set aside the decision and for the appeal to be  reheard  so  that  all
    issues relating to credibility could be considered and in  the  context
    of the documentary evidence.

13. In the light of that concession made  by  Mr  Singh  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    it is the case that both parties agree that  the  determination  cannot
    stand and must be set aside.  I am satisfied that the  submissions made
    on behalf of the Appellant to which I have  made  reference  to,  which
    concern the lack  of  consideration  or  analysis  of  the  documentary
    evidence relied upon, are made out. Whilst it is true that the starting
    point of the assessment was the decision made in 2007 which  the  judge
    made reference to at paragraph 31, given that the  respondent  accepted
    that this was a "fresh claim" and that he provided a different  factual
    matrix, it was incumbent on the judge to  consider  the  later  factual
    account in the light of  the  new  documentation  which  did  not  only
    include the medical report but also the documents from the  Taliban  to
    which no reference is made and  also  the  expert  evidence  which  was
    specific to this appellant. It could not be said that it was a  generic
    report but  one  that  was  directed  to  particular  risk.  Thus  some
    assessment should have been  made  of  that  report  when  reaching  an
    overall view as to whether or not there was a risk on return. Mr  Singh
    accepted the grounds which related to the  medical  evidence  also  and
    that whilst it would be  open  to  the  judge  to  reject  the  medical
    evidence, to do so it would be necessary to engage with the contents of
    it as Miss Head submitted.

14.  Therefore for those reasons and in the light of the concession made by
    Mr Singh, the decision cannot stand and will be set aside.

15. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of  this  nature  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the  Appellant's  evidence  alongside  the
    documentary  evidence  and  the  expert  report  and  medical   report.
    Consequently the credibility findings must be made in the light of  all
    the evidence to reach a conclusion on this claim.

16. Thus the appeal will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  who  will
    consider the matter afresh. In the light of those submissions  and  the
    concession made by the Secretary of State , I am satisfied that this is
    the correct course to take and therefore I set aside  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and it  will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to hear afresh.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. It is set aside and it is remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  The direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Signed
[pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Reeds
                                Date: 5/7/2017

