
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03245/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 6th August 2019                   |On 16th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Barham [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss J Mason, a Solicitor's Clerk from Broudie
Jackson & Canter


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department challenges the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis, promulgated on 13th May 2019 in  the
    appeal of the respondent.  To avoid confusion  I  shall  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department as  being  "the  respondent"
    and to Barham [F] as being "the appellant", as he was before the First-
    tier.

2.   The appellant is an Iraqi national from Kirkuk who claims to have  left
    Iraq illegally in March 2018 and who entered the United Kingdom on 23rd
    July that year and claimed asylum the following day.   His  application
    was refused by the Secretary of State on 27th March and  the  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, claiming that  his  removal  would
    involve the United Kingdom in a breach of the Refugee Convention on the
    basis of his well-founded fear of persecution for  reasons  of  imputed
    political opinion.

3.   The judge did not believe the appellant's account and at  paragraph  41
    of the determination said, "Accordingly, I did not find his account  of
    events in Iraq to be credible.  Such a finding  also  raises  questions
    about whether his mother had fled Iraq,  as  claimed,  or  whether  she
    remained in her home area."

4.   The judge considered  AA  Iraq  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2017]  Imm  AR  1440  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC).

5.   At paragraph 51 of his determination the judge found that  obtaining  a
    CSID card in the United Kingdom would be extremely  difficult  for  the
    appellant, because he has no documentation.  The judge said, "Whilst  I
    do not find his account credible I accept that in  the  absence  of  me
    being satisfied he has contact with family he will struggle  to  obtain
    the necessary documentation".  The judge appears to  have  applied  the
    wrong test.  It was not necessary for the judge to  be  satisfied  that
    the appellant had family in Iraq, but for the appellant to  prove  that
    he did not have family in Iraq.

6.   The judge went on at paragraph 54 to say this:-

         "The appellant would have to be able to  produce  evidence  from  a
         family member, at the very least, to obtain his CSID but  it  seems
         highly unlikely that such a document would be obtainable  within  a
         reasonable period of time as the appellant comes from  a  contested
         area.  He has no family in Baghdad as he has never been  there  and
         were he to be returned to Baghdad, in line with government  policy,
         he would be unable to leave  Baghdad  or  be  able  to  obtain  any
         employment without a CSID".

7.   At paragraph 55 and 56 the judge said this:-

         "55. Whilst the  appellant  is  a  Kurd,  he  is  not  someone  who
             originates from the IKR.  He would be unable to fly to the IKR
             because the Tribunal has accepted that without a CSID a flight
             would not be possible.


         56.  There is the alternative of travelling to the IKR overland but
             there would be problems for this appellant  because  he  would
             have to travel through several checkpoints and without a  CSID
             he would again face significant problems as detailed in AAH."

8.   The judge allowed the appellant's  asylum  appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State challenged the decision on the basis that given  that  the  judge
    found the appellant's account not to be credible, his finding that  the
    appellant did not have contact with family members  was  insufficiently
    reasoned.

9.   It was suggested on behalf of Miss Mason who appeared on behalf of  the
    appellant today that the appellant does not have any  documentation  in
    the United Kingdom and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has correctly
    considered the findings in the current country guidance case law of AAH
    Iraq.  Judge  Alis  has  helpfully  included  the  relevant  paragraphs
    relating to the difficulties in obtaining a CSID document, both in  the
    UK and Baghdad, in his determination.  The Secretary  of  State  claims
    that "the appellant clearly has family in Iraq", but it  was  submitted
    that it is not clear whether the appellant has family in Iraq, which is
    the point considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  appellant
    has consistently stated that he lost contact with his mother in  Turkey
    and that his father is deceased.  There is no clear evidence  that  the
    appellant has other family in Iraq.

10.  The Secretary of  State's  submission  that  the  judge's  findings  in
    paragraphs 55 to 59  that  the  appellant  would  face  "problems"  are
    speculative, unsubstantiated and contrary to the facts, disregards  the
    findings of the current country guidance.  She relied on  her  response
    under Rule 24.  Miss Mason referred me to paragraph 54 of  the  judge's
    determination, namely:-

         "The appellant would have to be able to  produce  evidence  from  a
         family member, at the very least, to obtain his CSID but  it  seems
         highly unlikely that such a document would be obtainable  within  a
         reasonable period of time as the appellant comes from  a  contested
         area.  He has no family in Baghdad as he has never been  there  and
         were he to be returned to Baghdad, in line with government  policy,
         he would be unable to leave  Baghdad  or  be  able  to  obtain  any
         employment without a CSID".

11.  He, therefore makes an alternative finding, she  said.   She  submitted
    that even if it were shown that he had family in Kirkuk they would have
    to travel to Baghdad in order to obtain the  documentation  and  it  is
    highly likely that that would simply increase the time it would take to
    obtain state documentation.

12.  At paragraph 57, the judge demonstrates that he was well-aware  of  the
    high levels of unemployment in the IKR and that this would cause severe
    difficulties for the appellant. She submitted that the judge was a very
    experienced one and clearly aware of the correct test  of  unreasonable
    harshness.  She suggested that the determination should stand.

13.  On behalf of the respondent, Mr McVeety submitted  that  the  whole  of
    the appellant's case is predicated on the need of him to obtain a  CSID
    card.  However, at paragraph 31 of his determination, the judge records
    that the Presenting Officer accepted that the key  issue  in  assessing
    the Article 15(c) claim was the feasibility of return.  The judge said:-



         "There were a number of options open to him to obtain a CSID  card.
         He could contact his mother and arrange for her  to  send  him  his
         documentation or he could attend the Iraqi Consulate in  London  to
         obtain a replacement CSID.   However,  he  conceded  the  appellant
         would need either a CSID card number, passport or the  page  number
         from the original  entry  to  obtain  a  new  CSID  card  from  the
         Consulate".

14.  Mr McVeety said that the appellant does not need a new CSID  card,  but
    rather a replacement and this appears not to have  been  considered  by
    the judge.  On the one hand the judge did not believe  the  appellant's
    account of what happened to him, and  on  the  other  appears  to  have
    accepted that the  appellant's  mother  is  not  in  contact  with  the
    appellant.  The judge identified the difficulty at paragraph 41 of  the
    determination, but simply failed to make any finding on whether or  not
    he accepted that the appellant had no family members.

15.  So far as paragraph 57 is concerned the judge was  obviously  aware  of
    the difficulties that would be  faced  by  the  appellant  in  IKR  and
    described the others as being  problems,  but  he  did  not  apply  the
    correct test and identify whether  relocation  would  be  unreasonable.
    Miss Mason had nothing further to add.

16.  I reserved my determination.

17.  I adopt Mr  McVeety's  submissions.   I  believe  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has erred in law by failing to make  clear  findings  on
    whether or not the appellant has relatives in Iraq and  on  whether  or
    not it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to  relocate.   He
    does not need a CSID card, because he already had one when he  came  to
    the United Kingdom.  He needs a replacement CSID card.  As  to  whether
    or not it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to  relocate  to  the
    IKR the "problems" identified by the First-tier Tribunal Judge need  to
    be properly assessed.

Notice of Decision

16.  I concluded that the determination of Judge Alis  cannot  stand  and  I
    set it aside.

Directions

(1)  I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis.

(2)  A Kurdish Sorani interpreter will be required.

(3)  Three hours should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.

(4)  No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
14th August 2019
