
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03075/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision promulgated                 |
|On 21 November 2017                  |On 08 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     VTH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Warren instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. By decision promulgated on 18 July 2017 the Upper Tribunal found  the
       First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  in  allowing  the  appellant's
       appeal on asylum and human rights grounds against a decision  not  to
       revoke a deportation order made against her.

Background


    2. VTH is a citizen of Vietnam born on [ ] 1974. VTH was encountered  by
       the police and arrested on suspicion of being an illegal entrant on 6
       January 2009 at which point VTH provided a false identification which
       was only revealed  when  the  Secretary  of  State  undertook  checks
       following an asylum claim which revealed VTH's true identity, and the
       fact she had previously claimed asylum and  been  refused  asylum  in
       Germany on 17 October 2006. VTH was granted temporary admission  with
       the direction she was to report to the immigration  authorities,  but
       absconded.

    3. On 30 May 2014 VTH was arrested by the Dorset Police in relation to a
       suspected drug offence. On 8 October 2014 VTH  was  convicted  before
       the Bournemouth Crown Court of being concerned in the  production  of
       Class B controlled drugs, namely, cannabis, and on 15  December  2014
       was sentenced to 18 months  imprisonment.  A  deportation  order  was
       signed and served upon VTH.

    4. On 4 March 2015 VTH claimed she was a victim of human trafficking and
       on 1 April 2015 an asylum claim was lodged which was refused  by  the
       Secretary of State who also decided it was not appropriate to  revoke
       the deportation order because no exception under section 33 of the UK
       Borders Act 2007 applied. The appeal before the Judge was against the
       decision that no such exception applied, i.e., that VTH was  entitled
       to protection under the Refugee Convention or that removal  would  be
       contrary to Article 3 and Article 4 of  the  European  Convention  on
       Human Rights.

    5. The appellant failed to  attend  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing  which
       proceeded by considering the advocates  submissions  based  upon  the
       evidence available from other sources.

Preliminary issue


    6. At the  commencement  of  the  appeal  Miss  Warren  raised  concerns
       relating to additional documents  provided  by  the  Secretary  State
       arguing  that  the  author(s)  of  the  documents  are  not  properly
       identified and that there is a need for certainty regarding  how  the
       documents came into existence. It was submitted that the weight to be
       given to a document from a [TT] should be reduced  as  the  statement
       was not signed and so the Tribunal should not rely upon the  same  as
       the provenance of the document was uncertain. It was  also  submitted
       that two further  witness  statements,  by  another  individual,  are
       generic in nature and not reliable.

    7. Mr Bates submitted the statements had been electronically  signed  by
       the author and provided copies of the emails showing  when  they  had
       been received which had been shown to Miss  Warren  at  the  hearing.
       There was clear  evidence  of  communication  with  [TT]  in  English
       indicating there  was  no  need  for  an  interpreter  to  have  been
       employed. The named gentleman is also employed by the British Embassy
       in Hanoi  and  can  speak  English.  The  emails  evidence  when  the
       statements were received.

    8. This tribunal  has  no  concerns  regarding  the  provenance  of  the
       statements such that they should be disregarded. The  submission  the
       statements are generic may, in part, be true but there still relevant
       to the issues in this appeal arise. The statements are admitted  with
       the tribunal giving due consideration to the weight that it considers
       maybe attached thereto.

Summary of the submissions:


Miss Warren

    9. Miss Warren submitted the issue relevant to assessing risk on  return
       is the real  risk  of  the  appellant  being  re-trafficked.  It  was
       submitted the appellant would  have  difficulties  reintegrating  and
       that her family could not ameliorate the risk on return solely due to
       their presence. It was submitted that  as  a  victim  of  trafficking
       there was a real risk of re-trafficking in Vietnam  for  which  there
       was no sufficiency of  protection.  It  was  argued  the  appellant's
       family will not be able to  support  her  and  she  will  be  without
       support or protection from the authorities.

   10. It was submitted there is no challenge from  the  respondent  to  the
       appellant's  assertions  relating  to  her  family,  set  out  in   a
       supplemental witness statement dated 2 August 2016, where  at  [10  -
       11] the appellant stated:

           "10.   Further to paragraph 29 of my 27 January 2016  statement,
                I was released from Yarl Wood on 13 April 2016. I  am  still
                in occasional contact with my family, and although  they  do
                not know what I have gone through, my husband keeps  telling
                me that I have gone to the UK to become a prostitute. He  is
                very abusive about this and have  even  turned  my  children
                against me. If my family knew what I have gone through  they
                would think it was my fault and would not have  anything  to
                do with me.


           11.    Even if I am returned to Vietnam I cannot  return  to  my
                family and will not be able to live with them.  My  children
                used to respect me but now they listen to their  father  and
                they do not want anything to do with me. My son has told  me
                not to return home as  my  husband  does  not  want  me.  My
                husband was always abusive and I am  afraid  that  if  I  am
                returned home then he would harm me, I have nowhere to go to
                if I am removed to Vietnam."


   11. It was  also  submitted  the  appellant  has  mental  health  issues,
       psychiatric  reports  mentioning  vulnerability  in  the   appellants
       background and problems and the fact the children  are  settled  with
       their father. Miss Warren submitted the family are not predisposed to
       help.

   12. A report prepared  by  Dr  Laura  Kemmis,  a  psychologist,  dated  7
       September 2015 has been provided in the  appellant's  appeal  bundle.
       Miss Warren refers to [47] of that report where it is written:

           "47.   [VTH] has expressed the shame she feels  about  her  past
                traumatic experiences and risk of being deported and  forced
                back into prostitution will be likely to have a  detrimental
                effect on  her  mental  health  and  increase  the  risk  of
                suicidal ideation. Even if [VTH]  is  not  re-trafficked  to
                Vietnam she is likely to face  reintegration  challenges  if
                returned due to the experiences she has been through.  [VTH]
                reports she has attempted to conceal her  traumatic  history
                from her family however, she fees  as  her  history  may  be
                disclosed by the  agents  which  may  result  in  her  being
                ostracised by her family and community which would  also  be
                likely to impact on her mental health and ability to cope if
                deported to Vietnam."


   13. Miss Warren argued the connection between  the  appellants  fear  the
       family may be advised of what had occurred by the agent is the  issue
       of debt bondage. Miss Warren sought to rely upon a report prepared by
       Mr Mark  Sidel,  a  Professor  of  Law  and  Public  Affairs  at  the
       University of Wisconsin Law School, University of Wisconsin - Madison
       in the United States of America, dated 23 May 2016 who at [51]  deals
       with the issue of re-trafficking in the following terms:

           "51.   Individuals who report that  they  have  been  trafficked
                remain in plausible  fear  that  if  they  are  returned  to
                Vietnam,  they  may  be  retaliated   against,   physically,
                emotionally and financially, or subject  to  re-trafficking.
                These risks on return of documented in numerous governmental
                and non-governmental reports.  For  example,  the  UK  Child
                Exploitation and Online Protection Centre  Strategic  Threat
                Assessment - Child Trafficking in the UK  2010  specifically
                noted the "fear of reprisals  from  Chinese  and  Vietnamese
                trafficking networks which are far-reaching, more structured
                and powerful than those observed in other  profiles."  These
                situations - reprisals, retaliation's, re-trafficking - have
                occurred in debt bondage and debt recovery contexts, such as
                the type of context that [VTH] instructs occurred with her."


   14. Miss Warren submitted in this case the appellant had been  trafficked
       by an organised criminal gang for  cannabis  cultivation  in  the  UK
       giving rise to the risk of retaliation. It was submitted that  as  it
       is a network it means they could locate  the  appellant  if  she  was
       returned to Vietnam and that the Vietnamese government is  unable  to
       fund and/or protect her in addition to issues of corruption.

   15. It was submitted that if the appellant is  in  debt  bondage  to  her
       traffickers and they are able to trace her, there is a real  risk  of
       her being re-trafficked from which no sufficiency of  protection  has
       been shown to exist.  It was also  submitted  the  country  materials
       indicate there is governmental involvement in such networks.

   16. An additional report prepared by Elizabeth  Flint,  described  as  an
       independent consultant with expertise in  human  trafficking,  sexual
       and gender-based violence and refugee  resettlement,  dated  4  April
       2016, deals with the link  between  debt  and  the  family  of  those
       trafficked in the following paragraphs:

           "132.  On release from the police station  [VTH]  did  not  know
                where to go. She was culturally, socially and linguistically
                isolated. She felt she had no alternative but to follow  the
                two men she had been arrested with ([16] of the  statement).
                She was registered as an absconder on 1 February 2009  after
                failing to  report  to  the  authorities  ([2]  of  Claimant
                statement of facts and Grounds). The two men exploited their
                power over her and her  vulnerability  to  re-traffick  her.
                They confiscated the papers [VTH]  had  been  given  by  the
                police and transferred her to a property where there  was  a
                third man ([16-17] of her statement). [VTH] was harboured at
                the property and raped by all three men. The next day one of
                the men left and thereafter [VTH] was held in  the  property
                for nearly a year and repeatedly sexually exploited  by  the
                two remaining men. They used various means  to  control  her
                including  sexual  violence  and  locking  her  inside   the
                property. She was instructed to say that one of the men  was
                her boyfriend if anyone asked her about the  nature  of  her
                relationship to the men ([17] of her statement).


           137.   Thereafter NT persisted in contacting [VTH] asking her if
                she had a job. When [VTH] told NT that she was without  work
                he offered her a job cleaning and looking after  plants,  at
                his house. This offer appears to be [VTH's] recruitment into
                forced labour and  forced  criminality.  She  was  given  no
                further information about the nature of the  work.  She  was
                told she would be paid �200 at the end of  the  week.  [VTH]
                agreed and was  subsequently  collected  and  taken  to  the
                property where she was harboured  and  exploited  in  forced
                labour  and   forced   criminality   for   drug   (cannabis)
                cultivation. Less than  a  week  later  [VTH]  and  NT  were
                arrested at the property ([25-26] of the statement).


           156.   Some of the  above  push  and  pull  factors  mirror  the
                experiences of  [VTH].  Her  traffickers  deceived  her  and
                exploited her vulnerability.  They  took  advantage  of  the
                financial difficulties her and her  family  were  facing  to
                recruit her at a time when  she  felt  desperate  about  her
                circumstances. She was brought on a circuitous route to  the
                UK punctuated by exploitation, violence and  brutality.  The
                trauma may have disorientated her and undermined her ability
                to recall the full details of her history.


           159.   IOM states that debt  bondage  is  extremely  common  for
                children trafficked from rural regions in Central and  South
                Vietnam. Debts may not be placed  on  the  victim  in  their
                entirety - in many cases parents are expected to pay half of
                the fees. These families are not able to borrow  money  from
                banks, so turn to relatives  or  moneylenders.  Moneylenders
                are often connected to the trafficking networks and  act  as
                an extra mechanism to further exploit the vulnerable  victim
                and their family, as the debts are  often  subject  to  high
                interest rates.  Families  will  be  forced  to  sell  their
                property to pay off the debts,  particularly  those  secured
                through banks. Those family members who cannot pay  off  the
                debts have been subjected to violence and maiming, and  some
                may have been killed.


           160.   [VTH] was exploited in cannabis cultivation.   This  type
                of drug cultivation is  well  recognised  as  a  significant
                problem in the UK. ACPO, in  a  2012  UK  National  Problem,
                Profile Report entitled Commercial Cultivation  of  Cannabis
                in the UK state: 'the threat from  the  domestic  commercial
                cultivation of cannabis in the UK is increasing.  There  has
                been an  increase  in  robberies,  burglaries  and  violence
                (including the use of firearms) linked to cannabis farms.'"


   17. The appellant's account is that the main debt owed to the traffickers
       is secured by collateral on family assets but  that  there  is  still
       approximately �6000 outstanding which the appellant  submitted  could
       be part  of  the  reason  the  family  would  not  provide  her  with
       protection.

   18. In relation to the risk on re-trafficking it was submitted  Elizabeth
       Flint, at [171 - 175], writes:

           "171.  In my  opinion  [VTH]  would  also  be  at  risk  of  re-
                trafficking if returned to Vietnam because of  a  number  of
                different vulnerability factors, including but  not  limited
                to: a history  of  exploitation;  the  history  of  domestic
                violence; the debt bondage  and  that  of  her  family;  her
                history of  relationships  of  dependency;  her  history  of
                trauma; and  her  fragile  mental  health  evidenced  by  Dr
                Kemmis's diagnosis of PTSD and Major Depressive Disorder.


           172.   In my opinion, [VTH] would  also  be  vulnerable  to  re-
                trafficking if returned to Vietnam if she were to return  to
                some of the same push and pull factors that led her to leave
                in the first place.  Push  factors  include:  poverty;  debt
                bondage; a history of domestic abuse and violence; a lack of
                education and employment  opportunities.  If  she  were  re-
                traffic to pull factors might include: an offer of education
                or employment or an  opportunity  to  improve  her  and  her
                children's quality of life or to repay  her  debts  enabling
                her to keep her family safe and free from threats; a  desire
                to escape the shame, humiliation and stigma  often  attached
                to being a victim of trafficking.


           173.   In my experience, support  is  a  key  protective  factor
                against the risk of re-trafficking. If [VTH]  cannot  access
                specialist trafficking support on return to Vietnam that can
                help her to reorganise relationships that may be harmful  to
                her and foster rehabilitation then I am concerned  that  she
                may find herself vulnerable to exploitation  again.  I  note
                from the 2015 TIP report on Vietnam that there are a  number
                of shortfalls in  protection  and  support  for  victims  of
                trafficking in Vietnam. It states:


                    'The government demonstrated modest efforts  to  protect
                    victims. In 2014, authorities identified 1031  potential
                    trafficking victims but did not  report  how  many  were
                    exploited in sex or labour trafficking,  how  many  were
                    adults or  children,  or  how  many  were  exploited  in
                    Vietnam or abroad. In comparison, authorities  certified
                    982 trafficking victims in 2013.  Victim  identification
                    and referral mechanisms  remained  weak  throughout  the
                    country. The  government  had  a  formal  procedure  for
                    victim identification, but it did not proactively employ
                    it to identify victims among vulnerable groups, such  as
                    women  arrested  for   prostitution,   migrant   workers
                    returning from abroad, and child labourers. It also  did
                    not systematically refer victims to protective  services
                    due  to  inadequacies  that  persisted  in  its   formal
                    referral  process.  Officials  continued   to   conflate
                    trafficking  with   smuggling,   which   precluded   the
                    identification  of  victims  who  voluntarily   migrated
                    abroad.


           174. And:


                    'protection services  vary  by  location  but  generally
                    included legal  aid,  counselling,  shelter,  vocational
                    training,   healthcare   and    financial    allowances.
                    Authorities did not report the  number  of  victims  who
                    used the one-time government cash  subsidy  -  up  to  1
                    million dong ($50). MOLISA's social protection  centres,
                    which provide services to a  wide  range  of  vulnerable
                    groups,  sometimes  housed  trafficking   victims;   the
                    centres are often  underfunded  and  lack  appropriately
                    trained personnel to assist victims. The Vietnam Women's
                    Union, in partnership with NGO's and with foreign  donor
                    funding, continued to operate three  shelters  in  urban
                    areas, one of which was  trafficking  specific.  Vietnam
                    had no shelters or services specifically  for  assisting
                    male or child victims and none devoted  specifically  to
                    victims of labor trafficking'.


           175.   When looked at together with Vietnam's  'Tier  2'  rating
                the available information points  to  a  number  of  serious
                shortfalls on the  part  of  the  Vietnamese  Government  in
                providing adequate protection  and  support  to  victims  of
                trafficking."


   19. The report indicates  at  [176]  that  a  'Tier  2'  rating  denotes:
       'countries whose governments do not  fully  comply  with  the  TVPA's
       minimum standards,  but  are  making  significant  efforts  to  bring
       themselves into compliance with those standards'.

   20. Miss Warren submitted the appellant is keen to keep knowledge of  her
       experiences from her family. She is concerned that  as  a  result  of
       mental health issues identified in the  psychologists  report  it  is
       likely the family will be aware that  something  had  occurred  as  a
       result of her presentation. It was argued this is  not  conducive  to
       the appellant's protection and that the appellant needs assistance in
       the  process  of  her  recovery.  It  is  argued  that  without  such
       assistance there could be a significant impact upon her mental health
       in the future.

   21. It was also submitted by Miss Warren that if the appellant returns to
       her family this would make her traceable as agents had been in  touch
       with her family.

   22. In relation to the issue of corruption,  Miss  Warren  refers  to  an
       addendum report prepared by Mr Mark Sidel dated 30  October  2017  in
       which there is reference to the issue of corruption.

   23. In addition to the submissions regarding the lack of  sufficiency  of
       protection, Miss Warren submitted  it  was  also  not  reasonable  to
       expect the appellant to internally relocate on the evidence.  It  was
       argued  that  without  the  benefit  of   expert   intervention   the
       appellant's mental  health  will  not  improve.  Miss  Warren  places
       reliance upon  a  second  medical  report  prepared  by  a  Dr  Brock
       Chisholm, a Chartered Clinical Psychologist, dated  28  October  2017
       who states at page 404 [66] that '[VTH's] PTSD  is  very  severe  and
       that it cannot worsen very much before her  symptoms  hit  a  ceiling
       level'.  It was submitted that in addition to this the appellant  has
       cognitive issues such as learning difficulties and that  if  she  was
       returned to Vietnam she will face the subjective fear referred to  in
       the evidence and she will remain isolated.

   24. Miss Warren submitted that despite the preserved findings,  that  the
       appellant is a victim of trafficking, the respondent  has  not  taken
       steps to check if she needs time to  enjoy  a  period  of  'rest  and
       recovery' which it was submitted is a breach  of  Article  4  of  the
       Trafficking Convention and which should be a gateway to assistance by
       of counselling and specialised help. It was submitted that one cannot
       say what in the future would happen as the gateway work has not  been
       undertaken.

   25. In relation to the existence of shelters and provision of assistance,
       it was submitted by Miss Warren that the provision  of  the  same  is
       problematic. The addendum report of Mark Sidel dated 30 October  2017
       refers to the lack of  shelters.  It  was  also  submitted  that  the
       appellant has a number of specific needs which are heightened in  her
       case in addition to the basic needs such as employment  and  housing.
       As a result of the problems regarding her functioning  the  appellant
       would find it difficult to  achieve  the  same  in  Vietnam.  It  was
       submitted her family will not assist her as they had  ostracised  her
       and she will be left alone.

   26. Miss Warren submitted that although  the  respondent  could  say  she
       could provide assistance, the evidence is generic and  does  not  say
       what is specifically available to the appellant or if the same  could
       be provided.  It was argued that although the evidence says there are
       shelters run by local government it did not  say  what  would  happen
       regarding a returnee from the United Kingdom or  that  the  appellant
       will be admitted into such shelters.   It  was  argued  there  is  no
       evidence of the range of partners the British Embassy has  ties  with
       in Vietnam and that the respondent's  witness  statements  failed  to
       deal with the specific needs of the appellant.

   27. In relation to the issue of traceability - Miss Warren  submits  that
       the appellant will require a national identity card and that as there
       exists a family system there was a real risk in this case,  in  light
       of the links with officials and traffickers, that they  could  obtain
       information relating to the appellant's whereabouts.

Mr Bates

   28. On behalf of the Secretary of  State  Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the
       appellant's own  evidence  referred  to  family  being  available  in
       Vietnam  including  the  appellant's  children,   grandparents,   and
       parents. It is also the case the appellant came to the United Kingdom
       for employment and that  she  left  Vietnam  willingly  and  was  not
       coerced. It was submitted the act of trafficking occurred  after  the
       appellant had left Vietnam.

   29. Mr Bates submitted that as the appellant had not told her family  she
       came to the UK to be a prostitute it was not  clear  how  the  family
       would discover this  which,  it  was  submitted,  is  an  attempt  to
       embellish the account.  The  claim  of  no  family  support  was  not
       accepted by the Secretary State in light of the  fact  the  appellant
       has a sister and adult children. It was also submitted  that  despite
       claiming that all the  family  are  against  her  the  appellant  has
       maintained contact with them. Mr Bates submitted there will be little
       purpose in maintaining contact if the  appellant  never  returned  to
       Vietnam and that she could be supported by the family  there  if  she
       was.  It was submitted the reason such  contact  was  maintained  was
       because the appellant intends to see her family so she would not want
       to tell them what had occurred. It was submitted  that  such  contact
       also undermined her claim to have been ostracised.

   30. In relation to the issue of  learning  difficulties,  it  was  argued
       there was  insufficient  assessment  provided  by  the  appellant  in
       relation to such issues. The psychiatric report of Dr  Chrisolm  also
       states at [65] "she may require additional support if she does have a
       learning disability, although I think she can live independently". Mr
       Bates also referred to [66] where it is written "in  my  opinion,  if
       she continues to be as isolated as she is, her low mood  will  worsen
       and she may therefore be at risk of suicide.  However,  her  PTSD  is
       very severe, and it cannot worsen very much before her  symptoms  hit
       ceiling level". It was submitted that the issue of isolation  in  the
       United Kingdom exasperates the appellant's mental health presentation
       where as if the appellant is able to be reunited with her  family  in
       Vietnam the situation will be different.

   31. In relation to the context of trafficking, Mr Bates argued there  was
       not one continuous chain of  events.  The  appellant  refers  in  her
       witness statement to being in a controlled environment when she was a
       victim of sexual exploitation but also that she was  able  to  escape
       from that environment and was able to make telephone contact  with  a
       person who led her to the cannabis cultivation  in  the  UK.  It  was
       submitted these are not the same people.

   32. Mr Bates submitted there are different methods  which  the  appellant
       refers in to in her statement of January 2016, in that she went to  a
       hotel to meet the person who offered her a job which it was submitted
       does not suggest she was under the control of the  person  mentioned.
       It was submitted this did not support a claim of a continuous  strand
       of trafficking from Vietnam.

   33. In Vietnam it was argued the appellant was a victim of deception  not
       coercion or physical removal and it was not made out that  those  who
       arranged  her  departure  from  Vietnam  were  linked  to  those  who
       trafficked her and exploited her in the United Kingdom.

   34. It was argued that due  to  the  passage  of  time  and  transfer  of
       property or by other means any debt owed for the appellant's  journey
       to the United Kingdom would have been repaid. It  was  submitted  the
       appellant still has a relationship with her family who she claims are
       unaware of everything that has  happened  to  her;  although  if  the
       appellant returned it is not known how her family would react if they
       found out what has occurred, including her children.

   35. In relation to the issue of trafficking, Mr Bates submitted that  the
       passage of time was relevant in that the  Secretary  State  does  not
       dispute that Vietnam is a country in relation to  which  there  is  a
       risk of re-trafficking but that now the appellant is  aware  of  what
       happened in the past it is highly unlikely that in the safety of  her
       family she is likely to face the same risk.

   36. Mr Bates referred to the evidence provided by the Secretary of  State
       which is in the following terms:

           Witness statement of [LG]


           I, [LG], Senior Executive  Officer,  Country  Manager  Asia  and
           Middle East team 4 & 5 of  Return  Logistics,  Home  Office,  14
           Floor Lunar House, Croydon, CR9 2BY will say as follows:


                 1. I am employed by the Defendant  as  a  Senior  Executive
                    Officer, Immigration Enforcement. My  title  is  Country
                    Manager, Asia and Middle East team  4  &  5,  in  Return
                    Logistics. The facts in this statement are true  to  the
                    best of my knowledge and belief  and  are  derived  from
                    information contained in Home Office files and  obtained
                    from Home Office colleagues overseas.


                 2. I make this statement as the Country Manager in Asia and
                    Middle East team 4 & 5. This is a specialist team within
                    the Home Office that plays a liaison role (sometimes  in
                    conjunction with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office) to
                    facilitate the provision of travel documentation through
                    diplomatic engagement with the  country  of  nationality
                    where a person has failed to provide the  normal  travel
                    and identity documentation required to enter the UK.  We
                    also  shape  and  coordinate  country  focused   returns
                    strategies for various countries.


                 3. I can confirm that a shelter (for victims of trafficking
                    who are returned to Vietnam) has been built in  Nghe  An
                    Province Vietnam. The shelter was built with funding  by
                    the British government has been run and operated by  the
                    Vietnamese local authorities (the local  authorities  is
                    funding the operational cost for the  shelter).  It  has
                    been  agreed  that  the  shelter  will  accept   victims
                    returning from the UK.


                 4. The shelter offers comprehensive  consultation  services
                    including healthcare  and  psychology  using  Vietnamese
                    language.


                 5.  Apart  from  this  shelter  only  Hagar  Vietnam   (and
                    international NGOs) has provided support to  victims  of
                    trafficking who have returned to Vietnam (two to  date).
                    Link  to  Hagar   website   detailed   Hagar   services:
                    htts://www.hagarinternational.org/international/hour-
                    work/where, we, work/Vietnam/


                 6.  The  Piece  House  Hanoi  run  by  Centre   for   Women
                    Development  of  Women  Union  also  have  comprehensive
                    consultation services. It's Facebook page  which  is  in
                    Vietnamese  only  (https://vn.Facebook.com/NgoiNhainhYen
                    PeaceHouseShelter/ (with only one consultation  line  in
                    English + 84 24 37281038. Its official website is  under
                    reconstruction ngoinhabinhyen.vn


                 7. Pacific Links  Foundation  (an  international  NGOs)  in
                    conjunction with local authorities also run two shelters
                    for female  victims  of  trafficking  Lao  Cai  province
                    (North border area of Vietnam)  and  An  Giang  province
                    (southern   border   area    of    Vietnam),    website:
                    http://www.Pacificlinks.org/


                 8. The facts this witness statement are true to the best of
                    my knowledge and belief


                    Signed:     ---------------------------------------------
                    --------


                       [LG]


                    Dated: 23.8.17


   37. Of more importance is the witness statement of [TT] which is referred
       to in relation to the preliminary issue point discussed  above.  This
       statement is in the following terms:

           Witness statement of [TT]


           I, [TT], Modern Slavery Project Manager, British Embassy  Hanoi,
           4th floor Central Building, 31 Hai Ba Trung, Hoan  Kiem,  Hanoi,
           Vietnam make this statement (consisting of TWO  pages  which  is
           signed by me).


                 1. I am employed by the  Defendant  as  a  Locally  Engaged
                    Officer of the  Immigration  Enforcement  International,
                    the British Embassy Hanoi. My title  is  Modern  Slavery
                    Project Manager. The facts in this statement are true to
                    the best of my knowledge and belief.


                 2. I make this statement  as  the  Modern  Slavery  Project
                    Manager  Locally  Engaged  Officer  of  the  Immigration
                    Enforcement International. This  is  a  specialist  team
                    that plays a liaison role (sometimes in conjunction with
                    the Foreign and Commonwealth Office) to  facilitate  the
                    provision of  travel  documentation  through  diplomatic
                    engagement with  the  country  of  nationality  where  a
                    person has failed  to  provide  the  normal  travel  and
                    identity documentation required to enter the UK. We also
                    coordinate all the projects on Modern Slavery funded  by
                    the HMG in Vietnam.


                 3. I can confirm that currently there is no certain  agreed
                    mechanism by  UK  in  Vietnam  for  returning  a  Modern
                    Slavery (MS) victim recognised by the UK to Vietnam  and
                    it requires the involvement of  our  team  in  Hanoi  in
                    getting approval from local authorities for  the  return
                    given the diplomatic status of the Embassy  in  Vietnam.
                    Our  team  will  need  advice  from  experts   of   Non-
                    Governmental Organisations (NGOs) in Vietnam on how best
                    to support a vulnerable victim who  has  been  diagnosed
                    with Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  (PTSD);  special
                    psychological  services  may  be  needed;  shelter   for
                    suitable  home  accommodation;  a  package  of  support;
                    reception and travel to shelter/home etc. Steps we would
                    take to liaise  with  the  Vietnamese  authorities  over
                    their reception upon return and to place  the  Appellant
                    (if possible) in one of the shelters are as followed:


                        Step  1:  the  victim  will  need  to  fill  in  an
                        application  with  self   declaration   forms   for
                        applying for an  emergency  travel  document  (ETD)
                        which  the  victim  will  need  for  travelling  to
                        Vietnam. The Asia and Middle East team 4  &  5,  in
                        Returns  Logistics  can  provide  the   application
                        template. The application should  be  sent  to  our
                        team by the Asia and Middle East team  4  &  5,  in
                        Returns Logistics. The  application  will  then  be
                        forwarded to the Immigration Department of Ministry
                        of Public Security of  Vietnam  for  identification
                        verification check.


                        Step 2: Once the verification is conducted  by  the
                        Vietnamese authorities and completed, and an ETD is
                        agreed to be issued to the victim,  our  team  will
                        inform the local  authorities  of  the  return  and
                        obtain the approval for the victim  to  stay  in  a
                        shelter in Vietnam.  Or  if  the  victim  wants  to
                        return to the victim's family and receiving support
                        without staying in  the  shelter,  a  NGO  will  be
                        identified  to  provide  tailored  support  to  the
                        victim.


                        Step 3: Once approval is obtained, a date of return
                        will be  set  and  reception  can  be  arranged  in
                        Vietnam by either local authorities and/or NGO


                        Step 4: if the victim  is  entitled  to  a  support
                        package by the British  government,  our  team  can
                        help identify a NGO to  handle/manage  the  package
                        for the victim to make sure that the packages  used
                        properly.


                 4. The facts in this witness statement are true to the best
                    of my knowledge and belief.


                    SIGNED:         -----------------------------------------
                    ------------------------------


                       [TT]


                    DATED: 12.10.17


Discussion


   38. There are a number of preserved findings recorded in the error of law
       decision which are summarised at [34] as:

           "34.   I find no error of  law  made  out  in  relation  to  the
                Judge's conclusion that VTH is a victim of  trafficking  for
                sexual exploitation. I find no error of law made out in  the
                Judges conclusions that VTH suffers from PTSD as a result of
                her adverse life experiences  and  subjective  fear  of  the
                possibility that the same may be repeated."


   39. Although the appellant relies upon a number of learned  articles  and
       reports on relevant issues these cases are  fact  specific  with  the
       burden  of  establish  an  entitlement  ordinarily  being  upon   the
       appellant.

   40. It was argued on the  appellant's  behalf  that,  notwithstanding  it
       being found she is a victim of trafficking, the  respondent  has  not
       provided the required period  of  'rest  and  reflection'  to  enable
       identified needs in breach of the 'Trafficking Convention'.  Guidance
       was to be found in EK (Article 4 ECHR:  Anti-Trafficking  Convention)
       Tanzania [2013] UKUT 00313 (IAC)

   41. This decision has been delayed as it was known the  Court  of  Appeal
       have  been  considering  a  trafficking  case  and  the  respondent's
       guidance in relation to a victim of  trafficking.  Judgment  in  that
       matter was handed down in R (on  the  application  of  PK  (Ghana)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 98,  on  8
       February 2018.

   42. It has not been  necessary  to  reconvene  in  light  of  this  later
       decision as it is not disputed, as recognised by the Court of Appeal,
       that the Council of Europe Convention on Action  against  Trafficking
       in Human Beings 2005 (CETS No  197)   "the  Trafficking  Convention",
       does not give a foreign national an automatic right to  remain  in  a
       particular country by virtue of being a victim of trafficking  alone;
       but it does require a state to grant such a victim a residence permit
       where the competent authority  in  that  state  considers  that  that
       person's stay in the  country  is  necessary  owing  to  his  or  her
       personal situation.

   43. It is also not disputed that a conclusive decision  that  the  person
       was  trafficked,  either  following  referral  through  the  National
       Referral  Mechanism  or  subsequent  judicial   finding,   does   not
       automatically lead to a grant  of  leave  to  remain.  Guidance  upon
       discretionary leave in these circumstances is found in several policy
       documents issued by the Secretary of State, which are linked and,  so
       far as material, consistent with each other.

   44. The respondent's guidance, Asylum Policy  Instruction,  Discretionary
       Leave,  Version  7,  18  August  2015,  in  relation  to  victims  of
       trafficking/modern slavery states:

           3.5    Modern Slavery cases (including trafficking)  Victims  of
                slavery, servitude and forced and compulsory labour who  are
                conclusively recognised as such  by  the  National  Referral
                Mechanism (NRM) may be eligible for DL  based  on  the  same
                criteria of  personal  circumstances,  helping  police  with
                enquires and  pursuing  compensation  as  victims  of  human
                trafficking, and this provision applies across the UK.


                A person will not normally qualify  for  DL  solely  because
                they have been identified as a victim of modern  slavery  or
                trafficking - there must  be  compelling  reasons  based  on
                their individual circumstances to  justify  a  grant  of  DL
                where they do not qualify for other leave such as asylum  or
                humanitarian protection.


                As part of the positive reasonable grounds  decision  letter
                issued by the Competent Authority of the NRM  the  potential
                victim of human trafficking in the UK, and modern slavery in
                England and Wales, will be asked if they would  like  to  be
                considered for DL in the  event  of  a  positive  conclusive
                grounds decision from the  NRM.  Where  they  indicate  they
                would like to be considered for DL this will  be  considered
                under  the  criteria  relating  to  personal  circumstances,
                helping  police  with  enquires  and  pursuing  compensation
                detailed in the Competent Authority guidance once a positive
                conclusive grounds decision is issued. The person  will  not
                need to fill in an application form or  pay  a  fee  for  an
                initial consideration of DL on this basis. A person who  has
                claimed asylum will receive automatic consideration  for  DL
                on this basis if they are not granted asylum or humanitarian
                protection.


   45. The Court of Appeal in PK (Ghana) found:

           42.    However, I cannot accept  the  proposition  that  Article
                14(1)(a) was intended to (or, construed  objectively,  does)
                give the Secretary of State an open-ended discretion.


           43.    If it were an  open-ended  discretion,  Article  14(1)(a)
                would be otiose, because the state  always  has  a  residual
                discretion to grant a foreign citizen the right  to  reside.
                It is a tenet of construction that  words  are  intended  to
                have some meaning, and a substantive provision should not be
                construed in such a way that it is empty.  Article  14(1)(a)
                is clearly not intended to be a provision included  for  the
                avoidance of doubt. Indeed, Miss Bretherton did not  suggest
                that was the case. It is intended to have  some  substantive
                content. If it is "necessary" (whatever that may mean), then
                the affected person will have  the  right  to  discretionary
                leave, and thus the right to remain in the  United  Kingdom,
                irrespective of his  or  her  immigration  status  or  other
                rights.  Where  an  individual  satisfies  the  criteria  of
                Article 14(1)(a), he or she is granted a new  right  by  the
                Convention.


           44.    "Necessary", in this context, means required to achieve a
                desired purpose, effect or result. In Article 14(1)(b),  the
                purpose for which it is necessary for a person  to  stay  in
                the country is  express:  the  competent  authority  has  to
                consider  that  the  person  staying  in  the  country   "is
                necessary for the purpose  of  their  cooperation  with  the
                competent   authorities   in   investigation   or   criminal
                proceedings".  In  Article  14(1)(a),  the  purpose  is  not
                express: but the provision is deep  within  the  Trafficking
                Convention which (as Miss Bretherton rightly accepted)  must
                be construed purposively [2]. Thus, "necessary"  in  Article
                14(1)(a) has to be seen through the prism of the  objectives
                of the  Convention:  and  the  competent  authority  has  to
                consider whether  the  person  staying  in  the  country  is
                necessary in the light of, and with  a  view  to  achieving,
                those objectives.


           45.    In respect of the relevant objectives of the  Trafficking
                Convention, Mr Westgate submitted that  Article  12  informs
                the correct construction of Article  14(1)(a);  but,  in  my
                view, any assistance  Article  12  can  give  is,  at  best,
                minimal  and  indirect.  Article  12  sets  out   additional
                obligations imposed upon  the  state  -  and,  reciprocally,
                additional rights that attach to the victim of trafficking -
                at various stages of the process; but it does not purport to
                prescribe or even inform when those stages  arise,  as  does
                Article 14.


           46.    Articles 10(2) and 13(2) (quoted above: see paragraphs  8
                and 10) make clear that the rights set out in Article  12(1)
                and (2) are triggered by a reasonable grounds decision,  and
                are maintained until at least the end of  the  recovery  and
                reflection period. Article 12(1) concerns steps that a state
                is required to make "to assist victims  in  their  physical,
                psychological and social recovery". Recovery is an important
                form of relief for a trafficked  person,  involving  medical
                and/or  psychological  care,  and/or  legal  and/or   social
                services  (see  EK   (Article   4   ECHR:   Anti-Trafficking
                Convention) Tanzania  [2013]  UKUT  313  at  [46],  and  the
                international documents there referred to). However, Article
                13 of the Convention, which deals with  recovery,  curiously
                requires the recovery period to be of no less than 30 days -
                for  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Secretary  of   State   has
                determined the period shall be 45 days - and  that  "such  a
                period shall be  sufficient  for  the  person  concerned  to
                recover and escape the influence of  traffickers  and/or  to
                take an informed decision on cooperating with the  competent
                authorities" (emphasis added). But,  as  agreed  between  Mr
                Westgate and Miss Bretherton, looking at the Convention as a
                whole, it seems clear that,  if  a  conclusive  decision  is
                made, the state's obligations under Article 12, once arisen,
                continue, irrespective of any other rights they might  have,
                unless and until the victim is returned to another state.


           47.    Similarly, the  rights  in  Article  12(3)  and  (4)  are
                triggered as soon as the victim is  "lawfully  resident"  in
                the country, which includes where he or she has been granted
                discretionary  leave.  Again,  those  rights,  once  arisen,
                continue, irrespective of any other rights they might  have,
                unless and until the victim is returned to another state.


           48.    Therefore, it is Article 14(1) which  prescribes  when  a
                state is required to allow a victim of trafficking  lawfully
                to reside in its national boundaries. I accept,  of  course,
                that "personal circumstances" is a  wide  concept  and  wide
                enough  to  include  the   consequences   of   having   been
                trafficked; but there is no additional  obligation,  outside
                Article 14, to allow a  victim  to  reside  or  continue  to
                reside to enable his or her full recovery. Article  12  does
                not impose such an obligation: it merely  prescribes  rights
                that a victim of trafficking  has  whilst  in  the  country.
                Indeed,  Article  14(3)  makes  expressly  clear  that   the
                withdrawal of any residence permit  is  dependent  upon  the
                national law of the  relevant  Party  (and  not  obligations
                imposed  by  international  law,  such  as  the   Convention
                itself); and Article 16(2) similarly provides  that  returns
                are to be effected simply "with due regard for  the  rights,
                safety and dignity of that person". Consequently, I  do  not
                consider that Article  12  is  of  any  real  assistance  in
                construing Article 14(1)(a).


           49.    However, Mr Westgate had a more  fundamental  submission,
                which in my view is of very much greater force, namely  that
                the Secretary of State's policy guidance documents to  which
                I have referred do not  reflect  Article  14(1)(a),  because
                they fail to engage with the relevant Convention criteria at
                all. Indeed, I consider this submission made good.


           50.     Article  14(1)(a)  of  the   Convention   requires   the
                identification  of  the   individual's   relevant   personal
                circumstances, and  then  an  assessment  by  the  competent
                authority of whether, as a result of those circumstances and
                in pursuance of the objectives  of  the  Convention,  it  is
                necessary to allow that  person  to  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom.  Leaving   aside   the   Convention   purposes   of
                facilitating  the  investigation  of  criminal   proceedings
                and/or a civil claim by the victim (neither of  which  apply
                in the Appellant's case), the only relevant objective of the
                Convention is the protection and assistance  of  victims  of
                trafficking. As I have described, this is one of the primary
                objectives of the Convention, as expressed in  the  Preamble
                and  Article  1  (see  paragraph  5  above).   Whether   the
                Appellant's personal circumstances were such as to  make  it
                necessary for him to stay in the United Kingdom  could  only
                be assessed by reference to that objective.


           51.    However, the Secretary of State's  guidance  is  entirely
                silent as to the purpose for which it must be necessary  for
                the  victim  to  remain.  That  is  understandable  if   the
                Secretary  of  State  shares  the  view  set  out  in   Miss
                Bretherton's submissions that  Article  14(1)(a)  gives  the
                competent authority an open-ended discretion. However, in my
                view it is fatal if, as I consider, the provision  does  not
                give  an  open-ended  discretion,  but  rather  requires  an
                assessment of whether it is necessary for  the  purposes  of
                protection and assistance of the victim of  trafficking  (or
                one of the other objectives of the Convention) to allow  him
                to remain in the country. In this  case,  the  Secretary  of
                State's guidance  neither  requires  nor  prompts  any  such
                engagement. As a result, in my view, it does not reflect the
                requirements of Article 14(1)(a), and is unlawful.


           52.    As a second strand of  argument,  Mr  Westgate  submitted
                that, if and insofar as the guidance does  engage  with  the
                Article 14(1)(a) criteria, it imposes too high a  threshold,
                in that it requires the individual's personal  circumstances
                to be "compelling" or "so compelling" that it is  considered
                that discretionary leave should be granted.


           53.    I see the force in this criticism  too,  although  in  my
                view this argument is in substance another manifestation  of
                the failure of the guidance to engage with the  purposes  of
                the Convention.


           54.    Like "necessary", something  cannot  be  "compelling"  in
                this context without reference, express or implied,  to  the
                object it tends to pursue Even if the Secretary  of  State's
                policy guidance identified that object - which,  as  I  have
                indicated, it singularly fails  to  do  -  and  even  though
                "compelling" does  not  necessarily  have  the  etymological
                implication of a particularly high threshold,  it  is  often
                used  in  the  legal  sense  to  convey  that  the  relevant
                threshold is high, and will be only exceptionally and rarely
                met. For example, the threshold for treatment being "inhuman
                or degrading" for the purposes of Article 3 of the  ECHR  is
                notoriously high. In medical cases - where it is  said  that
                removal of an individual from the United Kingdom to  another
                country would result in a breach of Article 3  of  the  ECHR
                because medical facilities that he needs are  not  available
                in that country - it is said that, to  avoid  removal,  that
                person  must  show  that   the   circumstances   are   "very
                exceptional". The test, derived from  European  authorities,
                was set out by Lord Hope of Craighead in N  v  Secretary  of
                State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31;  [2005]  2  AC
                296 at [50], as follows:


                    ".... For the circumstances to be ... 'very exceptional'
                    it would need to be shown that the  applicant's  medical
                    condition had reached such a critical stage  that  there
                    were compelling humanitarian grounds  for  not  removing
                    him to a place  which  lacked  the  medical  and  social
                    services which he would need to prevent acute  suffering
                    while he is dying...".


                To similar effect, see also [69]-[70] per Baroness  Hale  of
                Richmond and [94] per  Lord  Brown  of  Eaton-under-Heywood.
                Thus, "compelling"  has  a  particular  connotation  in  the
                immigration   context,   involving   a   particularly   high
                threshold.


           55.    Miss Bretherton's submission that that was  not  intended
                to be the connotation in the policy guidance documents  here
                (e.g. in paragraph 2.4 of the API, quoted  at  paragraph  18
                above) is fraught with difficulty. The construction  of  the
                policy  is  a  matter  of  law,  based  upon  an   objective
                consideration of the  words  used  and  their  context.  The
                context of paragraph 2.4 of the API includes the  fact  that
                in paragraph 2.1, on the opposite page to paragraph 2.4,  in
                respect of medical cases, after a  reference  to  N,  it  is
                said:


                    "To meet the very high Article 3 threshold an  applicant
                    will need to show exceptional circumstances that prevent
                    return,  namely  that   there   are   compelling   human
                    considerations, such as the applicant being in the final
                    stages of  terminal  illness  without  the  prospect  of
                    medical care or family support on return."


                That directly equates "compelling" with the  high  threshold
                inherent in "exceptional circumstances".


           56.    Anyone, including a  decision-maker,  reading  paragraphs
                2.1 and 2.4 could (and, in my view, probably would)  proceed
                on the  basis  that  the  same  high  threshold  applies  in
                trafficking cases.  That  impression  is  fortified  by  the
                general  impression  given  by  the  policy  guidance   that
                trafficking cases are to be treated in the same as any other
                application for discretionary leave to remain. For  example,
                the CAG indicates that, if discretionary leave  had  already
                been considered with an asylum claim, then it is unnecessary
                to consider it in the context of  Article  14(1)(a)  of  the
                Trafficking Convention (see paragraph 18 above). However, as
                I have described, the Convention is intended to give victims
                of trafficking particular  protection  and  assistance;  and
                Article 14(1)(a) merely requires consideration of whether it
                is necessary for the victim to remain in a  country  because
                of his or her personal  circumstances,  without  the  higher
                threshold implicit in the word "compelling".


           57.    Consequently, even if a decision-maker were to grasp that
                Article 14(1)(a) of the Convention requires consideration of
                whether it was necessary for  a  person  to  remain  in  the
                United Kingdom has  to  be  assessed  by  reference  to  the
                objectives of the Trafficking Convention, there is a real  -
                indeed, in my view, a very substantial - risk that,  on  the
                basis of the policy guidance, he  would  apply  a  threshold
                different  from  and  higher  than  that  required  by   the
                Convention.


           58.    Finally, I should deal with two  discrete  points  relied
                upon by Picken J (see paragraph 36 above)


           59.    First, he suggested that the fact that the  criterion  in
                Article 14(1)(a)  is  in  terms  of  whether  the  competent
                authority "considers" that the victim's stay is necessary is
                of some significance.  However, in my view,  the  word  does
                not support the  Secretary  of  State's  contention  that  a
                discretion is left to each state to decide the criteria that
                should be applied.  Rather, as  Mr  Westgate  submitted,  it
                simply means that the competent authority  has  to  make  an
                assessment of whether the criteria are met in a given  case.
                It does not bear upon the scope of those criteria, which are
                laid down in the Convention itself and are not a matter  for
                the states who are parties to it.


           60.    Second, contrary to the judge's view,  I  am  unconvinced
                that paragraph 183  of  the  Explanatory  Report  gives  any
                support  to  the  construction  which  he   favoured.   That
                paragraph refers to a person's personal circumstances  being
                "such that it would be unreasonable to compel them to  leave
                the national territory"; but "compel" there  is  used  in  a
                very different sense from that in which it is  used  in  the
                Secretary of State's policy guidance, i.e. as a verb meaning
                to require. The word is also used in  a  different  context,
                where it is envisaged that a person will be removed from the
                United Kingdom, whereas, in the present context,  the  issue
                is whether it is necessary that a person should be permitted
                to stay here.


           Conclusion


           61.    For those reasons,  I  consider  that  the  Secretary  of
                State's policy guidance documents fail properly  to  reflect
                the obligation imposed upon the United  Kingdom  in  Article
                14(1)(a) of the Trafficking Convention.


           62.    I would consequently allow the  appeal.  Subject  to  the
                further submissions of the  parties  on  the  terms  of  the
                order,  I  would  quash  the  order  of  Picken  J,  make  a
                declaration that the relevant policy guidance  is  unlawful,
                and quash the Secretary of State's decisions of  10  October
                2013 and 16 January 2015.


   46. The finding by the Court of Appeal can be summarised as reading  that
       the guidance issued by the Secretary of State, stating that it  might
       be appropriate to grant discretionary leave to a  trafficking  victim
       if their personal circumstances were "compelling", was  unlawful.  It
       did not properly reflect the European Convention  on  Action  against
       Trafficking in Human  Beings  2005  art.14(1)(a),  which  required  a
       competent authority to grant a  residence  permit  to  a  trafficking
       victim if it considered that their  stay  was  "necessary"  owing  to
       their personal situation. Article 14(1)(a) was not intended  to  give
       the Secretary of State an open-ended discretion.

   47. Article 14(1)(a) of the Convention requires the identification of the
       individual's relevant personal circumstances, and then an  assessment
       by  the  competent  authority  of  whether,  as  a  result  of  those
       circumstances and in pursuance of the objectives of  the  Convention,
       it is necessary to allow that person to remain in the United Kingdom.

   48. There is therefore an overlap between a number  of  factors  in  this
       appeal. The starting point has to be whether the appellant, in  light
       of her circumstances as known in pursuance of the objectives  of  the
       Convention, should be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom as  a
       victim of trafficking.

   49. The appellant's  needs  are  set  out  in  the  substantial  evidence
       provided by the appellant's representatives in this appeal. It  is  a
       preserved finding that the appellant, as a  result  of  her  previous
       experiences as a victim of trafficking, has acute needs.

   50. The respondent in the refusal considered the psychological report  of
       Dr Kemmis dated 7 September 2015. In that  it  was  acknowledged  the
       appellant was stated to fulfil the criteria for both PTSD  and  Major
       Depressive Disorder and that the appellant had suffered the same  for
       some time. It is also noted in that report  that  the  appellant  had
       recounted a history of domestic violence from her husband in Vietnam.

   51. As there was no acceptance by the respondent that the  appellant  had
       been trafficked at that  time  there  was  no  consideration  of  the
       respondent's obligations under the Convention. That position has  now
       changed as a result of the finding by the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
       the appellant is a victim of trafficking/Modern Slavery. The evidence
       available is far more extensive than that before the  decision-maker.
       In the report of Dr  Chisholm  dated  28  October  2007  the  section
       relating to the appellant's current psychological difficulties  reads
       as follows:

           Current psychological difficulties


           52.    Assessment confirmed the same symptoms  reported  by  the
                other clinicians who previously assessed her. I am confident
                that she meets criteria for PTSD with Prominent Dissociative
                Symptoms in  addition  to  Major  Depressive  Disorder  (AKA
                "depression" See Appendix).


           53.     I  had  difficulty  in  ascertaining  a   more   precise
                understanding of the content of her flashbacks. Her  replies
                lacked detail, but not in the manner of someone deliberately
                not answering the question, but in  a  manner  of  a  person
                struggling to make sense of what happened.


           54.    When people have severe PTSD,  as  [Ms  H]  does,  it  is
                difficult for them to report the content of the  flashbacks,
                since doing so risks triggering a  flashback.  In  addition,
                since a flashback is a type of memory that feels current and
                sensory, rather than one that can be expressed verbally,  it
                can be almost impossible for a person to describe  it  in  a
                way that can be  understood.  Based  on  her  reactions  and
                avoidance  symptoms,  it  is  most  likely  that  her   most
                prominent dissociative flashbacks were of an acid attack  in
                France. Her nightmares were about being chased or  attacked,
                somatic of her reported experiences, rather than a directory
                creation of  them,  in  so  far  as  she  could  report  and
                describes them.


           55.    [Ms H] has recurring  feelings  of  being  detached  from
                one's mental processes or body, as if one is observing  them
                from the  outside  or  in  a  dream.  She  experiences  both
                derealisation and depersonalisation. These are  dissociative
                symptoms, which are unusual, but form part of a  subtype  of
                PTSD.


           56.    In addition to  these  they  were  several  comprehension
                difficulties. She perseverated, stating the same thing  over
                and over.  In my opinion it is very possible, but  I  cannot
                confirm, that she also has a mild  to  learning  disability.
                This further impedes her ability to describe the content  of
                her symptoms.


            57. Although she has a cognitive impairment, it is  possible  it
                is not due to a learning    disability and may not have been
                present  since  birth.  She  is  able  to  read  and   write
                Vietnamese.  She  showed  me  a  letter  that   she   wrote.
                Unfortunately, the interpreter was unable to read  or  write
                Vietnamese, so I could  not  have  gain  any  insight  by  a
                translation from anyone other than her. [Ms H] told me  that
                the letter was about how sad she was.


            58. She  was  able  to  provide  a  more  easily  understandable
                answered questions not related to PTSD or traumatic  events,
                although even these were sometimes slightly off topic.


            59. As with Dr Whittaker-Howe's medicolegal report, I considered
                the  possibility  that  she  was  malingering,  feigning  or
                exaggerating my assessment  included  a  number  of  methods
                designed to detect this. I agree with Dr Whittaker-Howe that
                she would have required an expert  level  of  knowledge  and
                acting skills in order  to  have  faked  her  symptoms.  I'm
                confident that she was not malingering.


            60. I agree with the other clinicians that her PTSD  is  severe.
                She does  not  appear  to  have  improved  or  significantly
                declined since the last assessment a year earlier. There may
                be some declining mood, caused by the  reduction  of  social
                interaction compared with when she lived in Liverpool during
                the last assessment. [Ms H] has much less opportunity to see
                anyone else or undertake activity  compared  with  the  year
                ago.


   52. In relation to treatment Dr Chisholm writes:

           Recommended treatment


            61. I agree with Dr Kemmis and Dr  Whittaker-Howe  that  [Ms  H]
                require specialist evidence-based psychological therapy  for
                PTSD and someone experienced and adept with working with the
                association.


            62. In my experience of this, such  therapy  would  be  required
                thirty - fifty sessions, far more than  the  average  twelve
                for single event PTSD without complications.


            63. However, in advance of this, she  urgently  requires  social
                support. A support worker who encouraged her  to  leave  her
                room, got her engaged in activities that she  can  do  would
                bring significant benefits to her psychological  well-being.
                She cannot concentrate at college,  and  gains  very  little
                from it except a  sense  of  failing,  worsening  her  mood.
                Becoming  engaged  with  social  activities,  that   provide
                practical skills such as art or gardening or  cooking,  with
                other people would be  of  enormous  benefit  to  her  mood,
                feeling of safety and  association-based  symptoms.  At  the
                moment, she is in a community that she is fearful to go  out
                in, living in a house that is drab  and  dark,  with  little
                opportunity to communicate to anyone even on a social level.
                She lacks the capacity to do this  alone.  At  present,  she
                will not even go for a short walk by herself.


            64. She should be assessed for an antidepressant medication such
                as Mirtazapine, which in my clinical experience, can help to
                reduce the impact of nightmares.


            65. She may require  additional  support  if  she  does  have  a
                learning  disability,  although  I  think   she   can   live
                independently.


            66. In my opinion, if she continues to be as isolated as she is,
                her loom low mood will worsen and she may  therefore  be  at
                risk of suicide. However, her PTSD is very  severe,  and  it
                cannot worsen very much  before  her  symptoms  hit  ceiling
                level.


   53. There is arguable merit in  the  submission  by  Mr  Bates  that  the
       appellants claim to be in fear of her family and to be ostracised  by
       them yet, at the  same  time,  to  maintain  contact  with  them,  is
       contradictory. It is not disputed that the appellant  has  maintained
       contact with her family and that there are family members in Vietnam.
       The appellant has not made out on the basis of  the  information  she
       states the family are currently aware of, that she would not be  able
       to return  to  her  family.  The  question  of  whether  there  is  a
       sufficiency of protection if those who trafficked  her  seek  to  re-
       traffic her is considered further below. It is also the case that the
       appellant claims her family do not know she  was  trafficked  to  the
       United Kingdom for prostitution and that if  they  became  aware  she
       would be ostracised by them.

   54. The appellant's case is that she cannot return to her family. If that
       is taken as her position.  The option that needs to be considered  is
       whether there is a place to  which  she  can  return  where  she  can
       receive the support that it is required away from the family. In this
       respect Mr  Bates  submits  that  the  material  available  from  the
       Secretary of State, set out in the witness  statements  above,  shows
       that adequate facilities are available.

   55. Mr Sidle refers to Vietnam as a Tier 2 country, a term defined above.
       It is accepted that services provided by the authorities  in  Vietnam
       in isolation have in the past  been  insufficient  hence  the  action
       taken by the United Kingdom government in funding the construction of
       the shelter in question.

   56. In relation to return it is also important to note that the appellant
       was said to have claimed asylum in Germany but  did  not  pursue  the
       same, had pleaded guilty to criminal proceedings which the  appellant
       claimed she did so she could return to Vietnam  more  quickly,  which
       appears inconsistent with the case now, and requested on 15 May  2015
       to be removed to Vietnam under the Facilitated Returns  Scheme  which
       Mr Justice Dingemans in refusing permission to bring judicial  review
       at the High Court on 7 August 2015, also found inconsistent with  her
       case.

   57. The respondent's reasons for  refusal  letter  notes  the  Vietnamese
       authorities accepted the  appellant  is  a  Vietnamese  national  and
       agreed to issue her with an Emergency Travel  Document  on  13  March
       2015. This shows Step1 of the three-stage process identified  in  the
       witness statement of Tram Troung has already been completed.

   58. Step 2 provides that once the ETD is  agreed  to  be  issued  to  the
       victim, the respondent informs the local authorities  of  the  return
       and obtains the approval for the victim  to  stay  in  a  shelter  in
       Vietnam. Or if the victim wants to return to the victim's family  and
       receiving support without staying in  the  shelter,  a  NGO  will  be
       identified to provide tailored support to the victim. The  submission
       by Miss Warren that there is no evidence the appellant will  be  able
       to access a shelter is noted but not made  out.  At  this  point  the
       appellant will make a choice. If she maintains her position that  she
       does not want to return to her  family  the  respondents  staff  will
       obtain the required approval for her to enter a shelter. This ensures
       the appellant is not returned without accommodation and support.

   59. In relation to Step 4, the appellants needs have been  identified  in
       the appeal bundle in relation to her personal presentation and impact
       upon her of her experiences in the UK. It was not argued by Mr  Bates
       that the appellant will  not  be  entitled  to  assistance  from  the
       British government which should be put in place at a local  level  to
       assist with her PTSD and other needs. This is not a case in which the
       appellant will be expected to seek such a resource  herself  as  [TT]
       specifically confirms that the team of which he is  member  can  help
       identify a NGO to handle/manage the package for the  victim  to  make
       sure that the package is used properly. It was not made  out  by  the
       appellant that no such assistance is  available  and  even  if  to  a
       lesser standard by that available in the UK it has not been made  out
       that the same will not meet the appellants needs or give  rise  to  a
       breach of Article 3 ECHR.  Treatment is available in the UK to assist
       the appellant pending removal.

   60. It is not made out the appellant was trafficked to the  UK  directly.
       Historically the appellant was travelled to another European  country
       which she left and came to the UK and once in the UK became a  victim
       of modern slavery.

   61. It is not made out that the respondent is obliged to grant  a  period
       of leave to the appellant to enable her  benefit  from  a  period  of
       reflection, on the facts of this case, at this time. The need  to  do
       so has not been arguably made out.

   62. In relation the case law of the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  Nguyen  (Anti-
       Trafficking Convention: respondent's duties) [2015]  UKUT  170  (IAC)
       (Promulgated 25 March 2015) (Heard on 19 September 2013 & 15 December
       2014), the Upper Tribunal held that  'as Vietnam is a  large  country
       with a population of some 90 million people and  a  number  of  large
       cities in it, a victim of trafficking would be able to return without
       being of adverse interest to the government, and the  chance  of  the
       person coming across their traffickers is  very  slight.'  (Paragraph
       51) 'The person is more likely to be at risk of serious harm if  they
       still have an outstanding debt to the traffickers. The Upper Tribunal
       also held that there was no evidence to suggest that  a  lone  woman,
       returning without  her  family,  faced  a  real  risk  of  being  re-
       trafficked.' (Paragraph 52) While a person is, in general, not likely
       to be at risk of reprisal or being  retrafficked  by  their  original
       traffickers, each case will need to be considered on its merits.  The
       onus  is  on  the  person  to  demonstrate  that  their  profile  and
       circumstances are such that on return they would be too vulnerable to
       abuse or re-trafficking which would amount to serious harm.

   63. Factors that will indicate an increased risk of being abused  or  re-
       trafficked include, but are not limited to: . The  person  having  an
       outstanding debt to the traffickers. . The absence  of  a  supportive
       family willing to take the victim back into the family  unit;  .  The
       person having no other support network to assist them; no  or  little
       education or vocational skills; mental health conditions,  which  may
       well have  been  caused  by  experiences  of  abuse  when  originally
       trafficked; material and financial deprivation such as to  mean  that
       they will be living in poverty or in conditions of destitution.

   64. Factors that indicate a lower risk of being of being  abused  or  re-
       trafficked include, but are not limited to: . The availability  of  a
       supportive family willing to take the person  back  into  the  family
       unit; . The fact that the person has acquired skills and  experiences
       since leaving Vietnam that better equip them  to  have  access  to  a
       livelihood on return to Vietnam thus enabling  them  to  provide  for
       themselves.

   65. As stated, it appears the appellant is in contact with her family but
       claims she cannot return to live with them, even  though  she  claims
       they have no knowledge of what has occurred in the UK. The appellants
       expert Mr Mark Sidel refers to the existence of family in Vietnam and
       the family borrowing �20,000 (or another claimed figure) to send  the
       appellant abroad which is evidence of a willingness to support in the
       past

   66. The appellant claims to be in debt bondage but the debt once  due  is
       secured on the family home and there is insufficient evidence of  the
       family being illtreated, threatened or killed as result of a debt not
       being paid. The appellants claim to have such  a  debt  remaining  at
       this time is not made out. In any event,  the  appellant  claims  she
       will not return with her family and so the agents are not  likely  to
       know where she is as she can  be  placed  by  the  shelter  staff  in
       suitable accommodation  with  assistance  in  health,  training,  and
       employment, to enable her to re-integrate.  This  not  a  case  of  a
       person who cannot function but  a  person  who  has  the  ability  to
       survive on her own, according to her own expert evidence.

   67. In relation to the available protection, if required, and  whilst  it
       is accepted concerns arise in certain quarters  and  that  corruption
       can be an issue, in Nguyen (Anti-Trafficking Convention: respondent's
       duties) [2015] UKUT 170 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal endorsed  the  view
       that there is, in general, a sufficiency of  protection  provided  by
       the authorities in Vietnam (paragraph 52) and that general  effective
       state protection is likely to be available.  It is accepted this is a
       fact sensitive issue but the onus is on the appellant to  demonstrate
       why she would  not  be  able  to  seek  and  obtain  effective  state
       protection which  the  appellant  has  failed  to  make  out  on  the
       evidence.

   68. It is accepted that  women,  and  especially  single  women  with  no
       support networks, may  be  particularly  vulnerable  and  subject  to
       destitution though this may be mitigated by the existence of shelters
       and assistance available  from  both  government  and  civil  society
       organisations which  the  respondent  has  shown  is  available.  The
       appellant has failed to make out  that  she  faces  a  real  risk  of
       destitution  and  resultant  vulnerability  that  gives  rise  to  an
       entitlement to a grant of international protection.

   69. It is not made out the appellant will  be  returned  without  support
       sufficient to assist her in meeting her stated  needs,  provided  she
       engages with the same. It is not made out the appellant will not have
       the benefit of an effective sufficiency of  protection.  It  has  not
       been made out  that  it  is  not  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to
       internally relocate to a shelter.

   70. It has not been made out that the appellant  faces  a  credible  real
       risk of being trafficked from Vietnam such as to entitle  her  to  be
       recognised as a refugee or any other form of protection or  that  her
       removal will breach any  of  the  UKs  obligations  under  ECHR.  The
       Trafficking  Protocol  provides  that  when  returning  a  victim  of
       trafficking to the state where the victim is  a  national  or  has  a
       right of permanent residence, the sending state shall  maintain  "due
       regard for the safety of that person. The methodology for return  set
       out  in  the  respondent's  evidence  shows  such  concerns  can   be
       addressed.

   71. Accepting that the  prospect  is  subjectively  frightening  for  the
       appellant any such risk has not been  objectively  made  out  to  the
       required degree. As noted above the fact person has  been  trafficked
       does not entitle them to a grant of international protections per se.
       The fact the appellant may have to register with the authorities does
       not establish a real risk for her former traffickers per  se.  If  it
       was found this was so it would be speculation on  the  facts  and  no
       more.

Decision

   72. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.

  Anonymity.

   73. The anonymity order  shall  continue  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 7 March 2018
