
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03204/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd January 2017                           |On 8th February 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                Calvin burton
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms I Mahmud (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Buckwell, promulgated on 28th September 2016, following a hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 14th September  2016.   In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of Calvin Burton, whereupon he  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Jamaica, who  was  born  on  28th
    September 1968.  He appeals against a decision of the Respondent  dated
    17th  March  2016,  which  rejected  his  application  for  asylum  and
    dismissed a claim on Article 8 human rights grounds.  For  the  purpose
    of this hearing, only the latter, namely, the Article  8  claim  is  in
    contention.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has two children who are  resident  in
    this country.  The eldest, Tyannah Burton, was born on 17th June  2004.
    Her mother is Joyce Burton.  The younger daughter is Ketsyanah  Burton,
    and she was born on 14th June 2009.  Her mother is Arlette Sita, who is
    French.  Tyannah is British and Ketsyanah has French nationality.   The
    judge heard evidence that Ketsyanah spends weekends and school  holiday
    periods with the Appellant and there is a strong  bond.   There  was  a
    letter from her mother and school letters to confirm this.  Tyannah, on
    the other hand, spent less time with the Appellant (see paragraph 46).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge accepted that the consequences of the Appellant being removed
    to Jamaica would be that he  would  be  "restricted  to  a  significant
    degree" with respect to his ability to  see  Ketsyanah  (see  paragraph
    60).  The judge applied Section 117B of the  2002  Act  (see  paragraph
    61).  The judge took into account the Appellant's  immigration  history
    and observed that "the Appellant only  lawfully  entered  this  country
    when he had entry clearance as a  spouse  and  following  a  successful
    appeal to the Tribunal" after he had first come to the UK as a  visitor
    in 2001 and overstayed his  visa  (paragraph  62).   Consideration  was
    given to the best interests of the two minor children which had  to  be
    put in the  balancing  exercise  with  a  view  to  the  assessment  of
    proportionality  and  the  judge  concluded   that   the   balance   of
    considerations fell against the Appellant and the appeal was  dismissed
    (paragraph 64).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the Home Office had accepted that
    the Appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
    daughters and so it was not reasonable to expect the daughters to  move
    to Jamaica with their father (see paragraph 44 of  the  determination).
    Second, paragraph 117B of the 2002 Act stated that

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the  person's  removal  where  the
         person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a
         qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child
         to leave the United Kingdom" (see sub-paragraph 6).

 6. This was the situation  here.   There  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and it would not be reasonable to expect the  children  to
    leave the UK to go to Jamaica with their  father.   In  Treebhawon  the
    President gave consideration to Section 117B(6) and concluded that in a
    case where a court or a Tribunal decides  that  a  person  who  is  not
    liable  to  deportation  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with  a  qualifying  child,  and  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable  to  expect  such  a  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
    consideration had to be given to the "public interest question", namely
    as to how proportionality fell to be determined.

 7. What the statute makes clear is that where a person  concerned  is  not
    liable to  deportation;  and  where  such  person  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child; and where  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the qualifying  child  to  leave  the
    United  Kingdom,  then  "within  this  discrete  regime,  the   statute
    proclaims unequivocally that where these three conditions are satisfied
    the public interest does not require the removal of the Appellant  from
    the United Kingdom".  On 24th November 2016, permission to  appeal  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis  that  the  judge  may  have
    erred in the application of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me on 3rd January 2017, Ms Mahmud,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, placed reliance upon her skeleton argument and
    emphasised the points that had already been  made  in  the  grounds  of
    application.  She submitted that the Respondent's representative at the
    hearing had accepted that the  genuine  parental  relationship  existed
    between the Appellant and his two  daughters.   In  addition,  "it  was
    accepted that it was not reasonable for the  Appellant's  daughters  to
    leave  this  country  although  that  did   not   make   the   decision
    disproportionate" (paragraph 44).  Furthermore at paragraph 51  of  the
    determination the methodology with respect to the determination of  the
    proportionality question was set out in a way that should have  led  to
    the  appeal  succeeding.   Finally,  the  children   were   "qualifying
    children" in that they had been here for  seven  years  and  there  was
    evidence of British nationality.

 9. For his part, Mr Clarke submitted that the grounds overlooked the  fact
    that the Appellant had been in the UK  unlawfully  from  2001  onwards,
    until  he  returned  with   entry   clearance   lawfully.    In   these
    circumstances, it is of no  assistance  to  say  that  he  had  made  a
    successful application before the authorities.  If he had been  in  the
    UK unlawfully then he ought to have left the country to return back and
    make an application  so  that  he  could  enter  lawfully.   It  is  at
    paragraph 62 that the judge addresses this  issue  specifically  noting
    that

         "The Appellant overstayed in this country at the end of  his  first
         stated visit in 2001.  Indeed, according to the immigration history
         of the Appellant the Appellant only lawfully entered  this  country
         when he had entry clearance as  a  spouse  following  a  successful
         appeal to the Tribunal" (paragraph 62).

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  First, this was not a deportation case.

11. Second, there was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
    qualifying child, because Ketsyanah, a French national, had by the time
    of the hearing, "been present in  this  country  for  more  than  seven
    years" (see paragraph 47) and reliance was placed before the  judge  to
    the decision in Treebhawon [2015] UKUT 00674.

12. Third, the question then was whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
    the qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom, but the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer at  the  hearing  had  accepted  that  "it  was  not
    reasonable for the Appellant's  daughters  to  leave  this  country..."
    (paragraph 44).  The Presenting Officer did not accept that  this  made
    the decision disproportionate but it is difficult to see  why  that  is
    the case if a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  had  been
    established between the Appellant and the children.

13. For these reasons, the decision amounts to an error of law.  I  proceed
    therefore to remake the decision on the basis of the  findings  now  of
    the Immigration Judge, the evidence before  him,  and  the  submissions
    that I have heard today.  I am allowing this  appeal  for  the  reasons
    that I  have  set  out  above.   The  decision  in  Treebhawon  is  not
    inconsistent with the judgment in PD (Sri Lanka) [2016] UKUT 00108  and
    in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  This appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th February 2017

