
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: PA/03004/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                 |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 9 October 2019                   |  On 6 November 2019                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                 M a a s a k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R. Sharif, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a stateless Palestinian, born and brought up in
Lebanon. He was born on 7.3.91. He studied in the UK from 20.10.16 to
25.5.18, obtaining a Masters degree in Structural Mechanics, following
which he returned to Lebanon, where he claims he was detained and tortured
by Hezbollah in July 2018 and released only after having agreed to work as
a spy. The Appellant then fled from Lebanon to the UK and claimed asylum on
the same day- 28 July 2018. His application was refused in a decision dated
22 March 2019.

2. He appealed against this decision and his appeal came before Tribunal
Judge Parkes for hearing on 17 June 2019. In a decision promulgated on 28
June 2019, his appeal was dismissed. The Appellant sought permission to
appeal, in time, on the basis that the Judge had materially erred in law:

(i) in applying to wrong standard of proof in considering whether or not
the Appellant's account was "improbable";

(ii) in failing to provide any reasoning as to why weight should not be
attached to the evidence of AK at [21] and in placing undue weight on the
absence of supporting evidence from Israel at [20], [22] and [24];

(iii) in failing to make any findings in respect of the Appellant's claim
pursuant to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of
ECHR;

(iv) in failing to give adequate reasoning at [19] for not accepting that
the Appellant would lose the support of UNRWA assistance should he be
returned to Lebanon and failed to adequately address his claim in light of
the API: Article 1D - UNRWA at pages 281-291 of AB; and

(v) in failing at [20] to adequately explain why the facebook posts
produced by the Appellant cannot be relied upon as corroborative evidence
and at [22] in failing to attach appropriate weight to the impact of the
fact the Appellant has relatives in Israel on the risk to the Appellant
from Hezbollah.

3. Permission to appeal was granted by First tier Tribunal Judge Scott
Baker in a decision dated 1 August 2019 on the basis that:

      "3. The judge has arguably made insufficient findings on the totality
of the      evidence and arguably has applied a standard of proof that is
incorrect and too      high, noting the reliance by the judge at [12],
[13], [20], [22], [25] and [29] of      there being no further evidence.
Despite the assertion the judge had referred to    the API at [17]-[18] of
the decision and found that the appellant would not      lose the support
from UNWRA but fails to give adequate reasons for these  findings. In
particular, the judge accepted at [19] that the basis of the  substantive
account could be one factor for losing the protection but arguably  fails
to make sufficient findings on this core issue.

      4. Arguably within the body of the determination there is a failure
to engage   with the totality of the evidence on the grounds under the
Refugee     Convention, humanitarian protection and Article 8. Such failure
arguably    amounts to errors of law."


Hearing

4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Sharif adopted the grounds
as set out in the grounds of appeal. In respect of ground 1, he submitted
that the Judge has applied a higher standard of proof than that required:
see [26] where the Judge finds that the Appellant's account of ill-
treatment is not improbable, however, this is a higher standard of proof.
Mr Sharif submitted that consequently all the findings the Judge makes in
this determination in light of having that in the forefront of his mind are
tainted by applying a higher standard. The Judge says it is not clear why
only the Appellant would be of interest at [26] however, in so doing the
Judge is looking for something in respect of which the Appellant is not
able to assist further.

5. In respect of Ground 2, which refers to the Judge's finding at [21] of
the determination in relation to A K, the Appellant's uncle who lives in
Belgium, the Judge makes no finding as to his evidence and whether he
rejected it in its entirety or whether parts of it are accepted. No reasons
are given as to why the evidence is not accepted. The Judge then at [22]
and [24] is contending that the Appellant has been unable to obtain
supporting evidence from Israel but has failed to assess the evidence that
was before him and is seeking to look for other evidence without having
regard to the evidence that was before him eg facebook which he found does
not prove that the relatives actually live in Israel.

6. In respect of Ground 3, there is no mention in the decision and reasons
of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and this has not been
considered by the Judge, despite being pleaded in the skeleton argument at
some length and the Appellant is entitled to know why his appeal has been
dismissed. There is a cursory mention at [32]  "the Appellant cannot meet
the requirements of the Immigration Rules for LTR and there are no
compelling circumstances that would justify a grant of leave under article
8 outside the rules" however, Mr Sharif submitted that this was
insufficient.

7. In respect of Ground 4. Mr Sharif submitted that the Judge at [19] notes
one of the reasons for the cessation of UNRWA support viz ceasing
education, but fails to take account of the fact that there are other
reasons: see page 290 of AB which sets out factors where UNRWA support can
be lost, taken from the judgment of the CJEU in El Kott C-364/11 eg. threat
to life, armed conflict etc and practical, legal or safety barriers. Mr
Sharif drew attention to AB 284, an extract from the Home Office API
guidance of 9.5.16 in respect of Article 1D, which makes clear that UNRWA
only supports registered refugees.

8. With regard to Ground 5 and the evidence of relatives living in Israel.
The Judge does not give any reasons at [20] why he formed the view that the
facebook posts cannot be relied upon as corroborative evidence absent
further evidence to support the claim that the facebook posts are from the
Appellant's relatives or that they originate from individuals living in
Israel. Mr Sharif submitted that the Judge has not considered the evidence
before him adequately.

9. I pointed out to Mr Sharif the Judge's finding at [22] that facebook
profiles do not assist where people actually are and thus absent further
evidence this did not prove that the Appellant has relatives in Israel. Mr
Sharif responded that a person could be anywhere in the world and a
facebook account could be registered anywhere in the world but this is not
the issue but rather where the communication is happening and who has
access to it. He submitted that is that it is not the location that is
putting the Appellant at risk but the content. Mr Sharif further submitted
that the Judge has failed to go on to make a finding as to whether the
Appellant has relatives in Israel would cause him to have a problem with
Hezbollah as claimed. There were letters submitted from 14 June which
showed that the Lebanese security services anticipate activities inside
Lebanon and Israelis residing in Palestine arranging meetings: see SB under
cover letter of 14 June which the Judge refers to at [10]. Mr Sharif
submitted that the five grounds of appeal show that the Judge has erred in
law and the errors are material.

10. In her submissions, Ms Aboni sought to defend the Judge's decision. She
submitted that he had directed himself appropriately and given adequate
reasons for his conclusions.

11. In respect of the first ground of appeal, Ms Aboni submitted that there
was no material error of law with regard to the standard of proof applied.
Whilst the Judge does say that the account of ill-treatment is not
improbable there is no material error as this is consistent with background
evidence. When the Judge applied the facts as claimed by the Appellant he
gives adequate reasons for rejecting the core of his claim that he did not
suffer torture and ill-treatment as claimed

12. As regards Ground 2 and the witness evidence of A K at [21] the
Appellant claims to have established contact via facebook with relatives
and he found at [22] the Appellant may have relatives in Israel but even if
he is in contact with them there is nothing on the evidence to support his
claim that there are facebook posts that would put him at risk as facebook
posts in themselves do not establish risk.

13. As regards Ground 3 and article 8, Ms Aboni accepted that whilst the
Judge does not specifically consider paragraph 276ADE of the Rules that
this was not material, given that the Appellant only had limited leave to
remain with no expectation of being able to remain and can return to his
family in Lebanon

14. With regard to Ground 4 and the issue of UNRWA support, the Judge
considered the Appellant did have that protection. The Home office policy
document indicates that if a person has previously had that protection it
is for them to establish protection has been lost and nothing else has been
put forward as a reason for losing protection. The Appellant has not relied
on other reasons and it was open to the Judge to find he would still have
that protection and so would not be entitled to refugee protection.

15. In respect of Ground 5, at [20] the Judge could reasonably have
expected further evidence of residence there eg letters from relatives in
Israel. Ms Aboni submitted that there was adequate consideration of contact
with relatives in Israel and the Judge had given adequate reasons for
finding the Appellant has not had problems with Hezbollah and would not be
at risk on return. She submitted that there was no material error in the
Judge's decision and reasons.

16. In reply, Mr Sharif submitted that if one looks at the totality of the
evidence before the Judge the findings are insufficient; the Judge was
applying the wrong standard of proof and seeking further evidence and not
making findings in the round and that these errors are material.

17. I announced that I found material errors in the decision and reasons of
First tier Tribunal Judge Parkes in relation to grounds 2 and 3 and I
reserved my decision in respect of the remaining grounds on the basis that
I had not yet reached a concluded view of the other grounds so far.

Findings and reasons

18. I find that Ground 2 of the grounds of appeal is made out in that the
evidence of the Appellant's uncle as set out in his statement served on
14.6.19 and dated 16.5.19 is that he travelled in September 2017 to Israel
to meet his relatives in North Israel in Khawleid village and elsewhere;
that when he was there the Appellant spoke to him and their relatives
through WhatsApp and facebook. Whilst the Judge records the content of this
evidence at [21] he makes no finding upon it. This is a material error
given that the Judge went on at [22] to find that there was no written
supporting evidence from Israel to confirm the Appellant's claims to have
been in contact with relatives there, when his uncle's evidence is
corroborative of the Appellant's claims in that respect.

19. I find that Ground 1 of the grounds of appeal is also made out in
requiring further corroboration directly from Israeli relatives as well as
the Appellant's own account and that of his uncle, particularly given the
Judge also accepted at [22] that "it would not be surprising that the
Appellant could have relatives in Israel" which would, I find, indicate
that a higher standard of proof was being applied than a reasonable degree
of likelihood or serious possibility. Whilst at [26] the Judge's use of the
phrase "the Appellant's account of ill-treatment is not in itself,
improbable" in that particular context, I find that this is also indicative
of his approach to the evidence as a whole, given that at [20], [22], [23],
[24], [25] and [29] the Judge reasoning is predicated on an absence of
evidence he would have wished to have seen, rather than making findings on
the evidence that was actually before him.

20. In respect of Ground 3, whilst I note Ms Aboni's submission that any
error in failing to engage with paragraph 276ADE(vi) or Article 8 may not
be material, given that the Appellant only had limited leave to remain, the
fact remains that no consideration at all has been given to paragraph
276ADE(vi), despite the fact that it was addressed in the refusal decision
and expressly raised in the grounds of appeal.

21. In respect of Ground 4, I find that this would only be made out if the
Appellant's substantive account is accepted and that he would be unable to
access UNRWA protection due to threats to his life, physical integrity,
security or freedom. I find that, albeit briefly, this is referred to by
the Judge at [18] and thus I find no error in respect of this ground of
appeal.

22. In respect of Ground 5 of the grounds of appeal, I find that this is
made out for the reasons given at [19] above and the Judge erred in failing
to treat the facebook posts as potentially corroborative, absent further
supporting evidence from relatives in Israel. I further find that the Judge
erred in failing to either refer to or make any finding in respect of the
evidence in the supplementary bundle viz a translation of an article in
Arabic concerning the arrests and issuing of arrest warrants against two
individuals accused of conspiring with Israelis through facebook on
25.9.18.

Decision

23. I find material errors of law in the decision and reasons of First tier
Tribunal Judge Parkes for the reasons set out above. I set that decision
aside and remit the appeal for a hearing de novo before the First tier
Tribunal in Birmingham.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                4 November 2019


