
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03416/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 4 March 2021                            |On 15 March 2021                |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER



                                   Between

                                     BH
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

Introduction

       1. Having already found an error of law in the decision of the First-
          tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 20 February 2020  (see  my  'error  of
          law decision' dated 26 August 2020), I  now  remake  the  decision
          concerning  the  appellant's  appeal  against   the   respondent's
          decision  dated  22  March  2019,   refusing   his   international
          protection and human rights claims.

Background

       2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnic origin, who
          claimed asylum in the United Kingdom ('UK') on 8 December 2015,
          for reasons relating to his fear of ISIS and the internal armed
          conflict in his home area of Mosul, which is located in the
          Ninweh Governorate of Iraq. The appellant fled Mosul in April
          2015, the city having been occupied by ISIS around a year
          earlier.




Hearing

Adjournment application

       3. At the  beginning  of  the  hearing  Mr  Diwnycz  applied  for  an
          adjournment following the Court  of  Appeal's  decision  dated  16
          February 2021 to remit SMO, KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
          documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC) to the UT  to  reconsider
          the finding at headnote 13 that most Iraqi citizens  would  recall
          the family book information, and any other findings in  the  light
          of developments in Iraq.  He argued that it would be premature  to
          proceed absent the anticipated revision of SMO.


       4. Mr Holmes resisted the application on the basis  that  the  appeal
          did not turn on the issue of the  family  book  details  knowledge
          and the resulting delay this would necessitate in a case that  has
          already been plagued by delay.


       5. Having considered the overriding objective, I  am  satisfied  that
          the hearing can fairly proceed prior to a  fuller  reconsideration
          of the country guidance in SMO.  As discussed below, it is  agreed
          that the issues in dispute in this  case  are  very  narrow.   The
          available evidence  on  those  issues  is  available  in  detailed
          reports contained within a consolidated bundle  and  supplementary
          bundle that have been served in  accordance  with  directions.   I
          agree with Mr Holmes that the result in this case  does  not  turn
          on the appellant's knowledge of the  family  book  details.   Even
          assuming against his  case  he  has  that  knowledge,  it  remains
          necessary to address whether he is able to redocument  himself  by
          obtaining  the  requisite   Iraqi   identity   documentation   (as
          explained in my 'error of law decision').  This can be fairly  and
          properly determined on the country background evidence available.


       6. In determining that the matter can fairly proceed I also  bear  in
          mind that there has already been considerable delay in this  case.
          Following his initial 'screening' interview ('SI') on 11  December
          2015, there was a delay of some three years before  the  appellant
          underwent a substantive asylum interview  ('AI')  on  16  November
          2018. The appellant's claim was refused  the  following  year,  by
          way of a letter  dated  22  March  2019.   Over  five  years  have
          elapsed since the appellant made his unresolved asylum claim.   Mr
          Diwnycz acknowledged that a decision in the remitted SMO  case  is
          unlikely to be imminent given the developments  in  Iraq  and  the
          time that a country guidance  decision  normally  takes  prior  to
          promulgation.  Continued uncertainty is not in  the  interests  of
          either party when the matter can be fairly resolved now.

Evidence

       7. As I have already indicated, I have been provided  with  over  600
          pages of information in electronic bundles.  I have read  all  the
          country background information including the respondent's CPIN  on
          Iraq: Internal relocation, civil documentation and returns,  dated
          June 2020 ('the CPIN') and EASO's  Country  Guidance:  Iraq  dated
          January 2021 ('the EASO report').


       8. The appellant confirmed his most  up  to  date  witness  statement
          dated 26 February 2021.  Mr Diwnycz  confirmed  that  he  did  not
          wish to cross examine the appellant and accepted  his  claim  that
          he was unable to contact his family members.

Submissions

       9. Both parties confirmed that following my 'error of  law  decision'
          and the developments in Iraq, the  appellant's  claim   now  turns
          entirely upon whether he will be able to re-document  himself.  Mr
          Diwnycz accepted on behalf of  the  respondent  that  the  country
          guidance  supports  the  proposition  that  the  appellant   faces
          serious harm in Iraq if he  is  unable  to  access  the  requisite
          identity documentation in the UK or within a  reasonable  time  in
          Iraq.


      10. I invited Mr Diwnycz to  address  me  on  the  only  two  material
          issues Mr Holmes identified to be in dispute in his  comprehensive
          skeleton argument dated 3 March 2021.  Mr Diwnycz  confirmed  that
          matters had moved on since the respondent's  decision  letter  and
          the respondent was "hamstrung"  by  the  CPIN.   He  accepted  the
          appellant's evidence that he was not in  possession  of  his  CSID
          (contrary to the position at [73] of the decision letter dated  22
          March 2019).   He  also  accepted  that  the  CPIN  and  SMO  read
          together made it clear that  the  appellant  could  not  obtain  a
          replacement CSID or an INID prior to, or within a reasonable  time
          upon, his return to Iraq.

      11. Mr Holmes's submissions were  very  brief  in  the  light  of  the
          pragmatic position  adopted  by  Mr  Diwnycz,  on  behalf  of  the
          respondent.

      12. After hearing submissions, I reserved my  decision,  which  I  now
          give with reasons.

Legal framework

      13. This case turned on its facts and  the  relevant  legal  framework
          was not in dispute.  At all times the appellant has the burden  of
          proof, albeit to the lower standard of proof.

Findings

      14. I  first  turn  my  attention  to  whether  the  appellant  is  in
          possession  of  a  CSID  or  any   other   evidence   capable   of
          establishing his identity for the purposes of seeking to obtain  a
          replacement CSID at the Iraqi Embassy in the UK.  I do  so  having
          already determined that the appellant would need both  his  family
          book  details  and  some  type  of  identification   evidence   to
          successfully apply for a replacement CSID - see my 'error  of  law
          decision' at [6] to [11].


      15. My 'error of law decision' left  open  the  possibility  that  the
          parties might be able to rely upon additional evidence beyond  the
          CPIN, which might lead to a revision of my findings in  the  error
          of law decision.  Both parties accepted that they did not  on  the
          present state of the country background evidence seek to  re-argue
          the matter and accepted the conclusion that I reached.

      16. I now turn to whether the appellant would be able  to  access  the
          requisite identification evidence (which  is  necessary  over  and
          above  knowledge  of  the  family  book  details)  to   obtain   a
          replacement CSID.  As set out in my 'error of law  decision',  the
          FTT's findings in this regard were less than clear.  The FTT  made
          adverse findings of fact against the appellant but failed to  make
          clear sustainable findings on his ability to access the  requisite
          identification evidence.

      17.  The  adverse  findings  of  fact  certainly  weigh  against   the
          appellant and I have factored these into my  assessment.   I  bear
          in mind the FTT's finding at [63] regarding the  appellant's  lack
          of knowledge as to whether his parents took  their  documents  and
          whether he discussed with his parents how they would contact  each
          other if they became separated to damage his overall  credibility.



      18. However, at [49] of  its  decision,  the  FTT  accepted  that  the
          appellant  was  forced  to  flee  Mosul  "in   the   circumstances
          described by him".  It has not been disputed  that  the  appellant
          was formerly resident in Mosul prior to his departure  from  Iraq.
          The circumstances of his departure have  been  broadly  consistent
          both  internally  and  externally  with  the  country   background
          information at the time.  Mr Diwnycz declined the  opportunity  to
          cross-examine   the   appellant   and   accepted    the    claimed
          circumstances of his departure from Mosul.

      19. Having balanced the FTT's other adverse factual  findings  against
          all the other evidence before me, I accept the  appellant's  claim
          that the manner in which  he  left  Iraq  means  that  he  did  so
          without his documents and  that  he  has  lost  contact  with  his
          family members.  I accept the appellant's  account  regarding  the
          circumstances in which he left Mosul to be reasonably  likely.   I
          therefore accept the following matters.

          a) The appellant fled Mosul in April 2015, at a time when it had
             already been occupied by ISIS and there was intense fighting.
             The appellant's summary in the AI (Qs 104, 107, 177) is
             consistent with the country background evidence that Mosul was
             in a state of open conflict between 2014 and 2017, with ISIS
             carrying out wide-ranging serious harm - see the summary
             provided within the EASO report at page 148.


          b)  In  the  circumstances,  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the
             appellant had to leave quickly and  did  not  bring  his  CSID,
             passport and phone with him when he fled (AI at Qs 17 and 22).


          c) The appellant fled the city along with his family, and a  large
             number of others who were also attempting to avoid the violence
             in the area (AI at Q 129).

          d) Given the confusion and fear at the time, whilst travelling out
             of the city the appellant  separated from his family (AI  at  Q
             125) and has not seen them or had contact with them  since;  he
             does not know what happened  to  them  (AI  Q  46).    That  is
             consistent with the  significant  displacement  of  individuals
             from Ninewa - although many  have  returned,  the  EASO  report
             notes that (page 148) there  has  been  considerable  secondary
             displacement because of premature returns and  blocked  returns
             were also reported. Over 324,000 remain displaced.


          e) The appellant travelled to Kirkuk where the military and  local
             humanitarian organisations arranged for his transfer a  refugee
             camp (AI Q135).

          f) Having initially been hopeful that his family would  also  find
             their way to the camp, the appellant opted to accompany  others
             travelling out of Iraq (AI Q139).

          g) The appellant thereafter travelled through  Europe  to  the  UK
             where he arrived in or around early December 2015.

          h) The appellant has tried to make contact with his family through
             the  British  Red  Cross  and  'Trace  the   Face'   but   been
             unsuccessful.  This is consistent not only with their  mode  of
             departure from Iraq but also the country background information
             regarding the nature and extent of displacement of former Mosul
             residents.

          i) In addition, the situation in  Mosul  is  such  that  there  is
             likely to be, at least, a reasonable degree of likelihood  that
             the  appellant's  home,  and  its  contents,  will  have   been
             destroyed since he left Iraq.  The EASO report  concludes  that
             indiscriminate violence remains high in  Ninewa,  and  includes
             the following at page 149:

                 "The debris caused by Mosul destruction was reported to  be
                 heavily contaminated with explosive  devices  of  different
                 kinds, including unexploded ordnance and booby-traps,  with
                 one source declaring that the explosives  contamination  in
                 Mosul is of  a  previously  unseen  magnitude.  Significant
                 destruction  of  houses  was  also  reported,   while   the
                 reconstruction of the destroyed neighborhoods of  Mosul  is
                 advancing at a slow pace, due to the extent of  the  damage
                 and the lack of funding by the Iraqi  state.  The  lack  of
                 access to basic services  (water,  electricity,  education)
                 remains a challenge to the rural areas of the Ninewa Plains
                 and Sinjar. The district of Sinjar  is  also  suffering  an
                 intense contamination with unexploded ammunition  and  IEDs
                 deliberately left by ISIL. "

      20. The appellant also claimed, and I accept that he  arrived  on  his
          own at Lailan camp in May 2015 before travelling  to  Turkey  with
          the help of an agent (who gave him  a  false  Syrian  passport  in
          returning for months of working  for  him).   I  therefore  accept
          that the appellant has not been in  the  possession  of  his  CSID
          card or any other valid Iraqi  identification  document  since  he
          left Iraq in 2015 and  has  no  means  of  contacting  his  family
          members or anyone else in order to  obtain  replacement  documents
          or assist him in securing any form of Iraqi identification.

      21. Without any Iraqi identification  documents  the  appellant  would
          not be able to obtain replacement documents from  within  the  UK.
          Mr Diwnycz accepted  that  this  is  not  just  supported  by  the
          absence  of  Iraqi  identification  documents  but  a  significant
          further  matter.   The  2020  CPIN  now  expressly  concedes  that
          redocumentation at the Embassy is highly  unlikely,  at  [2.6.16]:




                 "Based on the above information, it is highly unlikely that
                 an individual would be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi
                 Embassy while in the UK.  Instead a person  would  need  to
                 apply for a registration document  (1957)  and  would  then
                 apply for an INID upon return to their local CSA office  in
                 Iraq."


      22. I therefore accept that the appellant will  not  be  able  to  re-
          document whilst in the UK.

      23. The appellant cannot  obtain  replacement  identity  documentation
          once forcibly removed to Baghdad (see  headnote  15  of  SMO)  and
          onward safe travel cannot be undertaken either to  his  home  area
          or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, without such  documentation  (see
          headnote 23 of SMO).


      24. In any event, Mosul now  has  the  new  INID  system  which  would
          require the appellant's presence there (see  headnote  16  of  SMO
          and the material in the supplementary bundle).

      25. On the basis of all of the above,  the  appellant  does  not  have
          Iraqi identity documentation and will not be able  to  re-document
          in the UK or within a reasonable time upon return to Iraq.


Conclusion

      26. Without the requisite CSID or identity documentation, the  country
          background information and CG cases make it clear and  Mr  Diwnycz
          accepted, that the appellant is at risk of serious harm  in  Iraq.




      27. The appellant has not identified any Convention  Reason  for  this
          harm and the written submissions  are  silent  on  the  basis  for
          allowing the appeal.  This case succeeds on  the  basis  that  the
          appellant will be unable to reside in Iraq  without  coming  to  a
          real risk of serious harm for reasons relating to  an  absence  of
          identity documentation.  It follows that to  return  him  to  Iraq
          would be a breach of Article 3, ECHR and Article 15(b) of  Council
          Directive 2004/83/EC as incorporated into the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

      28. I remake the decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
          protection and Article 3, ECHR grounds.


Signed:  UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 4 March 2021

