
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/03992/2015
     PA/04012/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals, Liverpool|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th January 2017                          |On 8th February 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                         (1) Ravinder Singh Malhotra
                            (2) Pal Kaur Malhotra
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Madubuke (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Davies, promulgated on 19th October 2016, following  a  hearing
    at Manchester Piccadilly on 13th October 2016.  In  the  determination,
    the  judge  allowed  the  appeals  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the
    Respondent  Secretary  of  State  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants  are  citizens  of  Afghanistan.   They  are  the  first
    Appellant, who is the son of the second Appellant, and who was born  on
    1st January 1986 and has a wife and two  children  with  him;  and  the
    second Appellant who was born on 1st January 1960, and is  without  her
    husband, as he was killed by the Taliban in Afghanistan.  Both of  them
    are Sikhs whose appeals stand to be considered  on  the  basis  of  the
    guidance  given  by  the  Tribunal  in  TG  and  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs
    persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 595.  The  Appellants  claim  to
    have been  born  in  Afghanistan  where  they  lived,  with  the  first
    Appellant's father, who was the second Appellant's husband,  running  a
    clothes shop in Kabul as well as in Jalalabad,  and  who  was  in  June
    2015, three months before the Appellants came to the UK, killed by  the
    Taliban and his body left outside their home.  Their claim is that they
    feared the Taliban in Afghanistan because they are Sikhs and they  have
    been put under pressure to undergo forcible conversion  to  the  Muslim
    faith (see paragraphs 28 to 36 of the refusal letter).

 3. The Respondent  Secretary  of  State  rejected  the  Appellants'  claim
    principally for two reasons.  First,  that  the  Appellants  and  their
    family had not experienced any problems from Taliban in Afghanistan and
    the account that they gave was inconsistent as to  why  they  had  left
    Afghanistan, particularly given that they arrived in the UK through the
    Republic of Ireland, where they did not  claim  asylum,  travelling  on
    false passports.  Second, that the  Appellants  and  their  family  had
    previously lived in Kabul but had moved to Jalalabad thirteen years ago
    previously on account of problems they had with the  Taliban,  but  the
    evidence shows that for the twelve years they had  been  in  Jalalabad,
    they had not experienced any problems with the Taliban.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that, having considered the various Home Office  Country
    Information and Guidance Reports on Afghanistan,  which  postdated  the
    Respondent's decision issued in January 2016, February  2016  and  July
    2016, and having had regard to the country  guidance  case  of  TG  and
    Others, the appeals should be allowed.  This is because,

         "Having accepted that the Appellants were Afghanistan nationals  of
         the  Sikh  religion  that  the  Respondent  had  not  given  proper
         consideration for the basis of  their  claim  and  its  conclusions
         regarding the  Appellants'  credibility  and  the  fears  they  had
         expressed upon being returned to Afghanistan had not been  properly
         considered" (paragraph 21).

 5. The judge went on to hold that the Appellants' evidence,  as  contained
    in their witness statements "was entirely in line with  the  background
    information".   In  fact,  both  representatives   before   the   judge
    "acknowledged the situation for Sikhs had got worse since the date upon
    which the case of TG had been decided as had the security situation  in
    Afghanistan" (paragraph 22).

 6. Furthermore, the Home Office representative before the judge, Mr Wardle
    had, "on behalf of the Home Office understood that the only returns  of
    Afghan Sikhs to Afghanistan would be on an  entirely  voluntary  basis.
    He indicated he did not  wish  to  cross-examine  the  Appellants  ..."
    (paragraph 23).

 7. On the other hand, the first Appellant did give evidence and he adopted
    his witness statement but was then "not  cross-examined".   The  second
    witness also adopted her witness statement  and  also  "again  was  not
    cross-examined" (paragraph 24).  It is significant that in this  matter
    before Judge Davies, when it came to making  closing  submissions,  "Mr
    Wardle simply relied on the refusal letters and had  nothing  otherwise
    to add" (paragraph 25).

 8. As for the closing submission of Mr Madubuke, who also on that occasion
    appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge,  having  had  no
    submissions made by Mr Wardle for the Home Office,  indicated  that  he
    need not address the Tribunal, at which point Mr Madubuke "simply added
    that there was no evidence that there was an additional male member  of
    the Appellants' family to protect them in Afghanistan" (paragraph  26).



 9. The judge then allowed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the judge was required  to  treat
    the country guidance decision of the Upper Tribunal in  TG  and  Others
    [2015] UKUT 00595 as  authoritative  because  that  decision  stood  as
    authority for the proposition  that  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu
    communities in Afghanistan do not face a real risk  of  persecution  or
    ill-treatment.  The judge did not treat the Upper  Tribunal's  decision
    as such but concluded at paragraph 32 of his decision that there was  a
    change of circumstances,  namely  the  fact  that  the  dwindling  Sikh
    population of Afghanistan was indicative of a worsening situation.

11. On 15th November 2016, permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis that the country guidance  case  of  TG  and
    Others had not been faithfully followed by Judge Davies.

The Hearing

12. At the hearing before me on 18th January 2017, Mr Bates,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of  State,  submitted  that  if  the
    judge in this case was going to depart from the country  guidance  case
    of TG and Others, he would need to have very strong grounds  for  doing
    so.  It was wrong to suggest that Mr Wardle, appearing on behalf of the
    Respondent on that occasion, had conceded the case for  the  Appellants
    when he chose not to make any specific submissions, as was indicated by
    the judge at paragraph 25 of  the  determination  in  terms  that,  "Mr
    Wardle simply relied on the refusal letters and had  nothing  otherwise
    to add".  If the judge was to take the position that the  situation  in
    Afghanistan had deteriorated then he had to explain to what  extent  it
    had deteriorated and in what manner.  This had not been done.  Finally,
    it was also wrong for the judge to conclude that, "because of the  lack
    of inference of Afghan Sikhs the local security forces do  not  provide
    them with effective protection and it is clear on that basis alone that
    internal relocation is not available to Afghan Sikhs"  (paragraph  33).
    As far as Article 8 was concerned, the  judge  had  given  insufficient
    reasoning as to the basis for his standalone  Article  8  basis  to  be
    applied in this case.  For all these reasons, the  appeals  should  not
    have been allowed.

13. For his part, Mr Madubuke submitted  that  first,  the  judge  was  not
    actually seeking to distinguish the country guidance  case  of  TG  and
    Others at all, and nor was he seeking to depart from it.  He was simply
    stating that, although the country guidance  case  still  applied,  the
    security situation adversent, and this was a matter of  objective  fact
    for the judge to determine, and if the evidence to this effect  existed
    then the judge could properly  come  to  such  a  conclusion.   Second,
    evidence  to  this  effect  did  indeed  exist  because   the   Amnesty
    International Report of 24th February 2016 in  the  Appellants'  bundle
    makes it clear that, "there was growing insecurity with insurgency  and
    criminal activity worsening across the country.  The first three months
    of 2015 were the most violent of any equivalent period on record".  The
    reports at pages 65 to 99 are also  worthy  of  consideration  in  this
    regard.  Thirdly, the absence of a male member of the family to provide
    for protection was a significant factor in the  judge's  determination,
    and Mr Madubuke had made a submission precisely  to  this  effect  (see
    paragraph 26), given that there  is  a  report,  "Home  Office  Country
    Information  and  Guidance  Afghanistan:  women  fearing  gender  based
    harm/violence  [February  2016]".   This   confirms   that   women   in
    Afghanistan are a particular social group and the case of TG and Others
    does confirm that women without a male family member  to  support  them
    will be at risk.

14. In reply, Mr Bates submitted that the judge should have referred to the
    background evidence and referenced it properly and his failure to do so
    rendered his judgment opaque.  Even if there was a worsening  situation
    in Afghanistan the judge  had  to  show  how  this  impacted  upon  the
    position of Sikhs in general which had not been done.  Moreover, it was
    false to suggest that the judge had not departed from the  case  of  TG
    and Others, because he had plainly done  so  at  paragraph  33  of  the
    determination.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the determination.  My reasons
    are as follows.

16. First, the judge found the Appellants to be credible.  As he indicated,



         "I am perfectly satisfied they  have  given  an  entirely  credible
         account of the reasons why they left Afghanistan .............  The
         evidence overwhelmingly indicates that the fear of  persecution  is
         genuine as is  their  fear  of  serious  harm  if  they  return  to
         Afghanistan" (paragraph 28).

17. Second, the  judge  was  careful  to  distinguish  the  manner  of  the
    Appellants'  arrival  in  the  UK,  via  Northern  Ireland,  with   the
    suggestion that they may have used forged passports  (which  the  judge
    acknowledged that the  Appellants  stated  they  were  not  aware  of).
    Third, and most importantly, the judge observed how the Appellants  had
    given detailed witness statements in which  they  explained  "how  they
    were treated in  Afghanistan  at  the  hands  of  the  Taliban.   Their
    evidence is entirely in line with the background information".

18. He then went on to  state  that,  "it  is  evident  that  the  security
    situation  and  the  activities  of  the  Taliban  in  Afghanistan  has
    increased substantially in recent years".  There is clear  evidence  in
    the Appellants' bundle that the situation has indeed so deteriorated as
    the Amnesty International Report makes clear for 2015.

19. The judge then held that "the Appellants  were  clearly  persecuted  in
    Afghanistan as is confirmed by the entirely credible evidence that they
    have given that their father/husband was killed by  the  Taliban",  and
    the judge was careful to distinguish  this  from  their  being  "simply
    harassed in Afghanistan by the Taliban" (see paragraph 30).

20. There is, of course, the issue as to whether the judge  had  faithfully
    applied the country guidance case of TG  and  Others.   The  Respondent
    Secretary of State argues that he had failed to do so  because  he  had
    chosen, when referring to the case of TG and Others, to state that "the
    Sikh population of  Afghanistan  has  been  built  further  since  that
    decision".  On that basis, the judge had held that  "those  communities
    cannot give any form of protection" (paragraph 32).  Be that as it may,
    the decision reached by the judge is not  contrary  to  TG  and  Others
    because that country guidance case, promulgated on 3rd  November  2015,
    following which the position in Afghanistan objectively appears to have
    deteriorated, states at head note (iii)(a) that,  "a  consideration  of
    whether an individual member of the Sikh and Hindu  communities  is  at
    risk of real persecution upon return to Afghanistan is fact-sensitive".
     It is of course the case here that the judge did treat their  evidence
    in a manner that was fact-sensitive.  He did refer  to  the  fact  that
    their evidence was entirely credible in  what  they  stated  about  the
    manner in which their father/husband was killed  by  the  Taliban,  and
    this was not simply a case of harassment by the Taliban, but  "amounted
    to persecution and caused them serious harm" (paragraph 30).

21. Second, the case of TG and Others  is  also  followed  in  that  it  is
    recognised  in  that  case  at  head  note  (iii)(a)  that  "women  are
    particularly vulnerable in the absence of appropriate protection from a
    male member of the family  ...",  which  precisely  fits  in  with  the
    situation of the second Appellant, whose husband was actually killed in
    Afghanistan three months before they set out from that country to  seek
    sanctuary abroad.

22. Third, the case of TG and Others is further followed by the  fact  that
    at head note (iii)(a)(iv) it is stated that, "although it appears there
    is a willingness at governmental level to provide protection, it is not
    established on the evidence that  at  a  local  level  the  police  are
    willing, even if able, to provide the  necessary  level  of  protection
    ...".  This indeed, is precisely what the judge found to  be  the  case
    when he held that, "because of the lack of inference  of  Afghan  Sikhs
    the local security forces do not provide them with effective protection
    and it is clear on that basis alone that  internal  relocation  is  not
    available to Afghan Sikhs", (see paragraph 33), a matter that expressly
    deals with the fact that there is a lack of willingness, even if  there
    is an ability to do so, to provide protection for Afghan Sikhs  by  the
    majority Muslim community of that country.

23. Finally, given that the issue of the protection of Afghan Sikhs  is  to
    be determined, as asylum claims generally are, on the  basis  of  fact-
    finding analyses, the judge concluded that neither the  first  nor  the
    second Appellant were financially independent "having  sold  all  their
    assets in Afghanistan to pay for their journey out  of  that  country",
    and that "it is also  clear  they  have  no  friends  or  relatives  in
    Afghanistan to provide them with assistance  should  they  be  returned
    there" (paragraph 34).  That issue went directly to the question of the
    availability of internal relocation to them, and the judge was entitled
    to make this finding on the evidence before him.

24. I  cannot  end  this  determination  without  dealing  with  Mr  Bates'
    submission that the judge was wrong to have taken  the  view  that  the
    Respondent Secretary of State had conceded the case for the Appellants.
     The judge, of course, does not say so in these terms.  What is  clear,
    my having had regard to the typed version of the Record of  Proceedings
    before the Tribunal of Judge Davies, is that in preliminary discussions
    of this matter before the Tribunal, Mr Wardle made the observation that
    his understanding was that only voluntary returns were currently taking
    place to Afghanistan of Sikhs and that he would not  cross-examine  the
    Appellants but only rely upon the refusal  letter  and  the  case  law.
    There was then neither any cross-examination of the first Appellant nor
    of the second Appellant, and apart from relying upon the refusal letter
    of 11th December 2014, there was "nothing otherwise to add".  The judge
    was entitled in these circumstances, to allow the appeal, and not least
    given that in doing so he gave express regard to  the  evidence  before
    him setting it out specifically, before doing so.

Notice of Decision

25. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

26. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th February 2017
