
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03729/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 February 2018                           |On 19th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     st
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan, Counsel instructed by Hackney Community
                    Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria and his date  of  birth  is  [  ]
    1981.  He made  an  application  for  asylum  on  the  grounds  of  his
    sexuality which was refused by the Secretary of State on 4 April  2016.
    There is an unfortunate history to the case.   The  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  R  Chowdhury  on  24
    November 2016.  This decision was set aside following  a  finding  that
    there was a material error of law.   The  matter  came  before  another
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, Judge M R Oliver, on 13 September  2017.   I
    set aside Judge Oliver's decision, having heard  submissions  following
    the grant of permission  in  a  decision  dated  7  February  2018.   I
    communicated the decision orally to the parties at the  hearing  on  15
    January 2018.

The Error of Law Decision

2.   The error of law decision reads as follows:-

         "7.  At the hearing before me Ms Pettersen conceded that there  was
             a material error of law in the decision of  Judge  Oliver  for
             the reasons raised in the grounds which relate to the  failure
             to engage with the evidence form N, the  failure  to  consider
             Article 8 and the failure properly to engage with  the  threat
             from the Appellant's brother in Algeria.

         8.   I agree.  Judge Oliver has effectively repeated the error that
             had been made by Judge Chowdhury relating to  the  Appellant's
             family in Algeria in addition to failing to consider  evidence
             and properly consider Article 8.  Mr Nathan's  preference  was
             for the matter to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
             However,  having  considered  the  Practice  Statement  of  25
             September 2012 and that the  Appellant  has  already  had  two
             hearing in the FtT,  I  decided  that  the  matter  should  be
             retained by the UT, which will go on to  remake  the  decision
             after a rehearing.

         9.   I set aside the  decision  of  Judge  Oliver  to  dismiss  the
             appeal.

         Directions

         10.  The matter is listed before me on 19 February 2017.  I made  a
             direction as follows:

             1.   In the light of the concession made that the relationship
                  between the Appellant and his partner is genuine  and  the
                  legal position in respect of homosexuality in Algeria, the
                  Respondent is directed to clarify her position in  respect
                  of insurmountable obstacles to family life and family life
                  generally continuing in Algeria within  fourteen  days  of
                  today's hearing."



3.   At the start of the hearing before me on 19  February  2017  Mr  Nathan
    raised two matters.  First was the inadequate response by the Secretary
    of State to the direction I made.  I indicated that the matter could be
    dealt with in submissions.  The second issue was that  of  venue.   The
    matter had been raised at the hearing before me on 15 January 2018.  Mr
    Nathan referred to a recent court user meeting attended by a  colleague
    of his who reported Chamber President stating that where  an  error  of
    law has been found,  appeals  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It became clear to me that what was said at the  meeting  has
    not been properly relayed to Mr Nathan.   This  is  at  odds  with  the
    Practice  Statement  concerning  the  disposal  of  proceedings  of  25
    September  2012.  There  have  been  two  hearings  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. As I stated to the parties at the hearing on 15 January there
    is no need for a full fact-finding assessment to be made in  the  light
    of  the  Respondent  having  accepted  the  Appellant's  sexuality.  In
    addition,  the  evidence  of  RS,  the  Appellant's  partner,  was  not
    challenged by the Presenting Officer at the hearing before Judge Oliver
    who made positive findings.

The Appellant's Evidence

4.   The Appellant's evidence is contained in his  witness  statement  of  6
    September 2017 which he adopted as his evidence-in-chief.  He  attended
    the hearing and gave evidence.  His evidence can be summarised.

5.   The Appellant was born and  raised  in  a  Sunni  Muslim  family.   His
    parents are deceased. He was raised by his grandmother.   He  has  nine
    siblings.  One of his brothers, F, resides in  the  UK  and  is  now  a
    British citizen.  When the Appellant was aged 13 he had a  relationship
    with a boy and this continued for six months.  When he was aged  15  he
    was violently and sexually assaulted by  two  men.   He  was  taken  to
    hospital and he reported the matter to the police.  The police told him
    that he looked gay when he told them that the men  had  tried  to  rape
    him.  He was told by the police that the men knew that he was  gay  and
    they suggested that the Appellant had wanted the attack  to  happen  to
    him.  They laughed at him and called him names like "atika" which is  a
    derogatory term  in  Arabic  for  effeminate  or  gay  men.   When  the
    Appellant was aged 19 he met a man, B. They had  a  relationship  which
    they kept secret.  He met another man after that relationship had  come
    to an end.

6.   He described his life in Algeria as being "very scary".  He  wanted  to
    live openly.  He applied for visitor visas to travel to  France,  Spain
    and the UK. He was eventually granted a visit visa to come to  the  UK.
    He came here in 2013 at the age of 32.  He made a claim for asylum on 8
    October 2015.  He did not know that it was possible to claim asylum  on
    the grounds of sexuality, but having made friends with  other  Algerian
    gay men, he was told that it was possible.  He initially lived with his
    brother, F, but, moved out of his house in March 2015.  He  was  scared
    that F would find out that he is gay.  The  Appellant  wanted  to  live
    openly as a gay man.  He was sick of hiding.  He has been living openly
    as a gay man whilst in the UK,  frequenting  bars  and  nightclubs  and
    expressing himself without fear.  He has gay friends, he drinks alcohol
    and uses social media apps and gay websites.  He was in a  relationship
    with GM for approximately a year which ended in or around January 2016.
     They met at a gay bar in Marble Arch.

7.   He met his current partner, RS,  a  British  citizen,  in  early  March
    2016.  He moved in to live with RS in late April 2016.  They have grown
    close. They are partners and planning the rest of their lives together.
     RS has  two  adult  daughters  and  in  oral  evidence  the  Appellant
    described visiting his daughter, K, and her two young  daughters.   The
    Appellant's evidence is that he does not want to hide his sexuality.

8.       If he was to return to Algeria he could not be  openly  gay  there,
    but he is now unable to hide his sexuality.  He  could  not  on  return
    conceal the fact he is gay.  He does not want to hide again.  He  wants
    to be himself. He would no longer be able to conceal his sexuality like
    he did before coming to the UK.  He believes that should he  return  to
    Algeria his brother, H, would track him down and kill him.  H  used  to
    call him on his mobile and make threats.  The Appellant has now changed
    his number.  The calls continued after he moved in  with  RS  in  April
    2016. The Appellant believes that he was seen with a man by someone  in
    London who told H. H started to call him on his mobile, abusing him. He
    sent messages on Facebook and Messenger threatening the  Appellant  who
    then blocked him.  H told the Appellant's best friend, N,  who  resides
    in Algeria, that should the Appellant return he (H) will kill  him.   H
    has threatened the Appellant.   The Appellant has not  heard  from  his
    brother, F, in the UK since H found out that he was gay.

9.       The Appellant worked as a tennis coach in Algeria prior  to  coming
    to the UK.  Life in Algeria was unbearable for  the  Appellant.   There
    was tremendous pressure on him to get married and  have  children.   He
    constantly had to lie and make up stories to conceal his sexuality.  If
    he continued to live in Algeria he would have to marry a woman and hide
    his sexuality which he could not do. It would not be possible  for  him
    to live like that.

The Evidence of RS

10.  RS gave evidence.  He adopted his  witness  statement  of  6  September
    2017 as evidence-in-chief.  He is a  company  director  of  a  property
    management company.  He owns his own property which is  mortgage  free.
    He has an annual income from a private pension of �23,000 per annum  in
    addition to savings of �49,000.  He has never claimed public funds.  He
    met the Appellant in a gay pub in March 2016 and  they  started  dating
    soon after this.  The Appellant moved in to live with RS in April  2016
    and they have been in a committed relationship since then.  RS has  two
    adult children, K and R.  Both of whom  have  met  the  Appellant.   RS
    described a visit to his eldest daughter's, K,  and  her  two  children
    (his grandchildren), the week before the hearing.

11.  RS in oral evidence described a  period  of  time  when  the  Appellant
    received what he a "ridiculous" amount  of  telephone  calls  from  his
    brother in Algeria and he listened to what seemed to  be  a  tirade  of
    abuse.  RS managed to persuade him not to  take  the  calls.   When  he
    received the calls it  was  as  though  the  Appellant  was  "wilting".
    Eventually the Appellant changed his number and the abuse  stopped  but
    they have had endless conversations about this.  RS  stated  that  they
    have an established family life here with his two  adult  children  and
    grandchildren.  The Appellant is very anxious about having to return to
    Algeria for any period of time.  It would be a "nightmare scenario  for
    him".  He fears that his family would harm him should he return.   They
    could not live a normal life in Algeria without fear.

N's Evidence

12.  The evidence of N is contained in a short note dated 11 February  2018.
     The witness's evidence is  that  he  has  known  the  Appellant  since
    primary school and he knows his family well.  On a day in  the  end  of
    February or in March 2017 he met the Appellant's brother, H,  in  front
    of his house after he finished work.  H stopped him and said that he is
    aware that he  is  in  touch  with  the  Appellant.   He  insulted  the
    Appellant and he told N that his friend in  London  saw  the  Appellant
    kissing a man. He said that if the Appellant returns to Algeria he will
    kill him.  All the family know that the Appellant is gay.

The Law

13.  The parties relied on background  evidence  and  the  country  guidance
    case of OO (Gay Men) Algeria CG [2016] UKUT 65.  The head  note  to  OO
    reads as follows:-

         "1.  Although the Algerian Criminal Code makes homosexual behaviour
             unlawful, the authorities do not seek to prosecute gay men and
             there  is  no  real  risk  of  prosecution,  even   when   the
             authorities become aware of such behaviour. In  the  very  few
             cases where  there  has  been  a  prosecution  for  homosexual
             behaviour, there has been some other feature  that  has  given
             rise to the prosecution. The state does not actively seek  out
             gay men in order to take any  form  of  action  against  them,
             either by means of prosecution or by  subjecting  gay  men  to
             other forms of persecutory ill-treatment.






         2.   Sharia law is not applied against gay  men  in  Algeria.   The
             criminal  law   is   entirely   secular   and   discloses   no
             manifestation, at all, of Sharia law in its application.






         3.    The  only  risk  of  ill-treatment  at  a  level  to   become
             persecution likely to be encountered by a gay man  in  Algeria
             is at the hands of his own family, after they have  discovered
             that he is gay. There is  no  reliable  evidence  such  as  to
             establish that a gay man, identified as  such,  faces  a  real
             risk of persecutory ill-treatment from persons outside his own
             family.






         4.   Where a gay man remains living with his family to whom he  has
             disclosed his sexual orientation in circumstances  where  they
             are prepared to tolerate that, his decision to live discreetly
             and to conceal his homosexuality outside the  family  home  is
             not  taken  to  avoid  persecution  but  to  avoid  shame   or
             disrespect being brought upon his family. That means  that  he
             has chosen to live discreetly, not to  avoid  persecution  but
             for reasons that do not give rise to a right to  international
             protection.






         5.   Where a  gay  man  has  to  flee  his  family  home  to  avoid
             persecution from family members, in his place of relocation he
             will attract no real risk of persecution  because,  generally,
             he will not live openly as a gay man. As the evidence does not
             establish that he will face a  real  risk  of  persecution  if
             subsequently suspected to be a gay man, his decision  to  live
             discreetly and to conceal his sexual orientation is driven  by
             respect for social mores and  a  desire  to  avoid  attracting
             disapproval of a type that falls well below the  threshold  of
             persecution. Quite apart from that, an Algerian man who has  a
             settled  preference  for  same  sex  relationships  may   well
             continue to entertain doubts as to his sexuality  and  not  to
             regard himself as a gay man, in any event.






         6.   For these reasons, a gay man from Algeria will be entitled  to
             be recognised as a refugee only if he shows that, due  to  his
             personal circumstances, it would be  unreasonable  and  unduly
             harsh to expect  him  to  relocate  within  Algeria  to  avoid
             persecution  from  family  members,  or  because  he   has   a
             particular characteristics that might, unusually and  contrary
             to what is generally to be expected, give rise to  a  risk  of
             attracting disapproval at the highest level  of  the  possible
             range of adverse responses from those seeking to express their
             disapproval of the fact of his sexual orientation."

14.  The following are the relevant paragraphs from OO:

        "163. Several sources of evidence to which we  were  referred  have
             discussed or emphasised the importance  of  appreciating  that
             gay men in Algeria may well not identify themselves  as  such.
             Dr Seddon referred in his report this observation by Dr Zahed:


                  'He referred to many people not referring to themselves as
                  'gay' because of the extreme taboo in society -  in  fact,
                  in Algeria, people who are  homosexual  do  not  generally
                  consider themselves to be 'gay'; they might have a  sexual
                  relationship with another man but will not  say  they  are
                  'gay'.'


        Reinforcing this point, Dr  Zahed  referred  to  interviews  he  had
             conducted in France with refugees who are established and face
             no obstacle to living openly as gay  men  but  choose  not  to
             because, according to Dr Zahed, of the


            'high societal pressure: it is impossible for them to  classify
                  themselves as 'gay' 'because it is like a perversion'.


         164. Ms Pargeter confirmed in her evidence that it is 'quite normal
             in Algerian society for young men to share accommodation'  but
             she said that  if  it  became  known  that  they  were  living
             together as a homosexual couple:


                  'they would face  severe  social  stigma  and  could  find
                  themselves chased out of the area. In such a scenario they
                  would be vulnerable to harassment and attack'


             although, as we have  observed,  she  offered  no  example  or
             illustration of that actually having occurred.


         165. The view expressed by the US  State  Department  Human  Rights
             Report as updated on 3 April 2014 is that:


                  '... while some  LGBTI  persons  lived  openly,  the  vast
                  majority did not, and most  feared  reprisals  from  their
                  families or harassment from authorities'


             although  no  information  followed  of  the  nature  of  such
             harassment. It is significant, therefore, that this  evidences
             is an asserted fear of consequences rather than  any  evidence
             that such consequences in fact materialised.


         166. This discussion of the reasons that might explain  why,  given
             the absence  of  any  reliable  evidence  of  gay  men  facing
             persecutory ill-treatment outside the family context, very few
             gay men choose to live openly as such, is informed, therefore,
             by a number of considerations. It is said  that  gay  Algerian
             men, as a consequence  of  cultural,  religious  and  societal
             views, do not generally identify themselves as  gay,  even  if
             their  sexual  preferences  lead  them  to  prefer  same   sex
             relationships. It is said that even men  with  settled  sexual
             preferences for same sex relationships may  well  continue  to
             entertain  doubt  about  their  sexuality.  Second,  gay   men
             recognise  the  intense  and  deep   rooted   near   universal
             disapproval of homosexuality that obtains in  Algeria.  Third,
             near universal adherence to and respect for established social
             and religious mores including the expectation that  men  of  a
             marriageable age will marry and produce children leads gay men
             to choose to marry. This was explained in  the  2014  Landinfo
             report that suggests that it may be  misleading  to  speak  of
             such marriages as being 'forced':


            'In the light of religious views on marriage being a duty,  one
                  must assume that it is not uncommon for gay men  to  marry
                  women, in order  to  hide  their  sexual  orientation  and
                  escape the questioning and pressure  from  their  families
                  and social networks. The fact that gay people marry is not
                  necessarily a response to  direct  or  indirect  pressure;
                  given  the  fundamental  role  of  marriage  in   Algerian
                  society, as well as the  respectability  and  significance
                  that marriage and children provide, it is  fully  possible
                  to wish to marry and have children, even if  one's  sexual
                  preference is for people of the same sex'.


         167. The reality of the position is that there is no reason at  all
             to doubt that there are in Algeria gay men who have left their
             family homes in order to escape intense family disapproval  of
             their sexuality, whether that  was  expressed  in  persecutory
             terms or not. The absence of evidence of  gay  couples  living
             openly as such leads to the inevitable  conclusion  that  they
             choose  to  live  discreetly.  As  Ms  Pargeter  observed,  in
             practice, gay men 'can live together in  Algeria'  and  it  is
             'quite normal for young men to share accommodation'.


         168. The absence of reliable evidence of adverse reactions  to  gay
             men living away from their families  of  a  type  sufficiently
             serious to constitute persecutory  ill-treatment  demonstrates
             that the choice to  live  discreetly  as  a  gay  man  is  not
             generally driven by a need to avoid persecution. In living  in
             a manner that does not require others to  be  confronted  with
             open displays of the affection a  gay  couple  have  for  each
             other such a couple are doing no more than what is demanded of
             a heterosexual couple.   That two gay men do not volunteer the
             information that they are living together not  simply  sharing
             accommodation  as  friends  but  living  together  as   sexual
             partners, gay  men  are  acting  discreetly  to  avoid  social
             pressures of the type contemplated in HJ (Iran)  v  SSHD  that
             does not give rise to a  sustainable  claim  for  asylum.  Put
             another way, a gay man who did live openly as such in  Algeria
             may well attract upsetting comments;  find  his  relationships
             with friends or  work  colleagues  damaged;  or  suffer  other
             discriminatory repercussions such as  experiencing  difficulty
             in dealing with some suppliers or services. But none  of  that
             amounts to persecution.


         169. We make one further observation in respect of this.  There  is
             evidence that gay men in Algeria do not identify themselves as
             being  gay  and  continue  to  entertain  doubts  about  their
             sexuality even if they have  recognised  within  themselves  a
             preference for same sex relationships.  The  evidence  of  the
             expert  witnesses  suggests  that  may  be   driven   by   the
             conditioning to which they have been subjected in  growing  up
             in a  society  that  holds  the  fiercely  negative  views  of
             homosexuality that we have discussed above. Plainly, a  person
             who does not consider himself to be  gay  would  not  wish  to
             inform others that he  is.  That  may  also  be  part  of  the
             explanation why Algerian men do not seek to  make  known  that
             they have a preference for same sex  relationships.  That  may
             help to explain also the evidence of such men, whom one  would
             normally refer to as 'gay' living in France who choose to live
             discreetly  despite  the  absence  of  any  risk  at  all   of
             persecution should they 'come out' as gay.


         176. It is conceded by the Respondent that where  a  gay  man  does
             face a real risk of persecution, which, when such  occurs,  is
             likely to  be  from  his  own  family  members,  there  is  no
             sufficiency of protection available from the police  or  other
             state authorities.


         177. There is a real risk of violent and persecutory  ill-treatment
             of gay men from family members, motivated by the deep sense of
             shame and dishonour perceived to be brought upon the family as
             a consequence of it becoming known in the  neighbourhood  that
             there is within the household a gay son. There is  a  risk  of
             that being the case throughout  Algerian  society  but  it  is
             clear from the evidence that that is especially  the  case  in
             the less affluent and densely populated neighbourhoods  where,
             typically, values will be  conservative  and  non-secular  and
             households are under close  scrutiny  from  neighbours.    But
             once the gay son has left the family home  and  re-established
             himself elsewhere there is no real risk  that  family  members
             will pursue him to that place of relocation, and so  generally
             that risk of persecution can be avoided by the availability of
             a safe and reasonable internal relocation alternative.


         181. That question, of whether  there  is  a  safe  and  reasonable
             internal relocation option, is a difficult and complex one  in
             the  Algerian  context.  Generally,  there  will  be  no  real
             difficulty preventing relocation and there  is  no  indication
             that disapproving family members have the  means,  inclination
             or reach to cause difficulties  after  relocation.  But  where
             such a person has established himself elsewhere in Algeria, as
             marriage is expected of all Algerian men, in pursuance of what
             is seen as an 'Islamic duty to procreate', it may well, sooner
             or later, become apparent that he has not adhered to the norms
             expected and that is likely to generate suspicion that he is a
             gay man.


         182. There is no real risk of gay men being subjected  to  violence
             or other persecutory ill-treatment outside  the  family  home,
             either at the hands of the authorities or by  members  of  the
             public with whom gay men have to engage. There is  an  absence
             of reliable evidence of that occurring.


         183. Very few gay men live openly as such in Algeria. Gay  Algerian
             men, as a consequence  of  cultural,  religious  and  societal
             views, do not generally identify themselves as  gay,  even  if
             their  sexual  preferences  lead  them  to  prefer  same   sex
             relationships.  Even  Algerian   men   with   settled   sexual
             preferences for same sex relationships may  well  continue  to
             entertain  doubt  about  their  sexuality.  Second,  gay   men
             recognise  the  intense  and  deep   rooted   near   universal
             disapproval of homosexuality that obtains  in  Algeria.  Thus,
             Algerian gay men who have  moved  to  France  where,  plainly,
             they face no obstacle to  living  openly  as  such,  generally
             choose not to because they refuse to categorise themselves  as
             gay, even though there is no persecutory disincentive to doing
             so.


         184. The fact that there is very little evidence of gay men  living
             openly in Algeria invites the conclusion that must be  because
             the risk of persecutory ill-treatment likely to  be  attracted
             is such as to prevent that from happening. But the expert  and
             other country evidence does not establish that, in fact, there
             is  any  real  risk  outside  the  family  context   of   such
             persecutory ill-treatment being meted out to persons suspected
             as being gay. The expert evidence indicates  that  a  gay  man
             recognised as such  is  very  likely  to  attract  an  adverse
             response from those by whom he is encountered as he goes about
             his  daily  business.  But  that  adverse  reaction   is   not
             reasonably likely be such as to amount to  persecution,  being
             on  a  range  of  responses  from  a  simple   expression   of
             disapproval, mockery or name calling up to the possibility  of
             physical attack. But there is simply no reliable  evidence  of
             the  expression  of  disapproval  being  expressed   in   such
             circumstances generally being otherwise than at the lower  end
             of that range of responses.


         185. That gives rise to a conundrum. If there  is  no  evidence  of
             persecution of gay men who  have  escaped  ill-treatment  from
             family by relocating elsewhere, why is there  no  evidence  of
             gay men feeling able to live  openly?  Alternatively,  is  the
             absence of evidence of physical ill-treatment of gay  men  due
             to the fact that there are no gay men living openly?


         187. Underpinning these conclusions is  recognition  that  Algerian
             society  is  governed  by  strict  Islamic  values  which  all
             citizens, including gay men, in practice respect, even if only
             for pragmatic reasons.


         188. This gives rise to  a  compromise  which  in  some  senses  is
             unsatisfactory but, as a matter of law, does not give rise  to
             a right to be  recognised  as  a  refugee.  Algerian  society,
             including the state authorities, effectively tolerates private
             manifestations  of  homosexual  conduct,  both  between  young
             unmarried men and gay men who have established themselves away
             from the family home, provided there is no public  display  of
             it.  Gay  men  choose  to  live  discreetly   not   to   avoid
             persecution, because there is no evidence that there  is  any,
             but because they recognise that the society they live in is  a
             conservative one, subject to strict Islamic  values,  that  is
             unable to openly embrace the  existence  of  the  practice  of
             homosexuality, just as women are expected to submit to Islamic
             requirements  such  as  being  veiled  and   accepting   other
             limitations upon their ability to act as they may wish to.


         189. The evidence before us indicates that as a result of  societal
             views and conditioning, Algerian men  with  a  preference  for
             same-sex  relationships  generally  do  not  in  fact   regard
             themselves as gay men  and  so  have  no  reason  to  identify
             themselves as such to others by  conducting  themselves  in  a
             manner that has come to be  regarded  as  'living  openly'  or
             discreetly. Therefore, choosing not to live openly as gay  men
             is not due to a fear of persecution but other  reasons  to  do
             with self-perception and how they  wish  to  be  perceived  by
             others.


         190. For these reasons, a gay man from Algeria will be entitled  to
             be recognised as a refugee only if he shows that, due  to  his
             personal circumstances, it would be  unreasonable  and  unduly
             harsh to expect  him  to  relocate  within  Algeria  to  avoid
             persecution from family members, or because he has  particular
             characteristics that might, unusually and contrary to what  is
             generally to be expected, give rise to a  risk  of  attracting
             disapproval at the highest level  of  the  possible  range  of
             adverse  responses  from  those  seeking  to   express   their
             disapproval of the fact of his sexual orientation."

15.  Both  parties  relied  on  the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
    Algeria, Sexual orientation and gender identity: Version 2.0  September
    2017.  For the purposes of this decision I will summarise  points  made
    in paragraphs cited from various sources:

         "The  law  criminalises  public  and  consensual  same  sex  sexual
         relations by men or women with penalties that include imprisonment.
          Society punishes gay and lesbian persons  by  marginalising  them.
         The legal framework strengthens  the  fear  and  shame  surrounding
         homosexuality and supports religious,  social,  and  familial-based
         prohibitions  about  sexuality  in  general  and  'deviant'  sexual
         behaviour in particular.  Despite the constitutional  guarantee  of
         the right to non-discrimination,  lesbian  and  gay,  bisexual  and
         transgender persons continue to be subjected to discriminatory acts
         that  marginalise  them  even  more.   Activists  said   that   the
         government did not actively  punish  LGBTI  behaviour  but  it  was
         complicit in the hate speech propagated by  conservative,  cultural
         and religion-based organisations some  of  which  associated  LGBTI
         individuals with paedophiles and  encouraged  excluding  them  from
         family and society.  Accessing health services could  be  difficult
         for members of LGBTI  community  because  medical  personnel  often
         treated LGBTI patients unprofessionally.  LGBTI persons face strong
         societal and religious discrimination.  While some lived openly the
         vast majority did not and most feared reprisal from their  families
         or harassment from authorities.  For several  years  the  country's
         gay and lesbian community has organised to claim its rights through
         a network of associations.  Demobilisation has been efficient in  a
         number of tests and relied in part  on  the  internet  and  digital
         social networks.  Because of criminalisation it  is  impossible  to
         create an organisation  or  space  openly  dedicated  to  gays  and
         lesbians in Algeria.  However, in the last several years, two  main
         associations have emerged."

16.  The parties in the context of Article  8  also  relied  on  R  (on  the
    application of) Agyarko v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11.


Findings and Reasons

The Protection Claim

17. Having had the benefit of hearing oral evidence, I find  the  Appellant
    and RS are entirely credible.  This is the third time  that  they  have
    given evidence.  (Judge Oliver found RS to be a  credible  witness  and
    there is no reason to depart from this conclusion).  Their evidence  is
    consistent with each other and internally. I find that the Appellant is
    at risk of persecution or serious harm from  his  family,  specifically
    his brother H, should he return to his home area.

18. I find that the Appellant would  not  be  at  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm should he relocate to another part of Algeria.   Whilst  I
    accept the Appellant has a subjective fear should he  relocate,  it  is
    not objective and it is not supported by the country guidance case.   I
    have gone on to consider whether relocation would  be  unreasonable  or
    unduly harsh applying the test set in Januzi v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5 at  [21]  approved  in  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) & Ors [2007]  UKHL  49.  The
    House of Lords approved the test for assessing internal protection  set
    out in  namely  that  "[t]he  decision-maker,  taking  account  of  all
    relevant circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of
    origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to expect the claimant  to
    relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to  do  so."
    It held that this test "was one of  great  generality,  excluding  from
    consideration very little other than the standard of rights  protection
    which an applicant would enjoy in the country where refuge is  sought".
    In assessing whether internal relocation  was  unreasonable  or  unduly
    harsh under the Refugee Convention, it was not correct to require  that
    an applicant show that there would be a breach of his rights under  Art
    3 of the European Convention on Human Rights in the  area  of  proposed
    internal relocation.

19. On a practical level relocation is possible. The Appellant is  a  young
    man without health problems and he worked prior to coming to the UK. He
    would be able to  live  independently  in  Algeria.   However,  whether
    relocation is reasonable should be considered in  the  context  of  the
    Appellant's sexuality and how he would live on return  to  Algeria.  He
    has been here since 2013 and whilst  that  may  not  be  a  significant
    period of time, the manner in which he has chosen to live here,  openly
    as a gay man, is significant.  Whilst he lived in Algeria his evidence,
    which I accept, was that he lived discreetly as a gay man and this fits
    in with what is stated in the case of OO about the general situation.

20. I find that the Appellant fully identifies himself as  a  gay  man.   I
    find he has no doubts  that  he  is  gay.   I  am  satisfied  that  his
    circumstances are unusual for a gay Algerian man because he  has  lived
    openly in the UK and he would, on return, continue to do so, finding it
    intolerable to live discreetly, and  therefore  the  general  situation
    about gay men in Algeria choosing to live discreetly does not apply  to
    him.  The common thread which ran through the appellant's oral evidence
    was that he is unable to hide anymore and conceal his identity.  Living
    openly, will not lead to persecution.  However, what is clear  from  OO
    and the Country Policy and Information Note,  which  postdates  it,  is
    that there is a great deal of discrimination against gay men. It can be
    reasonably  inferred  that  discrimination  increases  in  seriousness,
    should a gay man decide to live openly which, on the whole according to
    OO,  Algerian  men  do  not.  This  Appellant  would,  giving  rise  to
    attracting disapproval at the highest level of the  possible  range  of
    adverse responses from those seeking to express their disapproval.   If
    this Appellant would live more discreetly than he claimed on return  to
    Algeria that would not arise from respect for social mores and a desire
    to avoid attracting disapproval,  it  would  out  of  genuine  fear  of
    adverse responses. It would be unreasonable or unduly harsh  to  expect
    the appellant to relocate in these circumstances.

21. In addition, I accept that the Appellant has a subjective fear  of  his
    brother and is genuinely very fearful that he will find  him  and  kill
    him.  This may not be rational (his evidence that his  friend  N  would
    tell his brother of his whereabouts was surprising bearing in mind that
    it can  be  reasonably  inferred  that  N  would  be  aware  that  this
    information would put the Appellant at risk); however, what  came  very
    clearly through the evidence is that he is very  scared  and  extremely
    anxious and genuinely believes that H will track him down and kill  him
    should he return.

22. Although there would be no practical difficulty  preventing  relocation
    and no evidence that the Appellant's brother would have  the  means  or
    inclination  to  cause  difficulties,  I  conclude,   considering   the
    Appellant's personal circumstances, his  perception  of  risk  and  his
    intention to live openly  as  a  gay  man,  that  relocation  would  be
    unreasonable and unduly harsh.   He falls within the  category  of  gay
    men identified at [6] of the headnote in OO.

23. In these circumstances the appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 16 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


