
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03547/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13 November 2017                   |On 11 December 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     HAR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Caseley, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity direction made  in  my  decision
    dated 23 January 2017 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
    matter likely  to  lead  to  members  of  the  public  identifying  the
    appellant.  A failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on [  ]  1990.   He  is
    Kurdish and a Sunni Muslim.  He left Iraq in July 2015 and entered  the
    United Kingdom on 28 August  2015.   On  29  August  2015,  he  claimed
    asylum.  The basis of his claim was twofold.  First,  he  claimed  that
    his home village of Bakrd, Makhmour District (on the border of  Nineveh
    and Erbil governates) had been attacked by ISIS and his family had been
    taken.  He feared ISIS if he returned.  Secondly, he claimed that there
    was a family feud with the Barzani family as a result of a relationship
    between his uncle and a girl from that  family.   His  uncle  had  been
    killed and he would be a target if he returned.

 3. On 27 November 2015, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum and for humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the
    ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Burnett
    dismissed  his  appeal  on  all  grounds.   The  judge   rejected   the
    appellant's account that there was  a  family  feud  with  the  Barzani
    family and so concluded that the appellant had failed to establish  his
    asylum claim.  The judge, however, accepted the appellant's origins and
    that his village had been attacked by ISIS.  He  concluded  that  there
    was an Art 15(c)  risk  in  the  appellant's  home  area.   The  judge,
    nevertheless, found that the  appellant  could  safely  and  reasonably
    internally relocate either to Baghdad or to the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region
    (the "IKR") and consequently he dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.  No reliance was  placed  upon  Art  8
    before the judge.

 5. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  In a decision  dated  23
    January 2017, I concluded that the judge's findings in respect of  the
    appellant's asylum claim were legally  sustainable.   It  was  accepted
    that an Art 15(c) risk existed in the appellant's home area but, it was
    accepted by the Secretary of State, that the judge had erred in law  in
    reaching his internal relocation findings because  background  evidence
    sent in by the appellant after the hearing had not been  placed  before
    the judge and taken into account in his decision.

 6. Accordingly, I set aside the judge's decision and adjourned the hearing
    in  order  that  the  decision  could  be  remade  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's humanitarian protection claim, in particular in relation to
    whether internal relocation to Baghdad or the IKR was an option.

The Issues

 7. At the resumed hearing, it was accepted by Mr Richards, who represented
    the Secretary of State that the appellant could not return to his  home
    area as there was an Art 15(c) risk there.

 8. The sole issue  argued  before  me  was  whether  the  appellant  could
    internally relocate within Iraq in order to avoid that Art 15(c)  risk.



 9. The Secretary of  State  contended  that  the  appellant  could  either
    internally relocate to Baghdad or to the IKR.

The Submissions

10. In summary, Ms Caseley, who represented the appellant,  submitted  that
    it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for the appellant to  relocate
    to Baghdad or to the  IKR.   She  relied  upon  her  detailed  skeleton
    argument, in particular at para 10-34.

11. First, although Kurdish, Ms Caseley submitted that the appellant  could
    not internally relocate to the IKR.  She submitted that,  applying  the
    country guidance decision in AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
    00544 (IAC) and the country guidance as amended by the Court of  Appeal
    in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944, the appellant would be allowed
    entry to the IKR for ten days as a visitor  but  any  renewal  of  that
    permission, for periods of further ten days, would  be  dependent  upon
    the appellant obtaining employment.

12. Relying upon background information set  out  at  paras  18-21  of  her
    skeleton argument, Ms Caseley relied upon  the  deteriorating  economic
    situation in the IKR and submitted that the appellant would  be  unable
    to gain employment.  Ms Caseley submitted  that  the  appellant  would,
    therefore, have no lawful basis to remain in the  IKR  beyond  the  ten
    days and even if the IKR authorities did not pro-actively remove Kurds,
    it would be unreasonable to  expect  him  to  continue  to  live  there
    without status.  In any event, as a result of  his  inability  to  seek
    employment,  Ms  Caseley  submitted  that  he   would,   in   all   the
    circumstances, become an IDP who was destitute.

13. Ms Caseley's submission is helpfully  summarised  in  para  22  of  her
    skeleton in the following terms:

         "The Appellant is a young man  with  no  qualifications,  trade  or
         professional skills that he could use to find employment  in  Iraqi
         Kurdistan.  He suffers from mental health problems which affect his
         ability to manage everyday  tasks,  and  which  in  Dr  Battersby's
         opinion makes it 'unlikely that he would be able to obtain and keep
         work as well as care for himself'.... He does not  have  a  support
         network in Iraqi Kurdistan.  In  these  circumstances,  and  having
         regard to the fact that few displaced people are earning an  income
         and that unemployment is high among both  the  host  and  displaced
         population, there must be a real risk that he would not be able  to
         find employment.  If he could not find employment, it would  follow
         that he would be unable to obtain a long-term residence permit  and
         would be living in  the  region  as  an  irregular  migrant.   This
         precludes identifying Iraqi Kurdistan as a viable  internal  flight
         or relocation alternative for this Appellant."

14. Ms Caseley also submitted that the appellant would  not  have  a  Civil
    Status Identity Document ("CSID") which would  affect  his  ability  to
    gain employment (see paras 23-25 of her skeleton argument).

15. As regards  Baghdad,  Ms  Caseley  relied  upon  the  country  guidance
    decision of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017]  UKUT  00018  (IAC).
    She submitted that, although the Upper Tribunal,  had  found  that  the
    general risk to all Sunnis did not engage international  protection,  a
    cumulative assessment of circumstances might do so.  There  was  not  a
    sufficiency of protection from the risk to young Sunni men in  Baghdad,
    in particular, from Shia militias, who man checkpoints  throughout  the
    city.  The appellant would, in order  to  find  work,  likely  have  to
    travel across the city and therefore would inevitably be confronted  at
    checkpoints.  The appellant was Kurdish and, on the  judge's  findings,
    spoke only basic Arabic.  She submitted that there was a real  risk  to
    him in Baghdad from Shia militias.

16. Further, and in any event, applying the factors set out in AA  at  para
    15 of the country guidance, she submitted that it would be unreasonable
    or unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to Baghdad.  He would not
    have a CSID.  He had no family or friends  in  Baghdad  to  accommodate
    him.  He had no sponsor  to  provide  accommodation.   He  was  from  a
    minority community, namely a Kurd.  She also relied upon Dr Battersby's
    report which diagnosed the appellant as suffering  from  moderate  PTSD
    and that he struggled with loud noises, crowds and  the  dark  and  had
    experienced suicidal thoughts.  He  continued  to  struggle  to  manage
    everyday tasks in the UK and, she relied upon Dr Battersby's view  that
    he would be unlikely to obtain and  keep  work  as  well  as  care  for
    himself.  Ms Caseley also relied on the fact that the appellant was not
    a skilled or, as she put it in her skeleton,  "particularly  employable
    individual" who had had three years' primary education and  had  worked
    in the family shop in his home area.

17. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards relied upon the  Home  Office,
    "Country Policy and Information Note, Iraq: Return/Internal Relocation"
    (September 2017) ("CPI Note").

18. First, he submitted that the appellant  could  internally  relocate  to
    Baghdad and he relied upon para 2.2.15 of the CPI Note where, referring
    to the Upper Tribunal's country guidance in AA,  it  was  stated  that:



         "As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
         for a person from a contested area ... to relocate to Baghdad  City
         ... and that 'the number of persons for whom it is  not  reasonable
         or unduly harsh to relocate to Baghdad is likely to be small'".

19. Mr Richards referred to para 2.2.17 where, quoting the Upper  Tribunal,
    it was stated that

         "Arabic speaking males with family connections  in  Baghdad  and  a
         CSID are in the 'strongest position' and conversely, those with  no
         family, from minority communities and those without a CSID are most
         vulnerable.  However  there  is  a  'wide  range  of  circumstances
         falling between these two extremes'."

20. Mr Richards accepted that the appellant as a  Kurd  was,  therefore,  a
    minority individual.  He pointed out that Judge Burnett had, in effect,
    accepted that the appellant spoke basic Arabic.  Mr  Richards  accepted
    that the  appellant  did  not  presently  have  a  CSID.   However,  he
    submitted that the appellant could obtain such a document, important to
    his employability, from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK.   He  relied  upon
    para 3.3.4 of the CPI Note where it was stated:

         "A CSID can be obtained in the UK through the Iraqi  Embassy  if  a
         person has a current or expired passport and/or the book  and  page
         number for their family registration details.  Otherwise,  a  power
         of attorney can be provided to someone in Iraq  to  obtain  a  CSID
         from them."

21. Mr Richards submitted that the appellant had produced  in  the  bundles
    for the appeal, a photograph of his CSID in translation at  A7  of  the
    main bundle.  This would, Mr Richards submitted, assist  the  appellant
    in obtaining a CSID.

22. Further, Mr Richards submitted that Judge Burnett had not accepted  the
    truthfulness about the appellant's knowledge of the whereabouts of  his
    family.  Judge Burnett had found that  the  appellant  knew  where  his
    family was although he made no finding as to where they in  fact  were.
    Mr Richards submitted that  they  would  be  available  to  assist  the
    appellant, in any event, in obtaining a CSID in Iraq.

23. Mr Richards submitted that internal relocation to Baghdad was an option
    and was not unreasonable given that the appellant was a fit and a young
    man who had worked in the past.

24. Mr Richards submitted that internal relocation to the IKR was  also  an
    option.  He relied on the fact that the appellant is  a  Kurd  and  had
    lived on the border of the IKR.  He had family in Iraq in or  near  the
    IKR.  He relied on the relevant paras in the CPI Note, including  paras
    2.2.11 and 2.2.12 - the latter setting out the country guidance in AA.
    Paragraph 2.2.11 stated that:

         "in general, it may be possible for Kurds who do not originate from
         the KRI to relocate to the region.  ...".

25. Paragraph 2.2.12, citing AA states that:

         "Whether [a Kurd] ... if returned to  Baghdad,  can  reasonably  be
         expected to avoid any potential undue harshness  in  that  city  by
         travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive;  and  is  likely  to
         involve an assessment  of  (a)  the  practicality  of  travel  from
         Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Erbil by air); (b) the likelihood of
         K securing employment in the  IKR;  and  (c)  the  availability  of
         assistance from family and friends in the IKR".

26. Mr Richards invited me to consider Dr Battersby's report as having been
    predicated on the appellant telling the truth which the judge  had  not
    accepted.  He invited me to  treat  Dr  Battersby's  report  with  some
    caution.

27. Mr Richards submitted that it was not unreasonable or unduly  harsh  to
    expect the appellant as an able-bodied individual who had worked in the
    past, with family support and some financial support  from  the  UK  on
    return to relocate to the IKR.

The Law

28. The only issue now live in this appeal is that of internal  relocation.



29. The appellant's asylum claim fails  as  a  result  of  Judge  Burnett's
    adverse findings which I upheld in my decision dated 23 January 2017.

30. It is accepted by the Secretary of State that there  is  an  Art  15(c)
    risk to the appellant in his home area.

31. The appellant's claim is, therefore, for humanitarian protection  under
    para 339C of the Immigration Rules (HC 395  as  amended).   That  claim
    requires that the appellant establish that:

         "substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the  person
         concerned, if he returned to the country of return,  would  face  a
         real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or, owing to his
         such risk, unwilling to avail himself of  the  protection  of  that
         country ...".

32. The real risk of serious harm is established, falling within Art 15(c),
    and is set out in para 339C(iv).

33. The requirements for internal relocation are set out in  para  339O  of
    the Immigration Rules as follows:

         "339O    (i)  The Secretary of State will not make:

                    ...

                    (b)    a grant of humanitarian protection if in part  of
                        the country of return a person  would  not  face  a
                        real risk of suffering serious harm, and the person
                        can reasonably be expected to stay in that part  of
                        the country.

                (ii)   In examining whether a part of the country of  origin
                    or country of return meets the requirements in  (i)  the
                    Secretary of State, when making his decision on  whether
                    to grant asylum or humanitarian  protection,  will  have
                    regard to the general circumstances prevailing  in  that
                    part of the country and to the personal circumstances of
                    that person.

                (iii)  (i) applies notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
                    return to the country of origin or country  of  return."



34. It is not suggested in this appeal that there is any  obstacle  to  the
    appellant's return to Iraq.

35. Internal relocation will, therefore, not  be  an  available  option  if
    either the place of proposed relocation is unsafe or because  it  would
    be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect an individual either to reach
    or stay in that safe place.

36. In Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5 at [21],  Lord  Bingham  identified  the
    approach as follows:

         "The decision-maker, taking account of all  relevant  circumstances
         pertaining to the claimant in his country of  origin,  must  decide
         whether it is reasonable to expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
         whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to  do  so  ...  the
         decision-maker must do his best to decide, on such material  as  is
         available, where on the spectrum the particular case falls ...  All
         must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts."

37. In Januzi, Lord Bingham identified that the  socio-economic  conditions
    in the proposed area of relocation will be relevant, including  medical
    care, the ability to earn a living and find accommodation,  any  family
    links, ethnic affiliations, the ability to live  a  life  at  least  at
    subsistence level,  and  whether  support  might  be  forthcoming  from
    sources either in the country of origin or from abroad (see also SSHD v
    AH(Sudan) and others [2007] UKHL 49; [2008] Imm AR 289).

38. The burden of proof lies upon the appellant to establish, to the  lower
    standard applicable in  international  protection  cases,  that  he  is
    entitled to humanitarian protection.  The Secretary  of  State,  having
    raised the issue of internal relocation, the burden of proof remains on
    the appellant to demonstrate that he is not safe in another part of the
    country or that it would be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  for  him  to
    relocate there.

Discussion

39. I have considered all the material in the various bundles  to  which  I
    was referred.  Neither representative referred me to an  expert  report
    from Professor Christoph Bluth which is contained within the Tribunal's
    file.   It  was  not  relied  upon  in  either  representative's   oral
    submissions and Ms Caseley's detailed skeleton argument made no mention
    of it.  I can only assume that the parties considered  it  to  have  no
    relevance to my decision and I have  not,  therefore,  referred  to  it
    myself.

40. A number of facts are no longer in dispute either as a result of  Judge
    Burnett's findings or because they are accepted by the parties.

41. The appellant is a Kurd from the village of Bakrd in Makhmour  District
    which is close to the border with the IKR.

42. The appellant worked there in a grocery shop which is family owned.

43. The appellant has only three years of primary education and speaks only
    basic Arabic.

44. The appellant fled Iraq after his village was invaded by ISIS in August
    2014.

45. Judge Burnett did not accept the appellant's account  that  his  family
    were taken when ISIS attacked the village.   Judge  Burnett  found  (at
    para 62) that the whereabouts of the appellant's family  are  known  to
    him but:

         "it is unlikely that they have made it to Baghdad given the country
         situation, especially given that they were  residing  in,  or  very
         near, a contested area."

46. It is accepted that the appellant has a photocopy of his CSID.

47. It is clear from the country guidance in AA (as amended by the Court of
    Appeal) that possessing a CSID is important both in terms of  obtaining
    employment and accessing services in Iraq (see para 9).  Further, it is
    a specified relevant factor in determining whether it would  be  unduly
    harsh or unreasonable to expect an individual to  relocate  to  Baghdad
    (see para 15(a)).

48. I was not directly address on the relevance of a CSID to living in  the
    IKR.  Neither representative submitted it was irrelevant and Ms Caseley
    directly relied on its absence to support the appellant's claim that he
    could not be expected to relocate to the IKR.  It is not clear to me on
    reading the background material and AA whether the CSID is important in
    the context of living in the  IKR  (rather  than  elsewhere  in  Iraq).
    Given my findings below that the appellant could  obtain  a  CSID,  the
    point is not crucial in relation to relocation to  the  IKR  and  I  am
    content to assume for the purposes of this  appeal  that  it  has  some
    relevance.

49. I do not accept Ms Caseley's submission that the  appellant  could  not
    obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK.  That  possibility  is,
    contrary to her submission, expressly recognised by the Upper  Tribunal
    in AA at para [177].  There it is stated that it is possible to  obtain
    a CSID either by the production of a current  or  expired  passport  or
    "the book and page number for their family registration  details".   In
    this appeal, the appellant has a photograph of his  CSID  which  is  at
    page A7 of the main bundle (in translation).  That contains the "family
    registration details" and would, I find, enable the appellant to obtain
    a new CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK.  Ms  Caseley  placed  some
    reliance upon the Upper  Tribunal's  statement  at  [186]  which  makes
    reference to an individual's "ability to persuade  the  officials  that
    they are the person named on the relevant page"  which  "is  likely  to
    depend on whether they have family members or  others  individuals  who
    are prepared to vouch for them".  That, however, is said in the context
    of obtaining a CSID from their home governorate.  It was not  suggested
    in this case that the appellant could do so as an Art 15(c) risk exists
    in his home governorate.  Neither did Mr Richards suggest that he could
    obtain  a  CSID  from  the  "central  archive"  in  Baghdad  (which  is
    problematic: see para 11 of the guidance in AA) or an  alternative  CSI
    office for his particular home area.

50. Consequently, I approach the  issue  of  internal  relocation  in  this
    appeal on the basis that I am satisfied that the appellant  can  return
    to Iraq with a valid CSID.

51. I deal first with internal relocation to Baghdad.

52. In AA, the relevant country guidance is at paras 14 and 15 (as  amended
    by, and annexed to the judgment of, the Court of Appeal.  Paragraph  14
    states that:

         "as a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts."

53. Paragraph 15 of the guidance goes on to set out the relevant factors to
    be taken into account in assessing whether it would be unreasonable  or
    unduly harsh to relocate to Baghdad as follows:

         "15. In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
             P to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are,  however,
             likely to be relevant:

             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (see
                  Part C above);

             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are  less
                  likely to find employment);

             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in  Baghdad  able
                  to accommodate him;

             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
                  difficulties than men in finding employment);

             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or
                  rent accommodation;

             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;

             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind
                  there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers
                  are provided with the support generally  given  to  IDPs."



54. Here, as I have found, the appellant will return with a CSID.

55. As the country guidance in AA makes plain, a CSID is important  because
    it is (at para 9):

         "Generally required in order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access  financial
         assistance from the authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;
         and medical treatment.  If P shows that  there  are  no  family  or
         other members likely to be able to provide means of support,  P  is
         in general likely to face a real risk of destitution, amounting  to
         serious harm, if, by the time  any  funds  provided  to  P  by  the
         Secretary of State or her agents to assist  P's  return  have  been
         exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have no CSID."



56. Judge Burnett found that it was not likely that the appellant's family,
    although in Iraq,  had  travelled  to  Baghdad.   The  appellant  will,
    therefore, return to Baghdad without any familial support there.

57. His CSID will assist him  in  obtaining  employment.   He  will  return
    however, as Mr Richards accepted, as a member of a minority  community.
    He is a Kurd.  He also speaks only  basic  Arabic  which  will,  as  AA
    recognises, make it less likely that he will find employment.

58. Ms Caseley placed reliance upon the country guidance  decision  of  BA.
    That case concerned, inter alia, the position of Sunnis  on  return  to
    Baghdad.  The Upper Tribunal affirmed the earlier conclusion in AA that
    the general level of violence in Baghdad City did not engage Art  15(c)
    of the Qualification Directive.  However, the Upper Tribunal  concluded
    that (headnote para (vi)):

         "Individual characteristics, which do not in  themselves  create  a
         real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount  to  a
         real risk for the purposes of the Refugee Convention, Article 15(c)
         of the Qualification Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR if assessed
         on a cumulative basis.  The assessment will depend on the facts  of
         each case."

59. The Upper Tribunal noted that (headnote para (vii)):

         "in general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and in the case
         of Sunni complainants,  are  likely  to  be  unwilling  to  provide
         sufficient protection."

60. The Tribunal  noted  the  increase  in  sectarian  violence  since  the
    withdrawal of the US-led coalition forces in 2012, in  particular  that
    (headnote para (v)):

         "Sunni men are more likely to be targeted as  suspected  supporters
         of Sunni extremist groups such as ISIL.   However,  Sunni  identity
         alone is not sufficient to give rise to  a  real  risk  of  serious
         harm."

61. In BA, the Upper Tribunal noted the prevalence  of  checkpoints  (about
    200 in the streets of Baghdad) which were used to check the identity of
    people  and  vehicles.   Sunnis  were  a  particular  target  for  such
    inspections and had resulted in Shia militias killing Sunnis (see [84]-
    [101]).  The appellant is, of course, a Sunni, young man.  Although  BA
    did not specifically consider  the  position  of  a  Kurd  (since  that
    appellant was not of that  ethnicity  in  that  case),  the  background
    evidence shows the continued antagonism and  hostility  towards  Kurds,
    including by the Shia militia.  In para 29 of her skeleton argument, Ms
    Caseley cites a number of background documents which, in  my  judgment,
    support this view.  It is convenient to set out that paragraph  of  her
    skeleton (removing the supporting footnotes) which is in the  following
    terms

         "The Finnish Immigration Service report states that Asaib  Ahl  al-
         Haqq "openly supports an anti-Kurdish policy and is critical of the
         existence of "two governments" (Baghdad and Erbil)." In 2014  Asaib
         Ahl al-Haqq leader Qais al-Khazali said "Kurds  living  in  Baghdad
         and other provinces will be targeted... their  economic  interests,
         offices, and political presence will  be  targeted."  Kurdistan  24
         reported in January 2016 that Kurdish families in Baghdad had  been
         targeted by gunmen and that some had fled their homes.  In  January
         2016 a Kurdish member of the Iraqi Parliament stated  that  Kurdish
         residents in Baghdad are under serious threat  and  that  most  are
         forced to flee the city.  In  February  2016  it  was  reported  by
         Kurdish MPs that militia groups had threatened Kurdish families  in
         Baghdad with death and had  given  them  one  month  to  leave  the
         capital. Reportedly,  al-Khazali  said  in  March  2016  of  Iraq's
         Kurdish population, "[they are] operating right now  like  leeches,
         which feed on the host's body - sucking moreand more of its blood -
         in an effort to grow in size." Kurdish  MPs  have  themselves  been
         targeted and in May  2016  it  was  reported  that  some  had  left
         Baghdad. Al-Khazali made further inflammatory anti-Kurdish comments
         in December 2016. In February 2017 a number  of  Kurdish  MPs  fled
         Baghdad following a protest  by  Sadrists.  The  overall  political
         context must be understood in this regard. Some  of  the  contested
         areas reclaimed from Daesh are disputed between  Kurdish  Peshmerga
         forces and Shia militias.  Shia  militias,  known  as  the  Popular
         Mobilization Units,  have  attacked  Kurds  in  areas  of  disputed
         territory such as Tuz Khormato, and in February 2017  thousands  of
         Kurdish families fled the  Tuz  Khormato  area  due  to  atrocities
         committed against them by the militias. The Shia militias therefore
         have a general stance of hostility towards Kurds,  and  it  can  be
         expected that the Appellant, as a young Sunni Kurdish man, would be
         at real risk in Baghdad from the Shia militias."

62. I accept Ms Caseley's submission that in  order  to  find  and  sustain
    employment in Baghdad the appellant will be required to cross the  city
    and will as a consequence be confronted at checkpoints by Shia militia.
     The appellant's language is Kurdish Sorani and he  only  speaks  basic
    Arabic.  His background (which would include that he is a  Sunni)  will
    be only too obvious to those at checkpoints.

63. I accept that the country guidance in AA concludes  that  "in  general"
    relocation to Baghdad will not be unduly harsh or  unreasonable.   But,
    as para 15 of the guidance makes plain, each case must  turn  upon  its
    own facts and  an  assessment  of  the  evidence.   The  subsequent  CG
    decision in BA highlights the risk to Sunnis in Baghdad albeit not,  in
    itself, amounting to a real risk of serious harm.

64. There is, nevertheless, a risk to which he will be exposed as a  result
    of living in Baghdad and seeking and sustaining employment in the city.
     In BA itself, the Upper Tribunal, adopting  a  "cumulative"  approach,
    found that the particular appellant in that case had established a real
    risk of serious harm or persecution.  The facts were, there,  different
    in a number of respects, including that that appellant had been outside
    the UK for fifteen years and so had a particular profile as a  returnee
    from the west and, further, he had  previously  worked  for  a  foreign
    contractor.

65. In this appeal, I am not satisfied that there is a real risk of serious
    harm to the appellant in Baghdad which, in itself,  engages  Art  3  or
    amounts to  persecution.   However,  there  is  a  background  risk  of
    significance which when taken cumulatively with the  other  factors  in
    assessing whether  internal  relocation  is  an  option,  leads  me  to
    conclude that  it  would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to live in Baghdad.  In  reaching  that  view,  I  take  into
    account the factors relied upon by the appellant, albeit that I  accept
    that he would have a CSID on return.  He would, however, have no family
    or friends.  He is from a minority, namely he is  Kurdish.   He  speaks
    only basic Arabic which must, in  my  judgment,  seriously  hamper  his
    ability to obtain employment in Baghdad where, and the contrary was not
    suggested before me, Arabic is the prevailing language.  He has  mental
    health problems  which,  and  I  accept  this  evidence,  Dr  Battersby
    observes, will impact upon his ability to obtain and retain  employment
    (see the discussion at paras 71-73 below  which  I  adopt  here).   The
    appellant has no specific qualifications: his only work has been in the
    family shop.  There is also the evidence, which I have  set  out  above
    from Ms Caseley's skeleton, that Kurds may be treated with hostility in
    Baghdad.  In my judgment, there is a very real risk that the  appellant
    will not be able to obtain or retain employment  despite  possessing  a
    CSID.

66. For these  reasons,  having  regard  to  the  background  risk  to  the
    appellant and his economic and social circumstances in  Baghdad,  I  am
    satisfied that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to live
    in Baghdad such that he  cannot  be  expected  to  internally  relocate
    there.

67. I now  turn  to  consider  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  can
    internally relocate to the IKR.  In AA the Upper Tribunal identified in
    para [20] of the  country  guidance   the  fact-sensitive  approach  to
    determining whether a person returned to Baghdad  could  reasonably  be
    expected to travel to and live in the IKR as follows:

         "Whether K [a Kurd], if returned  to  Baghdad,  can  reasonably  be
         expected to avoid any potential undue harshness  in  that  city  by
         travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive;  and  is  likely  to
         involve an assessment of (a) the practicality  of  travelling  from
         Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of
         K's securing employment in the IKR; and  (c)  the  availability  of
         assistance from family and friends in the IKR."

68. In para [19], the Upper Tribunal dealt with the position of a  Kurd  on
    entry to the IKR and thereafter as follows:

         "A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR  can  obtain  entry
         for ten days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission  for
         a further ten days.  If  K  finds  employment,  K  can  remain  for
         longer, although K will need to register with the  authorities  and
         provide details of the employer.  There is no evidence that the IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end."

69. It was not suggested by either party before me that the appellant could
    not reach the IKR, presumably by air from Baghdad travelling to  Irbil.
    Before me, the submissions focused on the appellant's circumstances  in
    the IKR, in particular whether he could obtain  employment  and  so  be
    able to remain beyond the initial ten  days'  entry  permission  and-or
    whether it would be reasonable or unduly harsh for him to  live  there.
    In the IKR, unlike in Baghdad, the appellant will  not  be  faced  with
    hostility as a Kurd or any risk from Shia militia.

70. Ms Caseley placed reliance upon the fact that the appellant was a young
    man with no qualifications, trade or  professional  skills.   She  also
    relied upon his mental health problem, including his ability to  manage
    everyday tasks, recognised by Dr Battersby in her report.   She  relied
    on the fact that the appellant had  no  support  network  in  the  IKR,
    including family and the evidence, which she summarised in paras  18-21
    of her skeleton argument, demonstrating the  increasing  poor  economic
    situation in the IKR.  She submitted, in  effect,  that  the  appellant
    would become destitute in the IKR and therefore could not  be  expected
    to relocate there.

71. I accept, as Mr Richards submitted,  that  the  appellant  is  an  able
    bodied young man.  However, what he has to offer is limited in an  open
    job market.  He has no qualifications (he was educated for three  years
    in primary school)  and  has  no  trade  or  professional  skills.   He
    previously worked in a shop run by his family.   Although  Mr  Richards
    invited me to treat Dr Battersby's report with  some  caution,  in  her
    report she does diagnose the  appellant  as  suffering  from  "moderate
    PTSD" (see page A12 of the main bundle) and, I am satisfied,  was  well
    aware that the appellant had been found not to be credible having  been
    provided with both  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  and  my
    decision  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  finding  an  error  of  law.    She
    specifically acknowledges that the appellant has been found to  lie  in
    respect of his history at page A17.  Nevertheless, she is confident  in
    her diagnosis.  In her report (at page  A21)  Dr  Battersby  notes  the
    problems suffered by  the  appellant  which,  in  her  view  amount  to
    "specific difficulties with his mental health that significantly impact
    on his ability to function in everyday life".

72. She, thereafter, gives examples, including  him  struggling  with  loud
    noises,  crowds  and  the  dark  and  having  suicidal  thoughts.   She
    concludes:

         "He is  currently  in  a  relatively  safe  country  but  is  still
         struggling to manage everyday tasks.  Relocation  would  be  highly
         likely to be a stressful experience and  any  increased  stress  is
         likely  to  have  a  negative  impact  on  his  mental  health  and
         subsequent negative impact on his  functioning  and  suicide  risk.
         From his current presentation it would seem unlikely that he  would
         be able to obtain and keep work as well as care for himself.  He is
         also reluctant to seek help from others.  For these reasons  in  my
         opinion [the appellant] has specific difficulties  by  way  of  his
         mental health that  significantly  affect  his  ability  to  manage
         internal relocation."

73. I accept Dr Battersby's opinion  that  the  appellant  has  significant
    mental health difficulty and, like her, I am satisfied that these would
    on return to the IKR affect his ability to obtain or retain employment.



74. Judge Burnett made no finding as to where the appellant's family was in
    Iraq, other than to find that they were not likely to  be  in  Baghdad.
    It  is,  therefore,  pure  speculation  whether  they  remain  in   the
    appellant's home area or have, themselves, moved  into  the  IKR  whose
    border is close to  the  appellant's  home  area.   However,  there  is
    nothing to suggest that even if they were in the IKR they could provide
    any material or economic support to the appellant and, but this is also
    necessarily speculation, they may themselves be in an IDP camp  in  the
    IKR.  In any event, I am unable  to  find  on  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant's family are, or would be able to, support the  appellant  in
    any material way in the IKR.

75. Ms Caseley placed reliance upon what was  said  in  the  "UNOCHA,  Iraq
    [2016] Humanitarian Response Plan" (December 2016) which paints a bleak
    picture of the IKR's economy as follows:

         "In recent months, faced  with  a  crippling  fiscal  deficit,  the
         regional government has struggled to provide employment  and  basic
         public  services  for  both  resident  communities  and   displaced
         families. The steep drop in oil revenue, driven by historically low
         prices, has led to a spike in public debt.  Salaries are in arrears
         and all public investment projects have  been  halted.   More  than
         150,000 workers employed on these projects are now without  jobs...
         In a region which only a few years ago was experiencing  very  high
         growth rates, poverty has more than doubled in the KR-I in the past
         two years.  The displaced have been particularly hard-hit; although
         many have been struggling to survive on savings, personal resources
         are now exhausted, forcing hundreds of  thousands  of  families  to
         rely on outside  assistance,  and  where  this  is  inadequate,  on
         negative coping strategies.  Job  losses  are  leading  to  serious
         economic hardship among both resident and  displaced  families  and
         are likely to ignite unrest, unless  steps  are  taken  to  protect
         incomes... As the crisis has become protracted, both the  displaced
         and  residents  are  struggling  to  support  their  families.  Few
         displaced people [in Erbil governorate] report earning  an  income;
         the overwhelming majority continue to rely on savings  to  survive.
         Unemployment, coupled with sharp increases in the cost  of  living,
         is  creating  serious  economic  and  social  hardship  among  both
         resident and displaced communities."

76. Further, the document continues:

         "One of the most  dramatic  changes  in  Iraq  is  the  exponential
         deterioration in the condition of host  communities.  Families  who
         have generously opened their homes  and  have  been  sharing  their
         resources with relatives and neighbours are rapidly  plunging  into
         poverty. During the past 12 months, the debt burden has  quadrupled
         in Kurdistan and in the Diyala and Ninewa governorates. In numerous
         neighbourhoods, including in Dahuk, Erbil, Sulaymaniyah and Kirkuk,
         families  are  relying  on  negative,  even   irreversible   coping
         strategies... 85 per cent of displaced people  are  in  debt,  most
         unpayable, locking families into generations of impoverishment  and
         immiseration... With the social protection  floor  contracting  and
         unemployment affecting hundreds of  thousands  of  workers,  social
         tensions are rising, in some places sharply. As many as 1.7 million
         people are likely to be impacted by social conflict."

77. The influx of IDPs and Syrian refugees to the IKR is, itself,  attested
    by the Kurdistan Regional Government in a document from September  2015
    noting that (at C55 of the appellant's bundle of April 2017)  that  the
    region is

         "Offering  safety,  protection  and  services  to  280,000   Syrian
         refugees and up to 1.5 million IDPs.  In 2014, an average of 80,000
         IDPs entered the  Kurdistan  region  every  month.   These  figures
         exclude  the  displaced  population  served  by  the  KRG  in   the
         neighbouring  provinces.   As  a  result  of  multiple   waves   of
         displacement, the population of the Kurdistan region has  increased
         by almost 30%, placing immense pressure on existing  resources  and
         services."

78. The document goes on to note that  the  region  is  "on  the  verge  of
    breakdown".

79. A Kurdish newspaper report from September 2016 (at pages 43-44  of  the
    April 2017 bundle) reports that poverty and unemployment in the IKR has
    reached "unprecedented levels".  It reports that  "extreme  poverty  is
    more widespread  amongst  larger  families  with  family  children  and
    unemployed parents".  Further, unemployment has  almost  tripled  since
    2010 from 4.8% to 13.5% although "the actual unemployment is likely  to
    be considerably higher" quoting the IKR government.  The "UNOCHA,  2017
    Humanitarian Response Plan: Advance Executive Summary" (at C101 of  the
    April 2017 bundle) notes that:

         "Three years of continuous conflict and  economic  stagnation  have
         impacted nearly every aspect of Iraqi society.   Poverty  rates  in
         Kurdistan  have  doubled  and  unemployment  has  trebled  in  many
         communities.  Pay rolls for government employees have been  cut  or
         delayed.  Agriculture production  has  declined  by  40  per  cent,
         undermining  the  country's  food  sufficiency,  and  hundreds   of
         thousands of people have been forced to migrate to urban areas  for
         jobs and support."

80. The report also predicts a further displacement of  500,000  people  in
    2017 as a result of the military operation in  and  around  Mosul  (see
    C130).

81. The dire straits faced by the economy in the IKR is identified  in  the
    Home Office's own CPI Note at para 7.2.4 as follows:

         "7.2.4   The source also commented on economic opportunities in the
                KRI:

                    'Three sources said that the number of job opportunities
                    in KRI is very limited for the host community as well as
                    for IDPs. In this respect, ERC stated that, due  to  the
                    financial crisis in  KRI,  even  people  from  the  host
                    community are losing their jobs. Three sources indicated
                    that the private  sector  is  affected  by  the  crisis,
                    including  the  construction  business   and   the   oil
                    business. Being among these sources, IRC added that many
                    jobs in the oil sector are occupied by foreign labour.

                    'When asked in which fields IDPs  typically  find  jobs,
                    three sources said that IDPs who manage  to  get  a  job
                    will often find it in low-skilled fields,  for  instance
                    construction  or   casual   work   in   agriculture   or
                    restaurants.  IRC  further  stated  that  IDPs  with  an
                    education may be able to find work with  NGOs;  however,
                    the number of jobs available in this field is low.

                    'It was stated by three sources that the  public  sector
                    is not adding new jobs, and three sources pointed to the
                    fact that the Kurdistan Regional  Government  (KRG)  has
                    not paid salaries to  government  employees  since  June
                    2015. IOM said that it is not  possible  to  live  on  a
                    salary of a civil servant under the  Kurdistan  Regional
                    Government (KRG) administration.  Various sources stated
                    that  publicly  employed  IDPs  are  still  supposed  to
                    receive their salary  from  the  central  government  in
                    Baghdad. Two sources, however, said that as of September
                    2015, there is a delay in the payment.

                    'Different figures were given by three  sources  on  the
                    current unemployment  rate  in  KRI,  ranging  from  6.5
                    percent to 35 percent.

                    'Three sources pointed to competition for  jobs  in  KRI
                    between  host  community  members,   IDPs   and   Syrian
                    refugees. Three sources said  that  IDPs  are  typically
                    willing and able to work for lower salaries than members
                    of the host community.  IOM  stated  that  they,  as  an
                    organisation, are facing difficulties to find employment
                    for Kurdish returnees who went back to KRI from  Europe,
                    as many companies downsize their workforce.'"

82. The quotation is from the Danish Refugee Council &  Danish  Immigration
    Service document entitled "the Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI):  Access,
    Possibility of Protection, Security and Humanitarian Situation - Report
    from Fact-Finding Mission to Erbil, the Kurdistan Region of Iraq  (KRI)
    and Beirut, Lebanon, 26 September  to  6 October  2015"  (dated  April
    2016).

83. In my judgment, the background  evidence  well  demonstrates  the  dire
    economic situation faced in the IKR  not  least  because  of  the  huge
    influx of IDPs from central Iraq and Syria.  This has had a significant
    effect on the IKR's economy and, importantly for the purposes  of  this
    appeal, the jobs market.  The appellant would enter that market without
    any particular trade,  skill  or  professional  background.   His  only
    education is three years in primary school.  His only  work  experience
    is working in the family  shop.   He  has  mental  health  difficulties
    which, in my judgment, would further impact upon his ability to  obtain
    or sustain employment in the IKR.  In my  judgment,  taking  all  these
    factors together there is a real  risk  that  the  appellant  would  be
    unable to find or sustain employment in the  IKR  such  that  he  would
    become destitute.  That would affect his ability to remain in  the  IKR
    legally where it cannot be reasonable to expect him to  remain  without
    legal status.  But, more importantly, the situation  that  there  is  a
    real risk he will face makes it unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to
    live in the IKR.

84. For these reasons, therefore, I am satisfied that  internal  relocation
    to the IKR is not a viable option for the appellant.

85. Consequently, based upon there being an Art 15(c) risk to the appellant
    in his home area, I am satisfied that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection under para 339C of the Immigration Rules.

Decision

86. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds stands.

87. For the reasons given in my decision dated 23 January 2017, the  First-
    tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's   appeal   on
    humanitarian protection grounds involved the making of an error of law.
     That decision was set aside in my earlier decision.

88. I now remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal on the  basis
    that he is entitled to humanitarian protection.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            6, December 2017
