
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03585/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 May 2019                       |On 01 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     DYM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J McCallum, Latta & Co Solicitors (04/04/19
only)
     Mr Caskie, instructed by Latta & Co Solicitors (24/05/19)
For the Respondent:    Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
(04/04/19)
     Mr Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (24/05/19)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who appeals against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 8 August  2018,  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to remove him to Iraq.

 2. The appellant is, as the First-tier Tribunal found, an Iraqi Kurd  from
    Mosul and his father was a member of  Al-Fursan,  a  military  regiment
    aligned to the Ba'ath Party operating under the Saddam Hussein  regime.
    The appellant's claim arises from the fact  that  he  feared  ISIS  who
    overran Mosul, his home area, in 2014;  and,  because  he  is  a  Sunni
    Muslim, he fears the Shia militia.

 3. The appellant fears that he cannot return to  the  Independent  Kurdish
    Region ("IKR") because of his  father's  involvement  with  the  Ba'ath
    Party.  He also  claims  that  as  a  young  Sunni  Muslim  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity, relocation to Baghdad is unduly harsh and that  if  returned
    there he faces destitution.   The  judge  found  the  appellant  to  be
    credible finding at [12(g)] that the appellant  was  from  a  contested
    area; that the respondent had no intention of returning  the  appellant
    to Mosul but to Baghdad and that thus the issue was whether or  not  it
    would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to Baghdad.

 4. The judge then directed himself in line with AA (Iraq)  [2017]  finding
    in particular:-

      a) That the appellant has no family in Baghdad;  that  he  is  from  a
         minority community but is fluent in Arabic; that he had  previously
         lived in Baghdad  when  he  worked  for  the  Ministry  of  Foreign
         Affairs, has a CSID and had 27 million dinars in a bank.

 5. The judge then went on to refer to the expert report from  Dr  R  Fatah
    and Miss S Laizer [12(k)], concluding  that  the  appellant's  father's
    membership of Al-Fursan would not create a difficulty for the appellant
    either in attempting to enter the IKR  or  after  entry  [12(o)].   The
    judge also concluded, having directed himself in line with  AAH  (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 that there would not be
    difficulties in the journey nor would internal relocation  to  the  IKR
    would be unduly harsh noting the appellant's own evidence that  he  has
    special forces training, is an accountant, had worked in a  bakery  for
    four years before leaving Iraq and had skills and money and so did  not
    face destitution [12(r)].  The judge then held this:-

         "(s) The only conclusion I can realistically come to  is  that  the
             appellant can safely return to Baghdad.  If he does  not  want
             to stay there he can safely travel from Baghdad to IKR."

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      a) in failing to have regard to the opinion of Miss S Laizer in  which
         she opined that the appellant could not realistically  relocate  to
         IKR;

      b) that the judge had erred in making a finding that the appellant had
         been an accountant insisted it arose from  a  mistranslation  which
         had previously been corrected or it was incorrect to  say  that  he
         had previously worked in Baghdad without taking into  account  that
         he was employed and accommodated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
         on a shift pattern working two weeks on site and two weeks in Mosul
         and so was not residing and working independently in Baghdad;  and,
         in concluding that he had at least one friend in Baghdad, the  oral
         evidence being that he had had no contact with his friend or anyone
         else in Baghdad since he left in 2014;

      c) that the judge had erred in concluding that the  appellant  had  27
         million dinars in a bank account, the  evidence  in  his  statement
         being that he obtained some monthly payment in compensation for his
         mother's death before he left Iraq and had been  told  that  if  he
         were able to complete the process,  he  would  receive  27  million
         dinars.

 7. I heard submissions from both representatives.

 8. It was accepted that if it  were  necessary  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant could relocate to the IKR, then the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was defective in that, despite referring to Miss Laizer's
    report, the judge had failed to  engage  with  it  when  assessing  the
    difficulties or otherwise of the appellant relocating to the IKR.

 9. Ms O'Brien submitted that in reality the  finding  that  the  appellant
    would be safe in Baghdad was made out and that accordingly,  any  error
    with respect to the position in the IKR was not material.

10. There is, despite the  respondent's  submissions  to  the  contrary,  a
    significant difference between having  27  million  dinars  in  a  bank
    account and it being possible to recover that sum dependent on a number
    of contingencies.  The judge clearly referred to the money being in the
    bank and thus available to him  in  terms  of  being  able  to  support
    himself which is a major factor in assessing whether it  is  reasonable
    for somebody to relocate to Baghdad.

11. Further,  the  judge  appears  not  to  have  taken  into  account  the
    appellant's evidence which he otherwise believed that  he  had  had  no
    contact with a friend in Baghdad for by that point some four years.

12. There is less merit in the  submission  that  the  judge  had  made  an
    incorrect finding with respect to the fact that the appellant had lived
    in Baghdad and had been accommodated there.  Miss  McCallum  sought  to
    persuade me that because he had been provided with accommodation by the
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs, this was not an indication that  he  would
    be able independently to obtain accommodation.  There is  little  merit
    in that point.  The issue is whether the appellant  was  familiar  with
    Baghdad to the extent that he would be able  to  operate  there.   That
    includes contacts and it includes money.

13.  I  do,  however,  consider  that  there  is  an  issue  regarding  the
    appellant's qualifications as an accountant as opposed to a baker.  The
    point made in earlier evidence and which had been accepted is  that  he
    had no qualifications as a baker.  The judge appears to have taken into
    account his skills as an accountant in assessing whether the  appellant
    could reasonably be expected to relocate to Baghdad.

14. Whilst no one of these factors is of itself decisive, I considered that
    viewed cumulatively, these mistakes  of  fact  are  sufficient  in  the
    circumstances of limited reasoning with respect to the difficulties  or
    otherwise of relocation to Baghdad, and thus that  finding  is  unsafe.
    Given that the finding with respect to relocation to Baghdad is unsafe,
    it follows that the decision must be set  aside  because  the  findings
    with respect to the safety of  relocating  to  the  IKR  are,  for  the
    reasons set out above also unsafe.

15. I therefore set aside the decision.   I did so on the basis that it was
    not necessary to hear further oral evidence from  the  appellant  given
    that the facts appear to be established.   I  therefore  adjourned  the
    hearing, and gave directions  that  it  be  relisted  to  hear  further
    submissions and to receive further evidence

    Remaking the decision

16. I heard submissions from Mr Caskie and Mr Mullen.  In addition,  I  had
    the Home Office bundle, and two bundles from the appellant,  numbers  6
    and 7 as well as a skeleton argument.  The representatives agreed  that
    the three bundles contained the entirety of  the  evidence  upon  which
    they wished to rely and that I would not have to read it.

17. There are three primary issues.

      a) whether the appellant is at risk in his home area, Mosul, and if so
         why;

      b) if he is at risk in Mosul whether it would be reasonable to  expect
         him to relocate to either Baghdad or the IKR;

      c) if he is not at risk in his home area, whether he is able to  reach
         it and/or whether there would be an Article 15(c) breach were he to
         have to relocate to Baghdad, or in Mosul, or in the IKR.

The Law

18. Given the history of this case it is  necessary  to  consider  in  some
    detail Article 15 of the Qualification Directive which provides:

         'Serious harm consists of :

         (a)

         (b)  torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of  an
         application in the country of origin; or,

         (c)  serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  of  person
         by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international
         or internal armed conflict.'

19. Equally of note is what the Upper Tribunal held in AK (Afghanistan)  at
    [227] to [229]:

         "227.    One of the issues we have  to  decide  in  revisiting  the
         application  of  Article  15(c)  in  the  context  of   present-day
         Afghanistan concerns internal relocation. Whilst  confined  to  the
         Article 15(c) context, it is inevitable that what we say below will
         have implications for consideration of this issue in the context of
         Article 1A(2) of the  Refugee  Convention,  Article  15(b)  of  the
         Qualification Directive and Article 3 ECHR; but it is not our  task
         here to spell out what they are.


         When analysing this issue, it is  important  to  clarify  that  the
         respondent's position as expressed in submissions  before  us  must
         clearly be read in the context of the concession that has been made
         in recent Home Office OGNs on Afghanistan, namely that whilst women
         with a male support network may  be  able  to  relocate  internally
         "...it would be unreasonable to expect lone women and female  heads
         of household to relocate internally" (February  2012  OGN,  3.10.8)
         and the Tribunal sees no basis for taking a different  view.  (Much
         the same position was taken by the ECtHR in the case of N v  Sweden
         on the basis of a close consideration of major background sources.)


         228.  It  is  clear  from  the  structure  of  Article  8  of   the
         Qualification Directive that internal  relocation  is  a  necessary
         element  which  is  relevant  not  just  to  establishing   refugee
         eligibility (under Articles 2  and  9)  but  also  to  establishing
         subsidiary (humanitarian) protection eligibility  under  all  three
         limbs of Article 15 - 15(a), (b) and  15(c).  So  far  as  concerns
         internal relocation being a  necessary  consideration  for  Article
         15(c) purposes, it has been confirmed by the Court  of  Justice  of
         the European Union (CJEU) ruling in Elgafaji that an Article  15(c)
         issue can arise not just in relation to the whole of a country  but
         also part(s) of it: see para 43.  If  a  civilian's  home  area  or
         region is considered to be in a state of indiscriminate violence at
         above the Article 15(c) threshold, he will still  not  be  able  to
         establish  eligibility  for  subsidiary  (humanitarian)  protection
         unless able to show either a continuing risk of serious  harm  (the
         Article 8(1) "safety" limb) or circumstances  that  would  make  it
         unreasonable for him to relocate to another  area  or  region  (the
         Article 8(1) "reasonableness" limb).


         229. If the proposed place  of  relocation  is  one  which  is  not
         significantly affected  by  armed  conflict  and/or  indiscriminate
         violence, the  established  legal  principles  to  be  applied  are
         clear."


20. In assessing this appeal, the starting point is  the  country  guidance
    from AA v SSHD. It is well known and extensive; it  is  unnecessary  to
    set it out in this decision. It is, however, necessary to set  consider
    SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [46] to [47] , [50] and [67]:

         "46. The system of Country Guidance determinations enables
         appropriate resources, in terms of the representations of the
         parties to the Country Guidance appeal, expert and factual evidence
         and the personnel and time of the Tribunal, to be applied to the
         determination of conditions in, and therefore the risks of return
         for persons such as the appellants in the Country Guidance appeal
         to, the country in question. The procedure is aimed at arriving at
         a reliable (in the sense of accurate) determination.


         47.  It is for these reasons, as well as the desirability of
         consistency, that decision makers and tribunal judges are required
         to take Country Guidance determinations into account, and to follow
         them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence, are
         adduced justifying their not doing so.


         ...


         50.  Lastly under this head, I refer to what Mr Ockleton, who has
         very considerable experience in this area, said in Qader:


             "33. ... I do not derive any assistance from submissions about
             what Pill LJ may have thought or intended in granting
             permission in HM, or from speculation about what the outcome
             of the appeal to the Court of Appeal may be. There are many
             reasons why permission may be granted, one (albeit only one)
             of which is to allow a higher court to give its approval to a
             process or decision that has been challenged. And it is not
             unknown for challenges in the Court of Appeal to country
             guidance decisions to be successful solely in relation to the
             specific appellant, leaving the guidance itself essentially
             unimpaired. No substantive conclusion can be drawn from the
             grant of permission; but nor on the other hand can it be
             assumed, as Mr Dunlop would have it, that the only issues to
             be considered by the Court will be related to the Tribunal's
             procedure.


             34.  The proposition that a decision endorsed as country
             guidance by the President of the Immigration and Asylum
             Chamber of the Upper Tribunal loses its force by being
             challenged, or even by permission to appeal it being granted,
             I regard as entirely unarguable. The Tribunal has reached a
             reasoned decision after a review of a mass of relevant
             evidence. That conclusion remains binding within the terms of
             the Practice Direction, unless or until it is overturned on
             appeal or replaced by other guidance. And even if that were
             not so, it remains in the highest degree relevant to the
             issues that a decision-maker (whether the Secretary of State,
             or a representative seeking to advise a claimant) needs to
             take into account. On many questions, there is no country
             guidance at all, but that does not prevent the Secretary of
             State taking decisions, including decisions rejecting fresh
             claims and imposing certification under s 94. A challenged
             country guidance decision cannot be worse than no guidance at
             all.


             35.  The country guidance system has been endorsed by
             Parliament in s 105 of the 2002 Act (as amended), and by the
             Court of Appeal, and appears to be regarded with the highest
             respect by the Courts in Strasbourg and Luxembourg. That is
             not to suggest that individual country guidance decisions are
             infallible, but it is a good reason for supposing that it
             would be undesirable to render it wholly ineffectual. But the
             claimant's submission would, if accepted, have that effect.
             Whenever a decision was under challenge nobody would be
             entitled to rely on it, however reliable it might otherwise
             appear to be, until the challenge was resolved and (if
             necessary) further guidance had been given - which might
             itself be subject to challenge. That cannot be right: it is
             both unnecessary and wasteful of resources."


         I would endorse these remarks.


         ...


         67.  In my judgment a Country Guidance determination of the Upper
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) remains authoritative
         unless and until it is set aside on appeal or replaced by a
         subsequent Country Guidance determination."


21. The respondent's case is that there has now been such  changes  to  the
    situation in Mosul that the area is no longer such as would fall within
    the Article 15(c) area as before within the terms of Article 15(c)  and
    that the information show is such that it is  no  longer  necessary  to
    follow the country guidance.

22. I accept that there have been significant changes to  Mosul  since  the
    country guidance was handed down.  ISIS is no longer in charge; that is
    not in dispute and indeed they appear to have left the city on 14  July
    2017.  The respondent's position is set out in the CPIN Iraq:  security
    and humanitarian situation, November 2018  is  [2.3.32]  that  although
    there has  been  a  consistent  and  significant  decline  in  security
    incidents, and civilian fatalities and injuries.

23. The appellant's case is that the assertion that there is no  longer  an
    elevated level of indiscriminate violence anywhere in  Iraq  such  that
    substantial grounds exist for believing that an applicant would, simply
    by being present there, faces a risk, is illusory.

24. Mr Caskie relied on the civilian fatalities in the  six  most  affected
    governorates, a table at paragraph [8.6.1] of the same document showing
    that there is still a risk of civilian fatalities.

25. This data must also be viewed  through  the  observation  that  the  UN
    assistance by admission for Iraq produced the data and for  which  some
    months no data is available as follows (insert 8.6.1). but on any view,
    the graph shows that civilian casualties have  decreased  significantly
    in respect of Nineweh in which Mosul is located.  They are  well  below
    the 100 and significantly lower than the peaks in  September  2014  and
    between September 2016 and July 2017.

26. Mr Caskie sought also to pray in aid a voluminous set of documents  set
    out at pages 243 to 980 of the  bundle  being  news  reports  regarding
    Mosul from Iraqi news sources produced on a monthly basis.  Whilst this
    evidence is clearly relevant in that it documents  a  large  number  of
    incidents in which civilians are killed, without any proper analysis as
    to the numbers involved, it is difficult to attach much weight to  this
    material or indeed to draw any inferences as to the current  situation.
    Many of the extracts related to arrests of Islamic state militants,  of
    militants being killed but in reality.  There is no attempt to tabulate
    this or to give any idea of the number of incidents per month.   It  is
    not the job of the Upper Tribunal to read through reports such as  this
    and to tabulate the number of killings and other  incidents.   That  is
    the job of the appellant's representatives.   Accordingly,  I  conclude
    that I am not assisted by this material in  determining  the  level  of
    civilian casualties or other indicators  to  show  that  Article  15(c)
    still is relevant in Mosul.

27.  UNHCR  has  produced  a  recent  report,   "International   Protection
    Considerations with regards to people fleeing  the  Republic  of  Iraq"
    published in May 2019.  UNHCR is the source which I find can be  relied
    upon even if I do not necessarily agree with its conclusions which  are
    in any event not binding.

28. The report records at page 23 as follows:-

         "As of late summer 2017, following the end of the Mosul  offensive,
         monthly  casualty  figures  declined,  a   trend   that   continued
         throughout 2018  and  2019.   At  the  time  of  writing,  civilian
         casualties are  reported  to  occur  mostly  in  areas  where  ISIS
         maintains a presence.   Based  on  statistics  provided  by  UNAMI,
         Baghdad was the worst affected governorate in terms of total number
         of casualties in most months  of  2018,  largely  as  a  result  of
         regular small scale attacks (shootings, IEDs  and  "sticky  bombs")
         and infrequent mass casualty incidents.  In 2018, Baghdad (the most
         populous governorate of Iraq) was followed (or  surpassed  in  some
         months), although not  always  in  the  same  order,  by  Al-Anbar,
         Diyala, Ninewa, Kirkuk, Salah al-Din and  the  Babel  governorates.
         Based on  an  analysis  of  the  Iraq  body  count  (IBC)  casualty
         statistics for 2018, Ninewa governorate saw  the  highest  civilian
         casualty rate i.e. the number of casualties per 100,000 inhabitants
         (46.5 casualties per 100,000 of population) followed by Kirkuk ..."



29. This last figure was  gleamed  from  an  EASO  report,  "Iraq  security
    situation (supplement) - Iraq body count - civilian deaths  2012,  2017
    to 2018", published in February 2019. The EASO report  sets  out  in  a
    graph the number of deaths as well as incidents and the report  further
    breaks down the overall figures for Ninewa into districts showing  that
    Mosul had by far and away the greatest  number  of  incidents  and  the
    second highest rate of killings per 100,000.  Only Sinjar was higher on
    that level.  The raw figures show 1,369 killed, and  183  incidents  in
    2018 compared to 8,407 and 532 for 2017.

30. Of note also is the observation from UNHCR that there are obstacles for
    return including destroyed or damaged housing, unresolved housing  land
    and property disputes, as well as  continued  insecurity  in  areas  of
    origin.

31. It appears also that there are  significant  UN  rights  violations  in
    respect of the arbitrary arrest,  detention,  abduction,  disappearance
    and torture as well as extrajudicial killings of mostly Sunni Arab  men
    perceived to have been affiliated with ISIS.  The UNHCR report notes at
    page 32, footnote 191 that after liberation of Mosul  many  IS  members
    were captured and released after paying bribes.

32. Mr Caskie submitted also relying on what is said in the UNHCR report at
    footnote 381:

         "... in this  context  lists  of  ISIS  suspects  grew  to  include
         approximately  100,000  names   including   people   suspected   of
         involvement with ISIS  in  any  capacity  some  even  being  killed
         because suspicion including some who are under suspicion because of
         family members' involvement.  There is  significant  evidence  here
         that a prescription of guilt is made against an entire family up to
         the fourth degree.   This  is,  however,  evidence  of  a  risk  of
         persecution per se."

33. I accept that this does indicate a degree of instability engendering no
    doubt a climate of fear given the  risk  to  a  significant  number  of
    people, the implication that people  are  detained  and  held  for  the
    extraction of bribes rather  than  any  proper  investigation.   It  is
    almost as though having removed  ISIS,  the  Iraqi  state  has  allowed
    another form of arbitrary rule to take its place.

34. The overall conclusion of UNHCR at page 1 to 8 of the  report  is  that
    there should be no forcible returns of people who originate from  areas
    previously controlled by ISIS or with a continued  ISIS  presence.   Of
    note  also  is  the  observation  at  page  114  to  115  dealing  with
    eligibility for subsidiary protection under the Qualification Directive
    that:

         "Iraqis  and  former  habitual   residents   of   Iraq   who   seek
         international protection in Member States of the European Union and
         who are found not to be refugees  under  the  1951  Convention  may
         qualify for subsidiary protection under  Article  15  of  the  2011
         Qualification Directive,  if  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
         believing that they would face a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  in
         Iraq.708 In light of the information presented in Section  II.C  of
         these Guidelines,  applicants  may,  depending  on  the  individual
         circumstances of the case, be  in  need  of  subsidiary  protection
         under Article 15(a) or Article 15(b) on the grounds of a real  risk
         of  the  relevant  forms  of  serious  harm   (death   penalty   or
         execution;709 or torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
         punishment),710 either at the hands of the State or its agents,  or
         at the hands of non-state agents.711 Equally, in light of the  fact
         that Iraq continues to be affected  by  a  non-international  armed
         conflict and in light of  the  information  presented  in  Sections
         II.B, II.C, II.D  and  II.E  of  these  Considerations,  applicants
         originating from or previously residing in conflict-affected  areas
         may, depending on the individual circumstances of the case,  be  in
         need of subsidiary protection under Article 15(c) on the grounds of
         a serious and individual threat to their life or person  by  reason
         of indiscriminate violence [my underling]. In the  context  of  the
         armed conflict in Iraq, factors to be taken into account to  assess
         the threat to the life or person  of  an  applicant  by  reason  of
         indiscriminate violence in a particular part of the country include
         the  number  of  civilian  casualties,  the  number   of   security
         incidents, as well  as  the  existence  of  serious  violations  of
         international humanitarian law which constitute threats to life  or
         physical integrity. Such considerations are not,  however,  limited
         to the direct impact  of  the  violence,  but  also  encompass  the
         consequences of violence that  are  more  long-term  and  indirect,
         including the impact of the conflict on the human rights  situation
         and the extent to which the conflict impedes  the  ability  of  the
         State to protect human rights. In the context of  the  conflict  in
         Iraq, relevant factors  in  this  respect  are  (i)  the  continued
         presence of ISIS in areas outside of urban centres, where effective
         government control has not been established following the  retaking
         of these areas from ISIS and  the  latter's  ability  to  threaten,
         intimidate, extort, kidnap and kill civilians  and  restrict  their
         freedom of movement;  (ii)  the  high  level  of  fragmentation  of
         security actors, the prevalence of corruption and  the  ability  of
         security actors to commit human rights  violations  with  impunity;
         (iii) the impact of violence and  insecurity  on  the  humanitarian
         situation  as  manifested  by   food   insecurity,   poverty,   the
         destruction of homes, livelihoods and the loss of assets; and  (iv)
         constraints on women's participation in public life. These factors,
         either alone or cumulatively, may  be  found  to  give  rise  to  a
         situation in a particular part of Iraq that is sufficiently serious
         to engage Article 15(c) without  the  need  for  the  applicant  to
         demonstrate individual factors or circumstances increasing the risk
         of harm.712 [my underlining]Where, after all relevant evidence  has
         been considered, this is found not to be the case in  the  part  of
         Iraq from which the applicant originates, it falls to be considered
         whether the applicant's individual characteristics are such  as  to
         reveal specific vulnerabilities which, combined with the nature and
         the extent of the violence, give rise to a serious  and  individual
         threat to the applicant's life or person."

35. I note from the material that  many  people  have  returned  to  Ninewa
    mostly to the Mosul area as indicated by the Home Office.  The evidence
    of this is, however, conflicting given that the  respondent  relies  on
    material from IOM pages 127 and 128 of the report but  129  from  OCHA.
    Further, it is evident from the respondent's report at 8.1.2 that there
    is conflict still continuing  in  the  Mosul  area  albeit  outside  of
    population centres.

36. Taking all of this into account and bearing in mind that the  situation
    has changed for the better with the removal of  ISIS,  there  is  still
    evidence of continuing violence and significant instability. Looking at
    the evidence in the  round,  I  consider  that  there  is  insufficient
    evidence before me that at this stage I could  decline  to  follow  the
    country guidance accordingly, with respect to the Article 15(c) risk at
    least in Mosul and surrounding area.  If  I  were  considering  another
    area, my decision may have been different. Further, and in any event, I
    bear in mind that the appellant is not a Shia, but a  Sunni.  There  is
    some evidence that they are at greater risk, albeit that much  of  that
    evidence relates to Arabs rather than Kurds.

37. As I am satisfied that the appellant faces an article 15  (c)  risk  in
    his home area, I go on to consider whether the appellants would  be  at
    risk in Baghdad.

38. The principal objection raised by Mr Caskie as  to  why  the  appellant
    could not return to Baghdad is that he would simply not be allowed  in.
    This is based on a section of the most recent CPIN on the issue,  which
    indicates that there are restrictions  on  the  ability  of  Internally
    Displaced people  relocating  to  areas.   One  specific  reference  to
    Baghdad, at [ 8.2.3], has as its source, a  report  from  Human  Rights
    Watch entitled "Iraq: curbs put war as displaced at risk". This report,
    when considered in detail, shows that there are restrictions placed  on
    people trying to enter specific areas so that displaced people can only
    enter Baghdad if they can present a local resident as a guarantor or  a
    sponsor at entry checkpoints.

39. Internally displaced people are, however, not defined  in  any  of  the
    documents to which I have been taken to not a term of art.   Mr  Caskie
    did not take me to any definition nor has he taken me  to  any  passage
    which identified that the appellant would  be  treated  as  an  IDP  as
    opposed to a returnee from abroad.  That said there does appear  to  be
    difficulties at  checkpoints  the  source  for  paragraph  8.3.1  is  a
    publication  from  the  Internal  Displaced  Monitoring  Centre,  IDMC:
    "Nowhere. to return to: Iraqi's search for durable solutions continues"
    published November 2018.  The report does, however, contain at page  24
    a section entitled "returns from Europe" but this says little about the
    difficulties that such people may face in  terms  of  documentation  or
    relocating.

40. What is said at page 30 of the report is illuminating: -

         "For those who do wish to return, freedom of movement  restrictions
         can be significant barriers.  The rules that govern moving  into  a
         new city in another part  of  the  country  or  even  in  the  same
         governorate are opaque.  IDPs are requested to  present  documents,
         some of which are relatively impossible to obtain in that return to
         their areas of origin.   One  ...participant  in  Hamam  Ali  Alili
         saying "We are from Saladin.  Our documents  are  missing.   If  we
         return they will keep us in .... we  will  not  be  able  to  leave
         without our papers.

         Movement restrictions appear to be unequally imposed  dependent  on
         IDPs' ethnic and religious identity.  Sunni IDPs  are  particularly
         affected.  Akram who currently lives in Hamam Ali  Alili  tried  to
         return to Zumar but was presented from doing so by Kurdish  forces.
         ... many Sunnis returning from Syria had been blocked from entering
         areas under Kurdish control because of their perceived  affiliation
         with  ISIL.   Others  have  returned  to  destroyed  villages  with
         allegations that the destruction of villages was caused either as a
         retaliation or to limit returns."

41. I turn now to the guidance set out in  AA  (Iraq)  as  amended  by  AAH
    (Iraq).

         "D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


         14.  As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,
         likely to be relevant:


             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see
             Part C above);


             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less
             likely to find employment);


             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able
             to accommodate him;


             (d)  whether P is a lone female (women face greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel room or
             rent accommodation;


             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;


             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


         16.  There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling
         from Baghdad airport to the southern governorates, suffering
         serious harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article
         15(c)."


42.  The starting point here is that it will not in general be unduly harsh
    to expect the appellant and his family to go to Baghdad. Here, point 15
    (a) is met. The appellant had obtained work in Baghdad  before,  albeit
    that this was some years ago.   It is also clear that the appellant can
    speak Arabic; that is evident  from  what  he  said  in  his  Screening
    interview and from his response thereto in which he  said  that  he  is
    more comfortable speaking Arabic than Kurdish.

43. I am satisfied that he does not have family in Baghdad, and that he has
    lost contact with the friend whom he did have there.  It is less  clear
    that he could find a sponsor, and I accept it is now some  years  since
    he went to Baghdad in 2014, fleeing ISIS.  He did on that occasion stay
    with a friend, but I accept that he has lost contact with him.

44. The appellant did work previously in the Green Zone in Baghdad, but  he
    did so on a basis of 15 days on duty, 15 days off spent in  Mosul,  and
    spent his time while on duty in accommodation  provided  for  the  job.
    That was a very different existence from having to  find  accommodation
    and a means of support by himself.

45. Given that the appellant  spent  a  relatively  short  time  living  in
    Baghdad proper (as opposed to living in the  Green  Zone),  I  conclude
    that it would be difficult for him now, as  a  member  of  a  minority,
    being  both  Kurdish  and  Sunni,  to  find  either  accommodation   or
    employment.

46. I turn next to the report of Dr Fatah from 11 May 2017. I am  satisfied
    that Dr Fatah, whose expertise has been recognised in  several  Country
    Guidance cases, is an expert on whom I can rely; no submissions to  the
    contrary were made.

47. In his report at section 7.1, Dr Fatah opined that the appellant may be
    at greater risk given that his documentation will show  him  as  coming
    from Mosul, and, as a Sunni, he may well be identified as  coming  from
    there. I consider that risk factor is unlikely to have diminished since
    the retaking of Mosul; on  the  contrary,  there  are  indicators  that
    Sunnis from Mosul are likely to be viewed with even greater suspicion.

48. I am not, however, persuaded that the appellant would face difficulties
    as an IDP.  He has not satisfied me that he would be seen as an IDP  as
    opposed to a returnee from abroad. They are distinct categories and the
    material provided treats them so, as does the guidance at [15 (g)].

49. Taking all of these factors into account, I conclude that on the  basis
    of the evidence before  me,  the  appellant  could  not  reasonably  be
    expected to relocate to Baghad; it would be unduly  harsh  for  him  in
    consequence.

50. Turning finally to the  possibility  of  relocation  to  the  IKR,  the
    starting point must be the Country Guidance:

         "E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION


         17.  There are currently no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
         Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United  Kingdom  are  to
         Baghdad.


         18.  For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
         possession of a valid CSID or  Iraqi  passport,  the  journey  from
         Baghdad to the IKR, whether by  air  or  land,  is  affordable  and
         practical and can be made  without  a  real  risk  of  P  suffering
         persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment  nor  would  any
         difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.


         19.  P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
         IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


         20.  P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
         between Baghdad and the  IKR  by  land  without  a  CSID  or  valid
         passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including  two
         checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of  the  airport.  If  P  has
         neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a real risk of P being
         detained at a checkpoint until such time as the security  personnel
         are able to verify P's identity. It is not reasonable to require  P
         to travel between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability  of  P
         to verify his identity at a checkpoint. This normally requires  the
         attendance of a male family member and production of  P's  identity
         documents but may also be achieved by  calling  upon  "connections"
         higher up in the chain of command.


         21.  Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
         granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,  and
         registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would  be  permitted
         to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal impediments or
         requirements. There is no sponsorship requirement for Kurds.


         22.  Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during
         the security screening process must be assessed on  a  case-by-case
         basis. Additional factors  that  may  increase  risk  include:  (i)
         coming from a family with  a  known  association  with  ISIL,  (ii)
         coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii) being  a  single
         male of fighting age. P is likely to be able to evidence  the  fact
         of recent arrival from the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of
         having arrived directly from ISIL territory.


         23.  If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
         require that family to  accommodate  P.  In  such  circumstances  P
         would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as
         to lead a 'relatively normal  life',  which  would  not  be  unduly
         harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for   decision-makers   to
         determine the extent of any assistance likely to be provided by P's
         family on a case by case basis.


         24.  For those without the assistance of  family  in  the  IKR  the
         accommodation options are limited:


             (i)  Absent special circumstances it is not reasonably  likely
             that P will be able to gain access to one of the refugee camps
             in the IKR; these camps are already extremely overcrowded  and
             are closed to newcomers.  64%  of  IDPs  are  accommodated  in
             private settings with the vast  majority  living  with  family
             members;


             (ii) If P cannot live with a family member,  apartments  in  a
             modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent  at
             a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;


             (iii)    P could resort to a 'critical  shelter  arrangement',
             living in an  unfinished  or  abandoned  structure,  makeshift
             shelter, tent, mosque, church or  squatting  in  a  government
             building. It would be unduly harsh to require P to relocate to
             the IKR if P will live in a critical housing  shelter  without
             access to basic necessities such  as  food,  clean  water  and
             clothing;


             (iv) In considering whether P would be able  to  access  basic
             necessities, account must be taken of  the  fact  that  failed
             asylum seekers are entitled to apply for  a  grant  under  the
             Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could give P access to  �1500.
             Consideration should also be given to  whether  P  can  obtain
             financial support from other sources such as  (a)  employment,
             (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the availability of
             ad hoc charity or by being able to access PDS rations.


         25.  Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a
         case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


             (i)  Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to secure
             legitimate employment;


             (ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR is
             70%;


             (iii)    P cannot work without a CSID;


             (iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be  important  factors
             in securing employment. A returnee with family connections  to
             the region will have a significant advantage in that he  would
             ordinarily be  able  to  call  upon  those  contacts  to  make
             introductions to prospective employers and to vouch for him;


             (v)  Skills, education and experience. Unskilled  workers  are
             at  the  greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in   the
             construction industry reducing the number  of  labouring  jobs
             available;


             (vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with ISIL,
             that may deter prospective employers.


51. As a starting point, it is notable,  as  Mr  Caskie  sets  out  in  his
    skeleton argument, that the statistics  set  out  in  the  Humanitarian
    Assistance reports show a significant increase in the population of the
    IKR over a period of two years.  I accept that is  so,  and  that  this
    must be due in the main to a mass influx of  IDPs,  even  allowing  for
    possible problems as to the accuracy of data produced in the conditions
    prevalent in Iraq.   At [6.3.1] of the County Policy Information  Note:
    security and humanitarian policy,  November  2018  it  is  stated  that
    "Needs  are  also  concentrated  in  Dahuk,  Erbil   and   Sulaymaniyah
    governorates in Iraq's Kurdistan Region, which  together  host  30  per
    cent of all displaced people in Iraq and 226,000 refugees from Syria.".

52. It is evident from the November 2018 report that significant numbers of
    IDPs live in the most vulnerable  conditions  and  face  an  employment
    market with very high levels  of  unemployment.    At  [6.11.5]  it  is
    stated that:

         'The 2018 OCHR Humanitarian Response Plan explained  the  situation
         in the KRI: 'Pressures on local services, including schools,  water
         and sanitation,  solid  waste  management,  health  facilities  and
         competition for jobs have increased each year,  contributing  to  a
         sharp decline in living standards across  the  three  governorates.
         Conditions worsened in the aftermath of the Kurdish  referendum  in
         late September [2017] when international flights to the airports in
         Erbil and Sulaymaniyah were suspended, impacting economic  activity
         and commerce. In mid-October [2017], as security  forces  realigned
         in Kirkuk and a number of disputed  districts,  more  than  180,000
         people fled their homes, the majority seeking safety and support in
         Erbil and Sulaymaniyah.'

53. It is perhaps inevitable that the  pressure  put  on  ethnic  Kurds  in
    Kirkuk led to them fleeing to the IKR.

54. Dr Fatah's report at section 7.3 indicates that this would be difficult
    due to the appellant having identity documents showing him to  be  from
    Mosul, and as he does not speak Sorani Kurdish.  It  is  also  observed
    that Kurds from the Bahdini area, such as the appellant, "usually  have
    a tough time integrating into Sorani regions.  Dr Fatah  also  observes
    that the appellant would be removed  from  his  kinship  network  which
    would make it difficult for  him  to  access  employment,  housing  and
    social acceptance [207].

55. Returning then to the guidance, given that the appellant has a CSID,  I
    am not satisfied the he would not be able to fly to the IKR or that  he
    would not be permitted to enter.  Nor am I satisfied, given his  recent
    removal from the United Kingdom that he is at risk from  the  screening
    process. That said, he is from Mosul, he is a  Sunni  and  of  fighting
    age, but I am not satisfied that would put him at risk.

56. I am satisfied that the appellant does not have family in the IKR,  and
    thus it is necessary to  focus  on  paragraph  [24]  and  [25]  of  the
    guidance.  The appellant is a single man, has  a  CSID,  and  has  some
    skills. He also speaks Arabic, but against that  he  has  not  ties  or
    connections to the IKR which,  as  Dr  Fatah  states,  will  make  life
    difficult for him. He also, as his documents show, comes from  an  area
    recently a centre of ISIL/ISIS activity. He will  also,  I  accept,  be
    returning with a package of aid.

57. In the light of this, and all the evidence considered in the  round,  I
    consider it is unlikely that the applicant will be able to live  in  an
    IDP or other camp. He will be  reduced,  absent  a  family  member,  to
    staying in a rented flat which is not a durable prospect, as this would
    rapidly exhaust his funds, given that, for the reasons set out below, I
    consider he could not obtain employment. He is  likely,  therefore,  to
    fall into the category of  persons  described  at  [24  (iii)].  As  to
    employment,  although  he  has  a  CSID,  he  has  none  of  the  other
    connections that would assist him; and, as  noted  at  [56]  above,  he
    faces the difficulty of originating from an ISIL/ISIS hotbed.

58. Accordingly, for these reasons, I consider  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect the appellant to relocate either to Baghdad or the IKR.
     It therefor follows, in the light of the finding that he is at risk in
    his home area such that it would be contrary to article 15(c) , I  find
    that he is entitled to humanitarian protection and I allow  the  appeal
    on that basis.


Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

59. I remake the decision by allowing it on humanitarian protection
    grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 25 June 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

