

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/03289/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 July 2019                           |On 8 August 2019                  |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     AM
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Imamovic    (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills       (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal ("the tribunal") which it sent to the parties on 3 May  2018;
whereupon it dismissed his appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision
of 20 February 2018 refusing to grant him international protection.

2.    The background circumstances are not complicated. The claimant  is  an
adult national of Sudan and a non-Arab Darfuri. He  left  Sudan  on  a  date
which has not been clearly established and went to Italy  where  he  claimed
asylum. It was granted to him in 2011. That was for a five year period  with
provision for renewal. But the claimant did not remain in Italy. Instead  he
travelled to the United Kingdom (UK), entering unlawfully  in  August  2012,
and on 15 October 2012 he asked the  UK  authorities  to  grant  him  asylum
notwithstanding the grant made in Italy. His application was  refused  on  1
February 2015.  Further  representations  followed  and  those  led  to  the
Secretary of State's decision of 20 February  2018.  The  tribunal  held  an
oral hearing of the claimant's appeal against  that  decision  at  which  he
gave evidence and at which each party was represented.  At  the  appeal  the
claimant argued that he would be at risk of persecution in his home area  in
Sudan; that he could not safely relocate to Khartoum (relying  upon  Country
Guidance decisions of the Upper Tribunal to  that  effect)  and  that  since
there was no evidence his asylum status had been renewed and since  refugees
are treated very badly in Italy anyway (see paragraph 16 of  the  tribunal's
written reasons) he could not return there.

3.    The tribunal accepted the claimant would face persecution were  he  to
be returned to his home area in Sudan. As to internal  flight  to  Khartoum,
it noted that in AA (Non-Arab Darfuris-relocation)  Sudan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC) it  had  been  decided
that it was not safe  for  non-Arab  Darfuris  to  relocate  there.  But  it
accepted  the  Secretary  of  State's   representative's   submission   that
conditions had changed in Khartoum such that the claimant could safely  live
there  now  and  that  the  conditions  justifying  departure  from  Country
Guidance decisions existed. As to that, the tribunal  relied  upon  evidence
contained in  the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  Sudan:  Non-Arab
Darfuris of August 2017 (the CPIN). As to Italy, it said he had admitted  he
had been granted asylum in Italy (paragraph  20  of  the  written  reasons),
that he had come to the UK as a matter of choice, that he had not  evidenced
his assertion that the authorities in Italy are "overwhelmed and  unable  to
cope with immigrants", and that he had  not  shown  he  would  face  "severe
circumstances" in Italy or that he would not be  able  to  have  his  status
renewed (paragraph 22). His appeal was dismissed  because  he  could  go  to
Sudan (and live in Khartoum) or Italy.

4.        An application for permission to the Upper Tribunal followed.  The
grounds were submitted on the claimant's behalf by his Solicitors  and  have
clearly been professionally drafted.  The grounds  attacked  the  tribunal's
reasoning as to departure from Country Guidance and, in a  nutshell,  argued
it departed from it without giving adequate reasons. But  the  grounds  were
sent later than the permitted time and, on 4  July  2018,  a  Judge  of  the
First-tier Tribunal refused to extend time.  The same  Judge  also  made  it
clear that if he had extended time  he  would  have  refused  permission  to
appeal. The application was then  renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  On  15
October 2018 a Judge of the Upper Tribunal granted permission, observing  it
was  arguable  that  the  tribunal  had  failed  to  adequately  reason  its
departure from Country Guidance. Nothing was said about  lateness.  Nor  was
anything said about the fact that the grounds did not seek to challenge  the
tribunal's reasoning as to  the  claimant's  ability  to  return  to  Italy.
Permission having been granted the case  was  listed  for  an  oral  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me). Representation was  as  stated  above
and I am grateful to each representative.

5.     Mr Mills argued that  I  could  not  simply  assume  that  the  Upper
Tribunal Judge had decided to extend time. He said I should deal  with  that
matter myself and that I should refuse to extend time. Indeed,  he  went  so
far as to argue that if time was to be extended  in  this  case  that  would
equate  to  an  acceptance  that  time  should   always   be   extended   in
circumstances where permission had been sought late  in  immigration  cases.
At least that is my understanding of his position. If I were to extend  time
he argued that I  should  not  regard  the  correctness  of  the  tribunal's
approach as to the Italian aspect of the case to be before  me.  The  matter
was not raised in the grounds. If I were to treat it as being before  me  or
if I were to amend the grounds to encompass  argument  about  it,  I  should
conclude there was no legal error with respect to it. As to  departure  from
Country Guidance, the tribunal had taken a course of action which  had  been
lawfully open to it. Ms Imamovic argued that I should extend  time.  On  the
assumption  that  I  was  persuaded  as  to  that,  I  should  consider  the
lawfulness of the tribunal's reasoning concerning Italy  even  though  there
has been no challenge to  it  in  the  grounds.  As  I  understand  it,  her
position as to that was that it had  been  unnecessary  to  put  a  specific
challenge as to that in the grounds  because  it  was  a  "Robinson  obvious
point". Further, the error the tribunal had made here was  not  to  bear  in
mind that there was no evidence before it to  show  that  the  claimant  did
still have refugee status in Italy. As to the points which had been made  in
the grounds, the tribunal's  consideration  as  to  departure  from  Country
Guidance had been superficial and had relied only  upon  the  CPIN.  Anyway,
its consideration as to relocation to Khartoum  had  not  been  sufficiently
holistic because only the safety of living there had been considered but  it
had also been necessary to consider whether internal flight there  might  be
unduly harsh in all the circumstances.

6.         The claimant's explanation for the lateness  of  his  application
for permission to appeal which had been sent to the First-tier Tribunal  was
that he  had  not  received  from  the  tribunal  a  copy  of  its  decision
dismissing his appeal to it. Nor had he  received  a  letter  from  his  own
Solicitors notifying the result. He had, he asserted,  only  discovered  his
appeal had been dismissed on  22  June  2018  notwithstanding  the  tribunal
having sent the decision to him on 3 May 2018.

7.         The Upper Tribunal, in the event of  an  application  not  having
been admitted by the First-tier Tribunal due to lateness, has the  power  to
admit the application itself if it thinks it is in the interests of  justice
to do so but otherwise must not admit it (see rule 21(7)(b) of the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  The  period  of  delay  was  not
insignificant and was, in my view, at least on the borders of what might  be
characterised as serious delay. But in the context of  a  person  living  at
shared accommodation (which I am told he then was) there is scope  for  post
to go astray and I  did  not  find  the  suggestion  that  that  might  have
happened to be  implausible.  The  subject  matter  of  the  appeal  was  of
considerable importance to the claimant. The  Secretary  of  State  did  not
seem to me to be prejudiced if I were to  extend  time.  Mr  Mills  asserted
that prejudice, in this context, meant more than being inhibited in  putting
a case forward but did  not  elaborate.  Putting  all  of  that  together  I
decided to extend time so as to admit the application. It  had  been  agreed
by the representatives, that if that was the outcome  on  the  extension  of
time then the actual grant of permission would  stand  and  I  proceeded  on
that basis.

8.    The next issue was what in the grounds was before me.  The  claimant's
primary argument was that I  should  treat  the  grounds  as  containing  an
attack upon the tribunal's consideration of  the  Italy  issue  even  though
they did not actually do so. But I do not accept Ms Imamovic's reasoning  as
to the "Robinson obvious" point. First of all, it  seems  to  me  that  this
applies where there is a clear and obvious defect in a  decision  which  has
not been picked up on in the grounds. That is not the position  here.  I  do
not detect an obvious flaw in the tribunal's relevant reasoning  as  to  the
issue. Rather Ms Imamovic seems to  be  inviting  me  to  treat  a  relevant
challenge as being before me because it is obvious  that  such  a  challenge
ought to have been made. That is not the same thing at all.

9.         As  to  whether  I  should  amend  the  grounds  to  encompass  a
challenge to the Italy aspect, the grounds had originally been  prepared  on
26 June 2018. There had been ample time to amend them subsequently.  What  I
was effectively being invited to do was to amend them at the  last  possible
moment. I do not consider it appropriate to do that against a background  of
a failure to amend earlier and a lack of an explanation as to why there  was
no such challenge in the grounds.

10.       Anyway, had I amended the  grounds  I  would  not  have  concluded
there was error of law with respect to the way in which the  tribunal  dealt
with the Italy issue. The tribunal knew that the original five  year  period
of the grant would have expired by the time it heard the appeal. It did  not
overlook that or forget about it. It was for the claimant to  make  out  his
case. He had had a grant of asylum having been recognised as  a  refugee  in
Italy and if it was the case that such status had been irrevocably  lost  it
was for him to show that to be so. He had not sought to do that. So, it  was
open to the tribunal on the material before  it  to  say  that  it  had  "no
evidence" to suggest the grant "would  not  be  renewed  on  his  return  to
Italy" (see paragraph 22 of the written reasons). It was similarly  entitled
to conclude it had not been satisfactorily  evidenced  before  it  that  the
claimant would face "severe circumstances" were he to go back to Italy.

11.        I would, therefore, conclude that there was no  challenge  as  to
the Italy issue before me; that even if there was it would not succeed;  and
that, therefore, even if the tribunal had otherwise erred,  any  such  error
could not be material.

12.        Although it is now immaterial, I would make it clear  that  I  do
think the tribunal erred with  respect  to  its  consideration  of  internal
flight to Khartoum. To lawfully  depart  it  was,  in  effect,  required  to
conclude that there were very strong grounds for departure based  on  cogent
evidence.  That  is  a  high  threshold.  There  is  evidence  in  the  CPIN
suggesting a change in conditions in Khartoum and I understand a  new  Upper
Tribunal Country Guidance case on that point is likely to  be  issued  soon.
But the tribunals reasoning here was inadequate to show the  high  threshold
had been reached.

13.         For the  above  reasons  the  claimant's  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal is dismissed.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The claimant was granted anonymity by the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  continue
that grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008. So, no report of these proceedings shall name  the  claimant  or
any member of  his  family.  The  grant  applies  to  both  parties  to  the
proceedings. Failure to comply may lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                      Date: 30 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



