
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03014/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16 February 2018                        |On 01 March 2018               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    [C U]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:               Ms V. Eastey, of counsel, instructed by
Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:                    Ms. Z. Ahmad, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who was born on [ ] 1991, is a national of Nigeria.  She
    entered the United Kingdom, as a student, on 13 August 2010.  Leave  to
    remain  was  subsequently  granted  until  29  July  2013.   She   made
    applications for leave to remain on family and  private  life  grounds,
    which were refused on 7 January 2013 and 28 October 2014.

2.   Removal directions were set for  10  October  2015  and  the  Appellant
    applied for asylum on that same day. Her application was refused  on  9
    November 2015 and  she  appealed  against  this  decision.  Her  appeal
    hearing was adjourned for a range of reasons on five  occasions  before
    coming before First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi on 17 November  2017.  She
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 29 November 2017.

3.   The Appellant appealed against this decision and permission  to  appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer  on  4  January  2018.
    The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Response on 24 January 2018

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Both Counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   In her initial asylum interview the  Appellant  said  that  she  feared
    that, if she returned to Nigeria, her father would  beat  her.  In  her
    substantive interview she explained that he would hit her on  the  head
    or beat her with a cane. Furthermore, when she was  medically  examined
    by Dr. Ward whilst in detention, she told her that some of the scars on
    her body were from these beatings. It is also part of  the  Appellant's
    case that she is at risk of FGM, if removed to Nigeria.

6.   In a  letter,  dated  15  September  2016,  the  Appellant's  solicitor
    alerted the Tribunal to the need to hear the appeal "in  chambers"  and
    to the fact that the  Appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness.   In  her
    decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge also referred to a statement by
    the  Appellant's  solicitor  which  explained  that   the   Appellant's
    statement had taken a very long time to prepare because she  was  often
    very anxious and cancelled appointments and that when she did attend an
    appointment she was very agitated and fiddled with things on the desk.

7.   In addition, in paragraph 55 of her report, Eileen  Walsh,  a  clinical
    psychologist, concluded that the Appellant was suffering from  a  major
    depressive disorder.  At paragraph 84 she also noted that the Appellant
    may need prompting and encouragement in  order  to  give  evidence  and
    added that "if giving evidence in court, she may present as emotionally
    number or cut off and have difficulties with concentrating She may also
    present with emotional distress related to some aspects of her history,
    as she did in this assessment. All of these factors  ...impact  on  her
    ability to give evidence in court"

8.   In the fourth ground of appeal, it was submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed  to  apply  the  Presidential  Guidance  Note  on
    Vulnerable Witnesses or apply AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123. There is no  indication  from
    the decision  that  the  Judge  applied  the  recommended  approach  in
    relation to vulnerable witnesses. It was not sufficient to say  in  the
    penultimate  paragraph  of  her  decision  that  "the  appellant  is  a
    vulnerable witness, I accept that she is anxious and I  therefore  make
    an anonymity order".

9.   She should have considered whether the  Appellant's  mental  state  may
    have had an adverse impact on her ability to give cogent evidence about
    her risk of persecution by her father. Instead in paragraph 25  of  her
    decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi found that "the appellant  did
    not give me a credible explanation as to why  she  had  befriended  her
    father on Facebook or how he had obtained details of where she was. The
    only explanation she could give was that her father kept asking her  to
    add him to her Facebook account; again if she were  running  away  from
    abuse, she is not likely to have responded to the requests from him".

10.  Neither did she remind herself that Dr. Walsh had said  in  her  report
    that the Appellant "reports a problem that is not unusual in  survivors
    of abuse, where she experiences fear in relation  to  her  father,  but
    also a sense of emotional attachment to him".

11.  Instead, the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  a  non-specific  reference
    to "some research that suggests that victims can have an emotional bond
    with their abusers to the point that they go back to the abuser -  such
    as in the cases of domestic violence or  victims  of  childhood  sexual
    abuse, the appellant does not have the other characteristics of someone
    who fits into that model. She never had a close relationship  with  her
    father, she was never "groomed" by him and she  appears  to  be  saying
    that she was trying to get as far away from him as she could".    There
    was no reference to the nature or provenance of this research. I do not
    agree with the Home Office Presenting Officer that this was a reference
    to Dr. Walsh's report.

12.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi  also  failed  to  apply  Karanakaran  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2000]  EWCA  Civ  11  and
    consider all of the evidence in  the  round,  apportioning  appropriate
    weight to each part of the evidence, before coming to a final  decision
    as to credibility.  One  example  of  this  was  her  approach  to  the
    opinions of the expert report by Adaobhi Nkeokelonye in paragraph 23 of
    her decision.

13.  Another was her failure to consider the impact of Dr. Walsh's  evidence
    in relation to the Appellant's ability to live independently if removed
    to Nigeria.  Instead, in  paragraph  29  of  her  decision,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Obhi relied on the fact the Nigeria is a  large  country
    and concluded that the Appellant could simply relocate away from Lagos.
    She did not properly consider the Appellant's particular  circumstances
    and characteristics.

14.  The Home Office Presenting Officer relied  on  paragraph  36  of  South
    Bucks District Council and another v Porter  [2004]  UKHL  33  for  the
    proposition that "the reasons need refer only to  the  main  issues  in
    dispute, not to every  material  consideration".  However,  the  expert
    evidence which was not addressed or not addressed adequately and did go
    to the  main  issues  in  dispute,  which  were  the  Appellant's  true
    relationship with her father and the  risk  he  may  pose  for  her  in
    Nigeria.

15.  Furthermore, the fact that the Appellant's need for  medical  treatment
    did not meet the high  threshold  established  in  the  cases  of  N  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department No. 26565/05and D  v  United
    Kingdom Application No. 30240/96 does not undermine the  importance  of
    expert psychological evidence in her asylum claim and,  in  particular,
    in relation to the issue of internal flight.

16.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi  did  make
    errors of law in her decision.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Obhi.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 16 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


