
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03508/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 22 January 2019             |On 13 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                    [C Z]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimmons of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast born on 10  August  1999.
    He appeals against a decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hamilton sitting at Hatton Cross on 18 May  2018  in  which  the  Judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Respondent
    dated 23 March 2017.  That  decision  was  to  refuse  the  Appellant's
    application for international and human rights protection.

 2. On 22 June 2016 the Appellant's mother and the Appellant  were  granted
    visas to visit United Kingdom. They arrived here on 13 July 2016. On 28
    September 2016 the Appellant claimed asylum and  he  was  substantively
    interviewed about that claim on 13 March 2018.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The Appellant's claim was  summarised  by  the  Judge  at  [5]  of  the
    determination:

         "The Appellant claimed that if he returned to the  Ivory  Coast  he
         would be at risk of persecution and serious  harm  because  he  had
         refused  to  join  a  criminal  gang  called  the  "Microbes"  that
         recruited children and use them to carry out criminal  acts.  As  a
         result of this refusal the Appellant had been beaten and threatened
         by gang members and would  be  harmed  or  killed  by  them  if  he
         returned to the Ivory Coast. In  October  and  November  2016  gang
         members had come to the family home looking for him. This had  been
         reported to the police. He had developed mental health difficulties
         caused by his experiences and his fear of returning  to  the  Ivory
         Coast."

 4. The Appellant relied on an expert  report  from  Professor  Aguilar  on
    country  conditions   in   Ivory   Coast.   He   also   relied   on   a
    psychotherapist's report,  from  Mr  Sobel,  which  had  concluded  the
    Appellant was suffering  from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder,  major
    depressive disorder and generalised anxiety disorder.

 5. The Respondent refused the claim partly because  the  Appellant's  fear
    was said to be of non-state actors but also because the Respondent  did
    not accept the credibility of the claim pointing to the length of  time
    between the claim for asylum and arrival in the United Kingdom. Even if
    the Appellant were at risk in the Ivory Coast adequate  protection  was
    available. The background evidence showed  police  were  taking  action
    against gang members. On the Appellant's own account after gang members
    came to the family home in October and November 2016  the  police  were
    willing to assist the Appellant's family and investigate their concerns
    about the gang. Alternatively, the Appellant could relocate to  another
    part of the  country  as  there  was  no  evidence  the  gang  had  any
    significant influence  outside  the  capital,  Abidjan.  There  was  no
    evidence of continuing interest in the Appellant.  He  was  not  taking
    medication, but any treatment needed would be available  in  the  Ivory
    Coast.

The Decision at First Instance

 6. At [35] the Judge found that the Microbes gang were likely  to  have  a
    continuing adverse interest in the Appellant and would wish to  do  him
    harm if they could but the  long  gaps  between  the  times  they  came
    looking for  him  strongly  suggested  that  finding  and  harming  the
    Appellant was not a priority  for  them.  They  were  not  particularly
    motivated to find him. Professor Aguilar appeared  to  have  a  limited
    direct experience of the Ivory Coast. Some of the  background  evidence
    indicated that steps  were  being  taken  to  address  the  problem  of
    criminal gangs of street children who were being targeted  with  social
    programs. Nevertheless, the overall impression  was  of  an  inadequate
    service that was unable to provide anything approaching a consistent or
    effective level of response to the sort of street crime engaged  in  by
    the Microbes. The gangs were disparate groups  of  dispossessed  street
    children and young adults, they were not part of an organised  criminal
    network and the Microbes did not have a  significant  presence  outside
    the capital.

 7. At [51] the Judge found that if the Appellant were  to  return  to  the
    capital there would be a real risk that he might come to the  attention
    of those who wished to do  him  harm.  The  Appellant's  diagnosis  was
    consistent with his account of having been attacked by gang members and
    being frightened that they would  attack  him  again  (see  [58]).  The
    Appellant would have adequate emotional practical and financial support
    on return to the Ivory Coast. This would be  available  from  both  his
    family there and family members living abroad. The family were  capable
    of  arranging  the  Appellant's  relocation.  They  were  educated  and
    belonged to a high  socio-economic  class.  The  Appellant  was  young,
    intelligent and adaptable and would be able to reintegrate into life in
    the Ivory Coast by working or pursuing his studies.

 8. Even if the only route of return were via Abidjan the Appellant had not
    shown his family would be unable to arrange for him to  stay  somewhere
    safe there on a temporary basis before  he  relocated.  The  background
    evidence did not bear out the claim that it was dangerous for people to
    travel within the Ivory Coast. It was likely the Appellant's  uncertain
    immigration status had caused him to suffer from depression.  He  would
    rather not return to the Ivory  Coast  and  the  thought  of  returning
    causes stress and anxiety. However, he would  have  substantial  family
    support were he to return and any medical issues he might have were not
    sufficiently serious to engage either Article 2 or 3 of the ECHR.

 9. The Appellant and his sister had not been  honest  about  their  family
    circumstances in the Ivory Coast or the level of support available from
    family members. The Appellant had not established either  an  emotional
    or financial dependency on his  sister  that  went  beyond  the  normal
    relationship that could be expected  to  exist  between  a  child/young
    adult and an adult sibling. If the Appellant returned to  Ivory  Coast,
    he would be living in a country where he enjoyed the full rights  of  a
    citizen and where he had lived for most of his life. He could speak the
    national language and was familiar with its traditions and culture.  He
    would have to relocate to another part of the country and  whilst  this
    would still be difficult for him the support  he  would  receive  would
    mitigate those difficulties.

10. It was likely to be in his best  interests  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom but it did not follow that because it was in his best interests
    it would be disproportionate to require him  to  return  to  the  Ivory
    Coast. He would be able to maintain contact with friends and family  in
    the United Kingdom by modern means of  communication  and  visits.  The
    Judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

11. The Appellant appealed against this  decision  in  grounds  settled  by
    counsel who appeared at first instance and who appeared before me. They
    made five main points. The first was that the Judge's approach  to  the
    psychotherapist's report was erroneous in law. The psychotherapist  had
    seen the Appellant's  educational  documents.  He  had  regard  to  the
    Appellant's performance in school and took that into account in forming
    the view that the Appellant was not  malingering  or  embellishing  his
    symptoms. The psychotherapist's view was entirely consistent  with  the
    NHS evidence as to the extent of the Appellant's vulnerability. The NHS
    therapist had confirmed a PTSD diagnosis of severe.

12. The 2nd ground argued that the Judge had failed have regard to the lack
    of mental healthcare facilities in the Ivory Coast. The psychotherapist
    had included an  extract  from  the  World  Health  Organisation  (WHO)
    "Mental health atlas country profile 2014" which stated that there were
    no mental health outpatient facilities in Ivory Coast and only 2 mental
    health hospitals.

13. The 3rd ground argued the Judge  had  misdirected  himself  as  to  the
    standard of proof concerning the risk on the  route  of  return.  There
    were numerous checkpoints both regular and irregular at which robberies
    and bribery of travellers took place. There  was  no  requirement  that
    risks be systemic all that was required was a real risk. The fact  that
    the majority of attacks took place at  night  did  not  mean  that  the
    Appellant would necessarily be safe travelling during the day.

14. The 4th ground argued there was no proper basis for the Judge to  doubt
    the credibility of the Appellant and his sister as regards their family
    circumstances and his general credibility should have been  taken  into
    account. There was no attempt by the Appellant to distance himself from
    his uncle in the United Kingdom.

15. The 5th ground argued that the Judge had failed to undertake a holistic
    assessment of relocation focusing on the socio-economic status  of  the
    Appellant's family but not having full regard to the reasonableness  of
    the Appellant has an 18-year-old with a mental health  diagnosis  being
    forced to relocate without his family unit elsewhere  in  Ivory  Coast.
    The 6th ground argued that the Appellant's relationship with his sister
    constituted family life. The Article 8 claim should have been  assessed
    in the light of jurisprudence  for  durable  solutions  for  unattended
    children and care leavers.

16. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Boyes  on  17  September  2018.  In
    refusing permission to appeal he wrote that none of  the  grounds  were
    arguable as errors  of  law.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion he did about the medicolegal report,  he  did  not  have  to
    accept something as fact simply  because  an  expert  said  it  was  so
    particularly where there was other evidence which the Judge found  more
    reliable or which undermined the expert's conclusions. The  2nd  ground
    was unmeritorious. It was  not  going  to  succeed  at  first  instance
    because there was some provision for  mental  health  services  in  the
    Ivory Coast. They did not have to match  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    Judge had found they were sufficient. Grounds 3 and 4 were not arguable
    and ground 5 (failure to undertake a holistic assessment of relocation)
    did not begin to get off the ground. It was an attempt  at  a  catchall
    but was without merit.

17. The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on grounds substantially the same as those to the First-
    tier. The renewed application came before Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Alis on 9 December 2018. Granting permission to appeal he wrote:

         "At paragraph [55]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  preferred  other
         evidence to that of the expert, but the Judge did not  address  the
         fact that the expert report considered the other evidence but still
         concluded he suffered from severe PTSD, depression and anxiety.  It
         [is] arguable grounds one and two identify an  error  in  law.  The
         medical evidence is relevant to the issue of whether  it  would  be
         unduly harsh to require the Appellant to relocate. All grounds  are
         arguable albeit some have less merit than others".

    There was no rule 25 response from the Respondent.

The Hearing Before Me

18. As a consequence of the grant of permission the appeal came  before  me
    to determine in the first place whether there was a material  error  of
    law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  If  there  was  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal would be set aside  and  directions
    given for the rehearing of the  appeal.  If  there  was  not  then  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal would stand.

19. For the Appellant counsel argued  there  was  no  evidential  basis  to
    criticise the experts. Mr Sobel had sight of  school  certificates  and
    had met the Appellant. If the Judge was going  to  depart  from  expert
    evidence, there had to be sustainable reasons. This  determination  did
    not cross that threshold.  The  concern  that  the  Appellant's  mental
    health would suffer in the event of removal had  not  been  taken  into
    account. The Judge had not referred at all to the  annex  to  Professor
    Aguilar's report about mental health facilities  or  lack  of  them  in
    Ivory Coast. The Judge appeared to have found there was no family  life
    with the sister because that was not possible. The Appellant entered as
    a child and was found to be a genuine asylum seeker but for  the  issue
    of internal relocation.

20. In response the Presenting Officer submitted that there was no material
    error of law in the decision.  The  Respondent  had  not  accepted  the
    Appellant was suffering from PTSD because of the lack  of  evidence  in
    support. The refusal letter made clear there were facilities  available
    for any treatment the Appellant  might  need.  The  grounds  of  onward
    appeal were a mere disagreement with the  conclusions  reached  by  the
    Judge. The Judge had looked at the background evidence. The  attachment
    to the Professor's report showed that there were  facilities  available
    if the Appellant needed help. Professor Aguilar was not  an  expert  on
    the Ivory Coast which limited the weight that could  be  given  to  his
    report. The Appellant's family life with his  sister  was  one  between
    adults with no more than normal  emotional  ties.  The  Judge  had  not
    ignored the medical evidence but had reached appropriate conclusions.

21. In conclusion, counsel acknowledged it was open for a Judge to  take  a
    different view of the medical evidence but the difficulty in this  case
    was shown by [54] to [56] in which the Judge had said that the expert's
    conclusion was significantly inconsistent with the positive  report  on
    the Appellant from East Surrey College. The Judge had added that if the
    Appellant believed himself to be safe his mental health issues did  not
    interfere significantly with his day-to-day functioning. It was  argued
    on the Appellant's behalf that the expert, Mr Sobel had factored in  to
    his report the Appellant's relative success at college.  The  Appellant
    was genuinely presenting his symptoms and not embellishing his account.
    The Judge had  not  dealt  with  that.  The  evidence  of  health  care
    available in Ivory Coast came from WHO.

Findings

22. The Judge made two core findings in this case. The first was  that  the
    Appellant had come to the adverse attention of the  Microbes  gang  and
    there was a risk that he would do so  if  he  settled  in  the  capital
    Abidjan. However, the Appellant  would  be  safe  if  he  relocated  to
    another part of the country which he could do with the support  of  his
    family. The second  core  finding  was  that  the  Judge  accepted  the
    Appellant had depression but noted that the Appellant was doing well at
    college and concluded from that that provided the Appellant  considered
    himself to be in a safe environment his mental health  issues  did  not
    interfere significantly with his day-to-day functioning.

23. The Judge's conclusions have been attacked by the Appellant on a number
    of bases. Firstly, that the Judge has failed to adequately address  the
    difficulties which the Appellant would have in  relocating  to  another
    part of Ivory Coast. It was an important part of the Judge's  reasoning
    that there was ample family support available to help the Appellant  to
    relocate  including  travelling  through  the  capital.  There  was   a
    significant reason for this conclusion of  available  support  and  the
    Judge's adverse credibility finding  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    claims of a lack  of  family  support.  It  was  to  be  found  in  the
    application that had been made by  the  Appellant's  mother  for  entry
    clearance as a visitor in 2016.

24. The Judge dealt with this at [66]. The evidence that  the  family  were
    now poor was, as the Judge put it,  "significantly  inconsistent"  with
    the information provided when the Appellant's mother applied to come to
    the United  Kingdom.  She  had  a  trading  business  and  income  from
    properties and property investments. Her brother-in-law was  the  chief
    economist at the International Coffee Organisation who sponsored her to
    come to the United Kingdom. The Judge was concerned that the  Appellant
    and his sister were downplaying their connection with  this  uncle  who
    was clearly an influential and prosperous figure who could be  expected
    to support the Appellant.

25. I find it significant that these points have not been addressed in  the
    grounds of  onward  appeal  and  instead  there  is  a  rather  general
    disagreement with the Judge's conclusions. A mere disagreement does not
    amount to a material error of  law.  The  Judge  was  concerned  to  be
    scrupulously fair in  this  appeal  and  he  accepted  the  Appellant's
    account of being afraid of the Microbes gang because it  had  not  been
    challenged by the Respondent. Having said that,  the  Judge  was  fully
    entitled to consider  the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant  could
    relocate and what the practical difficulties would be that  would  have
    to be overcome in doing so.

26. What the Judge meant by saying that  the  risk  of  a  hold  up  whilst
    travelling was not "systemic" was that it was not organised in  such  a
    way that it represented a real risk. A random risk of attack would  not
    be sufficiently likely to cross the threshold of the lower standard  to
    show real risk. There was nothing in the Appellant's profile that would
    mean he was likely to face such a risk while travelling since he  could
    rely on the support of family members as the Judge pointed  out.  I  do
    not read the determination as being that  the  Judge  was  applying  an
    incorrect standard of proof for an  asylum  appeal.  He  had  carefully
    directed himself on the appropriate standard of proof at [21]  to  [26]
    of the determination.

27. It was a matter for the  Judge  what  weight  he  placed  on  Professor
    Aguilar's report but he was bound to take into account  that  Professor
    Aguilar was knowledgeable about Africa in general but was not an expert
    on the Ivory Coast as such. This is perhaps  illustrated  by  the  fact
    that rather than addressing the issue of medical  facilities  in  Ivory
    Coast directly the Professor merely appended to his report a copy of an
    extract from a WHO summary of mental health facilities.  Although  such
    facilities (as Judge Boyes pointed out in refusing permission) are  not
    at the same level as in the United  Kingdom  they  do  exist  and  this
    ground far from undermining the determination in fact reinforces it.

28. It does not appear to be seriously challenged in the grounds  that  the
    Judge was correct to say that the reach of the Microbes  gang  did  not
    extend beyond the capital and that the Appellant  would  therefore  not
    come to their adverse attention were he to live outside the capital. At
    [46] the Judge found that Professor Aguilar had reached his conclusions
    by  speculation  and  extrapolation  was  little  more  than   educated
    guesswork. That criticism was open to the Judge on the evidence  before
    him.

29. The second part of the determination deals with the Appellant's medical
    issues, the effect they  would  have  on  the  Appellant's  ability  to
    relocate and the impact on his private life. The question  was  whether
    the Appellant could be expected to relocate within a country  of  which
    he was a citizen, in short whether it would be unduly harsh for him  to
    have to do so, following the decision in Januzi. This involved  a  two-
    stage consideration. The first was the impact on the Appellant and  his
    life in this country by requiring him to  leave.  The  second  was  the
    reasonableness of requiring him to return to Ivory Coast  and  relocate
    once he was there. The Judge pointed out at [53] that it would was more
    normal to have a medicolegal report prepared by a clinical psychologist
    or psychiatrist, but he also noted that the expertise of the author, Mr
    Sobel was not challenged.

30. The difficulty with Mr Sobel's evidence was that the impairment of  the
    Appellant's functioning was described by him as severe but at the  same
    time there were positive reports on  the  Appellant  from  East  Surrey
    College. Further, the various academic achievements  of  the  Appellant
    were evidenced by certificates he had obtained. The Appellant's  answer
    to this inconsistency is to say that the psychotherapist  had  factored
    into his report that the Appellant  was  doing  well  at  college.  The
    difficulty with this argument is the extract from the report quoted  by
    the Judge at [54]  where  the  Appellant  symptoms  were  described  as
    including  "severe  impairment  in  social,  occupational   or   school
    functioning". It was clear that the Appellant was not suffering  severe
    impairment in school functioning. Given the internal  inconsistency  in
    the psychotherapist's report the Judge was obliged to resolve the issue
    for himself and he did so by discounting the weight he attached to  the
    psychotherapist's report.

31. It was not a question of saying  the  Appellant  was  malingering.  The
    grounds appear to be making a complaint about the  determination  which
    said no such thing. In those circumstances it was open to the Judge  to
    reach the conclusion he did that the  Appellant  would  be  capable  of
    managing a return to Ivory Coast and with help from his family would be
    able to relocate safely to another part of the country.

32. I agree with the submission on the part  of  the  Respondent  that  the
    grounds  of  onward  appeal  in  effect  amount  to  no  more  than   a
    disagreement with the Judge's conclusions. It is also correct as  Judge
    Boyes pointed out that some of the grounds are weaker than others.  The
    argument as to Article 8 in particular falls into  this  category.  The
    Judge assessed the Appellant's best interests as he was obliged to  do,
    doing so separate from the issue of proportionality also in  accordance
    with the jurisprudence. However, the Judge could not  ignore  the  fact
    that the Appellant had not been truthful about his family circumstances
    in Ivory Coast and was  entitled  to  factor  that  into  account  when
    assessing risk on return and availability of support.

33. The Appellant had no right to live in the  United  Kingdom.  Whilst  he
    could not be blamed for the actions of his mother, he was now an adult,
    being 18 at the date of hearing. He had not established an emotional or
    financial  dependency  on  his  sister   which   went   beyond   normal
    relationship ties. That assessment was a matter for the  Judge  on  the
    basis of the evidence having heard both the Appellant  and  his  sister
    give evidence and noting the concerns he had about  their  evidence  of
    family relationships. The conclusion he drew was one to  which  he  was
    entitled and the objection to it contained in the  grounds  is  a  mere
    disagreement.

34. Upon return to Ivory Coast the Appellant would be able to  re-establish
    his family life with his parents which had been severed by  his  mother
    when she returned to Ivory Coast leaving the Appellant  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The private life which the Appellant  had  built  up  in  this
    country in education and with friends had been established as time when
    he had no right to be here and thus little weight could be attached  to
    that private life in the proportionality exercise. In conclusion  I  do
    not find there was any material error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    Judge and I dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 6 February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 6 February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

