
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03861/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2020                            |On 14 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     MJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L King, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Rushforth, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or
court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant.  This direction applies to both the
appellant and to the respondent and a failure to comply with this direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 9 September 1982.

The appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 September 1997 and
claimed asylum.  That claim was refused on 4 April 2001 and, having lodged
an appeal on 24 August 2001, the appeal was abandoned on 5 April 2002.

The appellant subsequently applied for indefinite leave to remain on 19
January 2006 but this was refused on 21 February 2006.  Thereafter, the
appellant left the UK on 10 June 2008 and returned to Iran.

On 16 November 2016, the appellant, albeit in a different name, claimed
asylum on return to the UK.  That basis of his claim was that he had
converted to Christianity and was at risk on return.

On 9 September 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellants' claims
for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the European Convention of
Human Rights.

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision sent on 1
October 2019, Judge G Wilson dismissed the appellant's appeal on all
grounds.  In particular, he rejected the appellant's claim based upon his
conversion to Christianity.  The judge rejected the appellant's account
that the Iranian authorities had raided his home and seized a computer
containing material, in particular blogs relating to his Christian
religion.  The judge did not accept the appellant's evidence, based upon a
court document, that he had been prosecuted in his absence by a court in
Iran and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment plus 120 lashes.

The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on a number
of grounds including that the judge had erred in law in his assessment of
the document relied upon by the appellant.

On 14 November 2019 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Froom) granted the
appellant permission to appeal.

At the hearing before me, Ms King, who represented the appellant, relied
upon the grounds and her skeleton argument.  During the course of her
submissions, in which she challenged the judge's reasons for rejecting the
reliability of the court document it became clear that the judge had made a
fundamental mistake in respect of that document.  Ms Rushforth, who
represented the Secretary of State, conceded that the error was a material
error of law which undermined the judge's adverse credibility finding and,
as a result, his decision could not stand.  She acknowledged that the
judge's decision should be set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

I agree.  In paras 29 - 31, the judge dealt with what he describes as a
"court document" relied upon by the appellant (see para 29).  In para 30,
he states that:

         "I accept that the arrest warrant is consistent with the objective
         evidence in that it does not refer to criminal charges for being an
         apostate but rather the charges in relation to national security."
         (my emphasis)

Then, in para 30 he states:

         "In addition, whilst the warrant is detailed setting out the
         charges against the Appellant, there is no mention of the blog or
         information held on the Appellant's computed (sic) which he
         intended to submit to the United Nations." (my emphasis)

The difficulty with this reasoning is that the document relied upon by the
appellant was not an arrest warrant.  The document is at page 45 of the
appellant's bundle and its translation is provided in a letter from the
appellant's representatives dated 20 May 2019.  It is not an arrest
warrant.  It provides a record of the appellant's conviction and sentence.

After careful consideration of all the documents in the respective files,
neither representative nor I were able to find any other document upon
which the appellant placed reliance.  The only document is the court
document which records the verdict in respect of the appellant's conviction
for an offence against national security.  There is no doubt that the judge
was referring to this document in para 30 of his determination when he
considered the reliability of his "arrest warrant".  As is clear from para
31, he took into account what he considered to be typographical errors in
the document which plainly refers to the words at the beginning of the
court document when reference is made to "evidences and documentations".

Despite, therefore, the judge's reference to the document being an "arrest
warrant" and at times referring to "court documents" in the plural, the
only legal document is this one.  In the light of that, the judge's
assessment of it is fundamentally flawed when he took into account the
objective evidence concerning its consistency with the background evidence.
 As an arrest warrant, there was supporting evidence for that in the CPIN,
Iran: Christians and Christian converts", March 2018, in particular at para
5.3.12.  But, in assessing that "the warrant" was unreliable because it did
not set out the detail of the appellant's charges, it is wholly unclear
upon what basis the judge took the view, in effect, that the absence of the
detail, as he saw it, was inconsistent with the document being reliable.
Certainly, as regards an arrest warrant, para 5.3.10 of the CPIN says that
an arrest warrant would contain, inter alia, "basic details".  Not setting
out the detail of his offence might be inconsistent with the background
evidence as to what would be contained in an arrest warrant.   But, even if
it were an arrest warrant, there might be difficulties in the judge's
reasoning, e.g. the reference to the appellant's offence being a crime
against national security which is consistent with the background evidence.
 But, as I have already said, it is not an arrest warrant and there is no
basis given in the judgment for reaching the conclusion that, as a court
document setting out the verdict of the court in Iran, it was implausibly
lacking in detail.

Ms Rushforth indicated that the issue of the reliability of the document
had only arisen at the hearing as the document had not previously been
provided to the Secretary of State.  As I have already indicated, she
accepted that the judge's confusion over the nature of the document was
such that he had materially erred in law in assessing its reliability.
That document was central to the appellant's account and that he was at
risk on return to Iran.  Ms Rushforth accepted that if the judge's
assessment of the document was flawed so was his overall adverse
credibility finding.

I agree with Ms Rushforth's concession that the judge's assessment of the
court document, confusingly treating it as an arrest warrant - which it was
not - fundamentally flawed his reasoning in respect of its reliability and
therefore its support of a central part of the appellant's account to
demonstrate that he would be at risk on return to Iran as a Christian
convert.  I am satisfied that the judge materially erred in law in reaching
his adverse credibility finding and his decision to dismiss the appeal
cannot, therefore, stand.

Decision

For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error of law.
That decision is set aside.

Both representatives agree that the proper disposal of the appeal is to
remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  I agree.  Having
regard to the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and to para 7.2
of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the appeal is remitted to the
First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge
G Wilson.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            13 February 2020


