
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/03993/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 July 2017                       |       On 02 August 2017             |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                  miss KMK
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hudson, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
     (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  (DRC)
    whose appeal was dismissed on all grounds by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    O'Garro in a decision promulgated  on  21st  April  2017.   Grounds  of
    application were lodged.  It was said that the  judge  had  adopted  an
    erroneous and ultimately  unsustainable  approach  to  the  documentary
    evidence, pointing to small errors in the documents produced  and  then
    giving no weight to the documents.  A second ground was that there were
    other documents including letters from the Appellant's cousin and  from
    Miss L, which the  judge  did  not  mention.   Furthermore,  there  was
    extensive medical evidence  provided  in  the  appeal  which  had  been
    ignored.  Finally, under ground 3, it was a non-sequitur for the  judge
    to say that because she did not find the Appellant a  credible  witness
    she did not accept her claim to be a homosexual.  Permission to  appeal
    was granted and a Rule  24  notice  lodged  stating  that  the  judge's
    findings in relation to the Appellant's sexuality were ones open to the
    judge and that the medical evidence did not  significantly  impact  the
    Tribunal Judge's findings that the Appellant was not credible.

 2. Before me Mr Hudson relied on his grounds.  The judge had been wrong to
    utterly discount the documentary  evidence  and  she  had  ignored  the
    medical evidence.  Given those  material  errors  the  case  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier - unfortunately for the second time.

 3. For the Home Office Ms Isherwood acknowledged that the  judge  had  not
    referred to the medical evidence but relied on what  was  said  in  the
    Rule 24 notice.

 4. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 5. When the judge refers to the fact that there was no  credible  evidence
    of her membership of the UDPS the judge bases this on an error  in  the
    document which gives her age as 18 years old.  Given  that  this  might
    have been a simple error it seems to me  the  judge  went  too  far  in
    giving no weight whatsoever to the letter from the Secretary-General of
    the UDPS.  As the grounds say, it was accompanied  by  documents  which
    shows how the letter was brought to the UK.  It was not  challenged  by
    the Home Office that the judge ignored  letters  from  the  Appellant's
    cousin and from Miss L, and of course the judge was bound  to  consider
    all the relevant evidence presented to her.

 6. Unhappily the difficulties in the decision go much further  than  that.
    As paragraph 16 of the grounds of application states the judge did  not
    take into account, at all,  of  the  medical  evidence.   That  medical
    evidence includes, according to the grounds, contemporaneous notes from
    the Appellant's GP in the UK which indicated that the Appellant suffers
    from a "deformity of scapula" which the Appellant said  was  caused  by
    her having been hit repeatedly by a heavy plastic stick  or  truncheon.
    It is  said  there  are  extensive  notes  concerning  the  Appellant's
    diagnosed PTSD and other psychological  symptoms  consistent  with  her
    having suffered torture while in the DRC.  As a result it is said  that
    the Appellant was referred to the Lewisham Primary  Care  Psychological
    Therapy Service and to Freedom from Torture.

 7. As I understand it, none of this is disputed by the Secretary of State.



 8. What we therefore have in this appeal  is  important  medical  evidence
    which goes to the core of the Appellant's claim that she was  seriously
    ill-treated in the DRC.  The judge simply  failed  to  deal  with  this
    evidence.  There is therefore an error in law which is a material  one.
    The decision will have to be set aside.

 9. For the sake of completeness and in respect of the  sexuality  findings
    the grounds also have some  merit  as  even  if  an  Appellant  is  not
    credible on a part of her claim it does not follow  automatically  that
    she is therefore lying about her sexual orientation. In fairness to the
    judge she went on to give further reasons why she did not  believe  the
    Appellant's account.

10. However in all the circumstances it has to be said that  the  Appellant
    has not had a fair hearing for the reasons stated.   Unfortunately,  it
    is clear that further fact-finding is necessary  and  the  matter  will
    have to be heard again by the First-tier Tribunal.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the procedural history of this case,
    it would be sensible if the next hearing  was  heard  by  a  Designated
    Judge if that is administratively manageable.

Notice of Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

13. I set aside the decision.

14. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. I shall maintain the anonymity order.






Signed    J Macdonald                            Date 1st August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald





