
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03891/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 October 2020                   |On 20 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    A A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Gherman, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpreter:  Mr S Akram, attended to interpret the Kurdish Sorani and
                    English languages
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I begin slightly usually by setting out in its entirety my Decision and
    Reasons for finding an error of law in this case. It has  already  been
    served on the parties but, strictly, it is part of this decision  as  I
    kept the case in the Upper Tribunal to be redetermined. It follows that
    the hearing before me on 16 October 2020 is is a continuation  of  that
    hearing but my explanation of the reasons for finding an error  of  law
    also explain what the case is  about.   The  anonymity  direction  made
    there still stands.

 2. When I found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law I said:

    1    Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of
    any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to  identify  the
    appellant. Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.
    I make this order because the appellant may  be  a  refugee.  When  the
    appeal is reheard the appellant will be expected to make clear if  [he]
    still maintains that he is a refugee or if  he  is  relying  solely  on
    human rights grounds because of difficulties on return.

    2    This is an appeal against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal of  the  appellant  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing him leave to remain on Refugee Convention and human
    rights grounds.

    3    The short point is that the appellant is identified a  citizen  of
    Iraq from Kirkuk.  He is of Kurdish ethnicity and follows the  religion
    known as Sunni Muslim.  He says he cannot be returned to  Iraq  because
    he cannot obtain the  necessary  identification  documents  that  would
    permit him to live there safely.

    4    As  I  read  the  decision,  although  this  can  be  reargued  if
    necessary, it is accepted that if in fact the appellant  cannot  obtain
    the necessary documentation then he cannot be returned.

    5    His case is simple.  He said he entered the United Kingdom without
    the necessary documents somewhere in 2003.  He claimed asylum  but  the
    application was refused as were further submissions leading  eventually
    to the decision of the Secretary of State complained  of  on  28  March
    2019.

    6    The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the  appellant  to  have  been
    dishonest and this illuminated his own findings.

    7    The appellant said that he could not  obtain  a  CSID  because  he
    tried in the United Kingdom and had not been assisted  by  his  Embassy
    and he had no contacts anywhere in the  country.   The  judge  did  not
    believe that he had no contacts anywhere  in  Iraq.   Neither  did  the
    judge believe that he had enquiries of  the  Red  Cross  who  had  been
    unable to trace his family and had not been in contact with  him  since
    his initial enquiry.

    8    I have considered carefully the  grounds  of  appeal.   The  first
    point taken is that the judge did not make any findings that  explained
    why the appellant's apparent attempts to obtain  a  document  from  the
    Iraqi Embassy in  London  were  not  indicative  of  somebody  who  was
    genuinely trying to  re-document  himself.   The  appellant  had  given
    detailed evidence about how he had gone to the Embassy and how  he  was
    pursuing an application that was not processed because he did not  have
    the necessary CSID and the judge did not  engage  adequately  with  his
    evidence at all.  This point is made out.

    9    It is also argued that the judge did not give adequate reasons for
    rejecting his claim to have contacted the Red Cross and who received no
    help from them.

    10   Additionally, the judge is criticised  for  not  giving  a  lawful
    explanation for rejecting his claim  to  have  lost  contact  with  his
    family.  The judge said at paragraph 23 that:

         "Modern communication methods as such that the Appellant would have
         been well able to maintain with anybody who  he  could  be  put  in
         touch with through such networks that clearly  exist  to  find  out
         what happened to his family and, in particular, whether steps could
         be taken to provide him with the necessary certification."

    11   The complaint is that this conclusion is unsupported by  reference
    to background material and that the  reason  given  for  rejecting  the
    claim from an unknown person, identified only as "Mr Ali", that he  had
    bad news about some of the appellant's relatives is not lawful.

    12    The  judge  also  failed  to  give  any  acknowledgement  of  the
    consistency in the appellant's claim and  particularly  the  consistent
    claim that he had no documentation. He  has  maintained  this  position
    since 2003.

    13   I have reflected on Mr Melvin's submissions but I  have  concluded
    that the reasoning given by the  judge  is  absent  or  inadequate.   I
    cannot ascertain what the judge made of the appellant's claim  to  have
    visited the Embassy.

    14   I find this a particularly difficult case.  Clearly the burden  is
    on the appellant but there is only  so  much  he  can  do  to  prove  a
    negative.   It  may  be  that  the  judge  has  reached  a  permissible
    conclusion on the evidence but he has not explained it in a way that  I
    find lawful.  The judge has given clear indications of what strands  of
    evidence he has found unpersuasive or disbelieved outright but has  not
    given proper reasons for his conclusions that they are unpersuasive.

    15   I have decided that the proper course is to set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

    16   I have also decided to keep the appeal in the Upper Tribunal to be
    determined further.  It may be that the Upper Tribunal will be assisted
    by submissions addressed to the proper approach to take when  there  is
    limited evidence available but where, if an appellant  is  telling  the
    truth, there is likely to be limited evidence.

Hearing on 20 October 2020

 3. The appellant gave evidence before me.

 4. He adopted earlier statements.  In the statement dated 22 January  2019
    he repeated his claim that he was  an  ethnic  Kurd  from  Kirkuk.   He
    explained how he  had  tried  to  obtain  a  passport  from  the  Iraqi
    representation in London on 23 November  2018.   He  attended  with  an
    interpreter.  He explained  that  he  wanted  to  apply  for  an  Iraqi
    passport but when he said that he did not have an Iraqi  identity  card
    or nationality certificate but was "undocumented" he was told he  would
    not be able to obtain a passport.

 5. He was asked if he had any document other than  those  he  had  already
    identified to show that he was an Iraqi or anything to  help  find  his
    parents  or  family  and  he  said  that  he  did  not.   He  told  the
    receptionist that he could not contact anybody in Iraq and it was clear
    he was not going to get the document that he had sought.

 6. He produced an attendance certificate to support the statement that  he
    had attended the embassy.

 7. He then said he tried to trace his brother through the agencies at  the
    British Red Cross in November 2018.  He gave them the information  that
    he could but they called to tell him that it was insufficient.  He said
    he had done all that he could and  could  do  no  more  and  could  not
    relocate.

 8. The second statement was dated  14  May  2019.   This  again  rehearsed
    something of the history and reasserted his claim that he had tried and
    failed to obtain help from the Iraqi Embassy in London.

 9. He explained that the trip to the embassy having failed to gain  him  a
    passport, he now understood that applications had to be made  "online".
    On 17 April 2019 he attempted to make an application.  Again he had the
    same problem.  He did not have his CSID number and was told that he was
    not entitled to a passport.

10. He went to the embassy on 13 May  2019  explaining  that  he  wanted  a
    passport and did not have the necessary documents and  was  told  there
    was nothing that could be done.  He produced an attendance  certificate
    from that but no independent confirmation of the attitude taken by  the
    embassy.

11. He then explained how Kirkuk had become unsafe.  He had no contact with
    family members since 2007.  An attempt to contact a brother through the
    agencies of the British Red Cross in November 2018  failed  but  on  23
    April 2019 he went to the Wimbledon branch of the British Red Cross and
    explained the help that he wanted to see if  there  was  anything  that
    could be done.  They said they had contacted their branch in  Iraq  but
    he had heard nothing from them.

12. He then explained that he could not go to another part of Iraq  because
    it was too dangerous if he did not have an official document.

13. He also reasserted his claim that after now sixteen years residence  in
    the United Kingdom it had become his home and he did not want to leave.

14. He made a further statement which he actually  signed  at  the  hearing
    before me but it had been served before.

15. Some of it repeats things that had been said before and refers  to  his
    original claim for asylum.

16. He asserted that he arrived in the United  Kingdom  without  documents,
    but he said from the beginning  that  he  did  not  have  his  national
    identity card and did not know his identity card number.   Nothing  had
    happened in the intervening seventeen years to help him  remember.   He
    again referred to attempts to obtain documentation.  He referred  to  a
    trip to the embassy with an interpreter on 29 July 2020 when he made an
    online application but the application could not be  submitted  without
    the  CSID  number.   He  was  told  again  that  he  could   not   have
    documentation without the required proof.

17. He explained to his legal representatives what had happened and he  was
    advised to contact the Kirkuk INID Office which, his  lawyer  explained
    to him, was an agent of the  Iraqi  government  issuing  new  biometric
    identity cards.  The office was based in Kirkuk  and  he  was  given  a
    telephone number.  He gave details of his telephone calls.  He was told
    he had to be in Kirkuk to make an application  without  documents.   He
    was required to report to the office with a family witness,  ideally  a
    brother or father with their  own  identity  documents.   The  official
    could not help at all while he was in London.

18. He then commented on the links with the Red Cross.  The information  he
    had was described as insufficient for them to trace  his  brother.   He
    had a little bit more information than he had disclosed before.  He had
    been advised by the Red Cross that they may be able to help if  he  had
    been out of the country for no more than five years but  he  could  not
    help after seventeen years lack  of  contact.   He  said  he  had  done
    everything he could and had failed.

19. He then gave details of anything he thought might help and why it could
    not.  He had no connections with any political party  or  high  profile
    people in Iraqi who could help him or obtain  documents  for  him.   He
    left school when he was 11.  He worked in a grocery shop  for  a  short
    time before arriving in the  United  Kingdom.   His  brother  Akim  was
    associated with the Ba'ath Party but he "disappeared" in 2003.  He  had
    never known his father and his mother died in 2007.  He  had  an  uncle
    who died in 2013 and no aunts.  He had no-one left in Iraq  except,  he
    hoped, his brother but he had no  contact  with  him  since  2003.   He
    explained how he had been very ill with heart problems and nearly had a
    heart attack in October 2019.

20. He was asked a few supplementary questions which were intended to  give
    more details about his health and  also  attempts  to  engage  the  Red
    Cross.  He gave confident answers which appeared to be satisfactory.

21. He was cross-examined.

22. With respect Mr Tufan had a very difficult task.  There was little with
    which he could work on.

23. He began by asking the appellant when he first  went  to  the  embassy.
    The appellant was not immediately sure if he had gone  three,  four  or
    five occasions.  He was pressed.  This led to the question "Why had  it
    taken him sixteen years to go to the Iraqi Embassy?" He had  said  that
    no-one had advised him to go earlier.

24. He was asked what he had said to the embassy and replied,  predictably,
    what he had said indicated in his statement.

25. He was asked by Mr Tufan if he had been truthful about  not  contacting
    his family members.  That question seemed to confuse the appellant  but
    he said he had been truthful.

26. He was asked if it was the case he had an uncle and a brother in  Iraq.
    He denied this. He said his brother had disappeared  in  2003  and  his
    uncle had died in 2013.  His friend "Ali"  from  Kirkuk  had  told  him
    about his uncle's death but Ali had not made himself available to  give
    evidence.

27. He referred to a friend who as far as he knew was in the United Kingdom
    but was not helping by answering his phone and  had  not  responded  to
    messages.

28. He said that his family had its own house in Kirkuk and he did not know
    what happened to it after the fall of Saddam.  He was asked if  he  had
    ever tried to find out what had happened to the house and  he  did  not
    answer that directly.  He  said  his  friend  Ali  had  been  asked  to
    investigate and he understood it had been taken  over  by  the  Kurdish
    Peshmerga.

29. His uncle did have children.  They were daughters.  Three of them.   He
    did not know what had happened to them.

30. I was referred to the Determination in 2003 when he was  not  believed.
    He was asked why he should be  believed  in  his  claims  not  to  have
    relatives in Iraq.  There was no obvious answer to that.

31. He was asked if the problem with the Red Cross was his not  being  able
    to give them sufficient information.  The appellant  could  not  really
    comment on that but understood the point.

32. He said the person who went with him was an interpreter working for the
    solicitors rather than the friend.

33. He was not re-examined.

34. I then heard from Alan Adel who adopted a witness statement signed on 5
    October 2020.  Mr Adel said that he was working on the instructions  of
    the appellant's solicitors and accompanied him to act as an interpreter
    at the Iraqi Embassy on 29 July 2020.  He said they  both  entered  the
    embassy at  about  12.30am  (I  assume  he  means  pm)  and  waited  in
    reception.  The appellant was given a "waiting ticket".   In  order  to
    assist everyone he explained that the  appellant  had  made  an  online
    application for a passport but did not have  the  necessary  documents.
    The receptionist said that they would not be able to help.   He  helped
    the appellant explain that he had no contact with anyone since 2007.

35. He was cross-examined.  He said that he  heard  the  appellant  confirm
    that he did not have a record number.

36. He was asked about the CSID and said  that  some  people  remember  the
    number and some do not.

37. Essentially that was the evidence before me.

38. I have considered the bundle I prepared for the hearing before me.   Of
    particular interest is the material relating to the asylum  claim  made
    in 2003.  In his screening  interview  he  complained,  understandably,
    that he was tired and had a  headache  although  was  in  good  general
    health.  He gave his normal  occupation  as  "farmer"  He  denied  ever
    having a passport.  He was asked if he had an identity card and he said
    he did not and he was  asked  for  his  identity  card  number  and  he
    replied, "I don't know".

39. He had left Iraq on 10 July 2003 and arrived in the United Kingdom on 5
    August 2003.

40. Although he denied having an identity card or  knowing  the  number  he
    appeared to indicate that one had been issued in the Nationality Office
    in Kirkuk in 1980.  He gave names and years of birth for  his  parents.
    He said that his father had died and his mother lived  in  Kirkuk.   He
    had an uncle in Iraq and the uncle had told him to introduce himself to
    the authorities, particularly the police, as soon as he could after  he
    had arrived in the safe  country  to  which  he  would  be  taken.   He
    explained in a supporting statement that  his  brother  was  an  active
    member of the Ba'ath Party and made enemies by reporting  local  people
    to the authorities.

41. The Adjudicator's decision dismissing his  appeal  against  refusal  is
    dated 19 December 2003.  The Adjudicator did not believe the appellant.
     The appellant was vague about his brother's role.  He also  gave  very
    clear evidence about the family home being destroyed in  the  aftermath
    of the fall of Saddam Hussein but when pressed accepted that he did not
    know from his own knowledge because he was not there but his mother had
    told him what had happened.

42. There  were  inconsistencies  in  the  chronology  which  troubled  the
    Adjudicator.  The Adjudicator did not consider him to  be  at  risk  on
    what he had been able to establish.

43. I have looked at the decision of the Adjudicator in December 2003.  The
    appellant's claim to  have  been  singled  out  for  ill-treatment  was
    disbelieved, as was his claim to be unable to be  relocate  within  the
    boundaries of Iraq.  There was no specific finding that I have  noticed
    on any documentation that he may have or might find or  what  relatives
    or other support there might be available to him in Iraq.  It does  not
    go very far as a guide to present credibility.

44. I have reflected on the Secretary of State's arguments but I find  this
    is a case that has been  established  to  the  low  standard  of  proof
    necessary.

45. I had  no  hesitation  in  believing  the  appellant's  evidence  about
    attending the embassy and being given short shrift and  contacting  the
    Red Cross and their being unable to assist.   There  is  nothing  about
    those accounts which is in any way unbelievable and  I  accept  what  I
    have been told.

46. That is not the end of the matter.  An inability to find  something  is
    dependent at least in part on the desire to find  the  object  that  is
    sought.  I do not know what links  there  might  be  available  to  the
    appellant in Iraq or who might be able to help him because he  has  not
    said and the Secretary of State has not been able to throw any light on
    the matter.  This is not to criticise the Secretary of State.  The fact
    is she is not able to offer any helpful suggestions.

47. It is very much in the appellant's favour that he has been  consistent.
    His claim not to have documents was made at any  early  stage  and  has
    continued.  His claim to have a few contacts in the  country  has  been
    made for some time.  The idea he lost contact with his brother  because
    of the enormous social  upheaval  that  followed  the  fall  of  Saddam
    Hussein and subsequent events is  entirely  believable.   There  is  no
    element in the appellant's case  which  is  inherently  improbable  and
    there is nothing about the way he has told it which makes it irrational
    to believe it.

48. I do remind myself the CSID numbers are things that people in Iraq tend
    to know.  This is a difficult thing.  Perhaps an analogy can  be  drawn
    with service numbers in the armed forces.  I believe that many  service
    personnel remember the number they are given  for  the  rest  of  their
    lives but some do not.  The fact that many do remember  does  not  mean
    that  those  who  claim  not  to  be  remember  are  untruthful.    The
    discreditable elements of the story identified in the earlier  decision
    are not of a kind that make is safe to write off anything the appellant
    says.

49. I have reflected on the decision of the Adjudicator but credibility  as
    a whole is not so destroyed  that  I  can  or  even  feel  inclined  to
    disbelieve anything he says.

50. In short, I believe that he presented himself  at  the  embassy  in  an
    apparent attempt to obtain a passport and was rebuffed. I believe  that
    he does not have any identity documents and  does  not  know  his  CSID
    number. That has long been his case and he was  not  shaken  in  cross-
    examination. Mindful of the low standard of  proof  I  accept  too  his
    evidence that he is not able to contact anyone in Iraq who  could  help
    him. He has been away for many years. There is no evidence that he  has
    contact with anyone there and I have no reason to  reject  his  account
    that his aunt has died and  he  has  lost  contact  with  anyone  else.
    Certainly, there is no positive evidence before me that he had any such
    contact.

51. As everyone has agreed, this is a narrow point and I resolve it in  the
    appellant's favour.  This is a humanitarian protection case.  He cannot
    travel  safely  to  his  home  because  he  cannot  get  the  necessary
    documents.  If for some reason I am wrong and he should  not  have  the
    humanitarian protection then the appeal should be allowed on Article  3
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

52. This appeal is allowed.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 April 2021                   |



