
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/03481/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 April 2018                           |On 18 April 2018                    |
|                                          |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                    KAMH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The anonymity order made in the First-tier  Tribunal  is  to  continue.
    Pursuant rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008
    the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members
    of the public identifying the appellant who will be referred to as KAMH
    is prohibited. Failure to comply with this order may result in contempt
    of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope who dismissed his appeal  on
    all grounds against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  20  March
    2016 refusing his asylum claim.  The appellant is a national  of  Sudan
    where he was born on [ ] 1990.  His claim to  international  protection
    is based on his membership of the Al Goran tribe in Sudan.  This led to
    adverse attention from the authorities and specifically  in  June  2015
    the appellant was detained by the armed forces for a period of  several
    days during which he was ill-treated.  He was released on his agreement
    to report every week with information on rebel groups and  required  to
    stay in his home area.  He never reported and left the country,  making
    his way to the United Kingdom.

 3. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's tribal membership
    or that he had been arrested and detained.

 4. The appellant gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  when
    he was represented by Counsel and additionally he relied on  an  expert
    report by Mr Peter Verney.

 5. In his findings and analysis on the evidence, the judge began  with  an
    observation at [37] and [38]

         "37. A basic difficulty for the Appellant it seems  to  me  is  the
             complete lack of any background evidence in  relation  to  the
             Goran tribe.  He and his  solicitors  have  simply  failed  to
             produce any such evidence to show that the tribe  even  exists
             let alone what its characteristics, culture, customs etc  are,
             or the extent of the population and where they actually reside
             in Sudan.  Similarly there is a complete  lack  of  background
             evidence regarding any Goran language.

         38.  Instead there is much evidence  adduced  in  relation  to  the
             situation for African people from the Darfur  region,  despite
             the fact that the Appellant has never claimed  to  be  African
             Dafuri or to be from or have links with that  particular  part
             of Sudan."

    Nevertheless, the judge explained at [39] to [41]

         "39. Having said that I am prepared to proceed on  the  basis  that
             there is indeed an ethnic group of people  called  the  Goran.
             The Respondent seems to have  implicitly  accepted  throughout
             the asylum application and appeal process that there is such a
             tribe although she has made it clear that she does not  accept
             that the Appellant is a member.  Similarly, there  is  nothing
             in Mr Verney's report to indicate that the Goran do not exist.

         40.  Albeit with some hesitation given the lack of direct  evidence
             on the issue, for similar reasons I am prepared to accept  for
             the purposes of this appeal that there is a Goran language.

         41.  I would make  it  clear  however  that  I  consider  that  the
             questions of the geographical location of the Goran  tribe  in
             Sudan and whether the  Appellant  does  have  that  racial  or
             ethnic identity or if he speaks the Goran language are matters
             that remain at issue in this appeal."

    After identifying a number of inconsistencies regarding the  appellant's
    tribal membership the judge observed at [53] to [56]:-

         "53. Finally I need to refer to  the  physical  appearance  of  the
             Appellant albeit that I regard  any  such  comments  as  being
             invidious to say the least.  Drawing general conclusions about
             race and/or ethnicity on the basis of an individual's physical
             appearance   can    be    fraught    with    difficulty    and
             misunderstanding.  However in a case such as this it seems  to
             me that some comment is inevitable given the dichotomy between
             Arabs and Africans in Sudan that I have dealt with above,  and
             that it is explicitly part of the  Appellant's  case  that  he
             would be identified as  African  by  reason  of  his  physical
             appearance.

         54.  As I told the representatives, all that I can say in this case
             is that the skin colour of the Appellant is light  brown;  and
             that he was wearing a hat covering all his hair throughout the
             appeal.

         55.  I would simply observe that on the basis of his skin colour or
             any other physical feature such as hair I myself am unable  to
             conclude that it is reasonably likely the Appellant  would  be
             regarded as an African in Sudan.

         56.  As a matter of fairness to the parties I indicated at the  end
             of the hearing that this was my  provisional  view.   Both  Mr
             Boyle and Mr Stainthorpe accepted that this was the  situation
             and  agreed  that  my  remarks  were  fair  comment:   neither
             attempted to persuade  me  to  take  any  other  view  of  the
             Appellant's physical characteristics."

    He thereafter returned to the report by Mr Verney and proceeded with  a
    critique of the report with an opening consent at [59]:-

         "59. A major concern that I do  have  about  this  report  from  Mr
             Verney is the methodology that he  has  used  to  produce  it.
             There is a section of the  report  at  pp.3-12  in  which  the
             transcript of the interview is  intermixed  with  observations
             and comments made by Mr Verney himself.  This is not helpful -
             far better to have had a discrete record of the interview with
             comments given separately.  Furthermore it is not clear to  me
             whether the transcript  of  the  interview  is  complete,  and
             whether all of Mr Verney's questions are included in it."

    In addition, the judge was critical of the absence of any material from
    a Dr Turbiana who had been consulted by Mr Verney  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's competence in the Goran language.  He then  turned  to  the
    Human Rights Watch Country report on Chad 2007 which had been  referred
    to by Mr Verney.  He considered it permissible  with  reference  to  AM
    (Sudan) [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC) to look  at  the  report  himself.   He
    observed at [81]

         "81. There is no mention whatsoever made of the Goran tribe in that
             Human Rights Watch report."

    In the light of his misgivings the judge explained at [88]

         "88. That being so, although I have considered the  evidence  as  a
             whole from the Appellant himself  and  from  Mr  Verney  I  am
             unable to accept that it has been shown that it is  reasonably
             likely that  the  Appellant  is  an  African  from  Sudan  and
             specifically that he is a member of the Goran tribe."

    He  thereafter  turned  to  the  detail  of  the  appellant's   adverse
    encounter.  After  identifying  a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the
    account he concluded at [135]

         "135.    I would make it clear that I simply do  not  believe  that
             the events described by the Appellant as  having  happened  to
             him actually took place.  In particular whilst I  accept  that
             he is Sudanese citizen, I am not satisfied that he  has  shown
             even on a reasonable likelihood basis  that  he  is  from  the
             Goran tribe nor that he has shown that  he  is,  or  would  be
             regarded as, an African living in Sudan; that he  was  accused
             of being involved  in  providing  support  to  anti-government
             forces; that he was arrested; detained and  mistreated  during
             detention; that he was released on condition that he  provided
             information to the authorities; that he failed  to  report  to
             the authorities as required; or that as a  result  he  had  to
             leave Sudan."

 6. The grounds of challenge are twofold.  The first asserts that the judge
    failed to properly grasp or  consider  the  evidence  provided  in  the
    report by Mr Verney.  The second questions the legal correctness of the
    assessment of the  appellant's  ethnicity  by  reference  to  his  skin
    colour.

Discussion

 7. Discussion as to the first ground  began  with  our  enquiry  over  the
    judge's conclusion that the Goran  were  not  mentioned  in  the  Human
    Rights Watch report.  Unsatisfactorily this was  not  in  Mr  Hussain's
    papers but we provided him with a copy and directed him to identify the
    references to the Goran.  As it turns out there are several.  Under the
    heading "Glossary of Ethnic Groups in Chad" there is this reference

         "Goran

         Also known as Toubou, this non-Arab ethnic group  mainly  lives  in
         Northern Chad, but also  in  Sudan,  Libya  and  Niger.   Most  are
         nomadic herders; others are semi-nomadic."

    Whilst the report is naturally focussed on the situation in Chad, it is
    clear from any reading that  the  Goran  have  a  border  presence  and
    furthermore exists in Sudan.

 8. This aspect was not specifically mentioned in the ground  of  challenge
    but it is material and goes to the heart claim.  We  consider  that  it
    should be treated as Robinson obvious  and,  in  any  event,  it  comes
    within the challenge to the treatment of the  evidence  by  the  judge.
    With appropriate candour, Mr Diwyncz accepted there are  references  to
    the Goran in the report and, as acknowledged by the judge himself,  the
    report had been  read  after  the  hearing.   Although  the  judge  had
    indicated in his decision that he was prepared to proceed on the  basis
    that  there  was  an  ethnic  group  called  the  Goran,   Mr   Diwyncz
    acknowledged that the concern expressed over the absence of information
    might well have impacted on the judge's analysis. His conclusion on the
    appellant's membership was therefore unsafe.

 9. We consider this a realistic concession.  Whilst  we  accept  that  the
    judge considered the appeal on the basis that a tribe called the  Goran
    existed,  having  decided  that  there  was  a  complete  lack  of  any
    background evidence in relation to the tribe  (when  there  was  in  Mr
    Verney's report) and having concluded that there was  no  reference  to
    the tribe in the Human Rights Watch report (although in fact it did) we
    are of the view that the ultimate conclusion that the appellant was not
    a member might well have been infected by the error over the  evidence.
    We cannot be sure but as this is a protection claim on which there is a
    low standard of proof and taking into account Mr Diwyncz's  concession,
    we conclude that for this reason alone,  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside and remade.

10. That being so we do not consider there is a need  to  consider  in  any
    detail the other grounds of challenge although we  make  the  following
    observations. We consider that the concerns  expressed  by  Judge  Cope
    over the methodology and format of Mr Verney's report have validity  as
    acknowledged by Mr Hussain. The impact of these aspects and the absence
    of any direct evidence from  Dr  Tubiana  will  be  a  matter  for  the
    tribunal remaking the decision.

11. We see force in the ground challenging Judge  Cope's  findings  on  the
    appellant's appearance and as also acknowledged by Mr Hussain. There is
    no indication of what evidence of the appearance of someone claiming to
    be Gorani the judge took into account in reaching his findings based on
    the appearance of the appellant at [53] to [55] despite  the  reference
    to the discussion that ensued as recorded at [56].

12. The grounds do not challenge the findings by Judge Cope on the  account
    of  difficulties  that  the  appellant  claims  to  have   specifically
    encountered which was  accepted  before  us.  Accordingly,  we  do  not
    consider nor was it argued that  these  findings  are  tainted  by  the
    errors committed by Judge Cope. The judge's reasoning and  findings  on
    these aspects begin at [91] of his  decision  and  conclude  at  [134].
    These are preserved for the  remaking  of  the  decision.  The  parties
    agreed that issues to be addressed in the remaking will be

      a) Is the appellant a member of the Goran tribe?

      b) Is being a member of the Goran tribe a risk factor absent any  risk
         of harm prior to flight from Sudan?

Decision

13. Error of law by the First-tier Tribunal requiring the  decision  to  be
    set aside is conceded by the Secretary of State. The  decision  is  set
    aside. Given the extent of findings  required  as  to  the  appellant's
    origins, the appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  its
    reconsideration based on the  issues  and  matters  preserved  in  [12]
    above.


Signed
                                               Date 16 April 2018

UTJ DAWSON
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
