
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03039/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2019                     |On 11 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Z N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr M Nadeem, Legal Representative


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan allowing  the  appeal  of
    the respondent on human rights grounds.
2.   The respondent is a national of Iraq born  on  [~]  1994.   She  is  of
    Kurdish ethnicity and comes from Kirkuk.

3.   She claimed that in April  2015  she  met  a  man  called  [AH]  whilst
    visiting her aunt.  Mr [H] is an Iranian national.  He was born  on  23
    September 1988.  He lives in the UK and was granted indefinite leave to
    remain in 2013.

4.   In June 2015, Mr [H] asked to marry her, but her brother  refused  him.
    They slept together in July 2015 and the respondent became pregnant  as
    a result.  She discovered that she was pregnant  on  13  October  2015.
    Her family never discovered that she was pregnant.  She left Iraq on 15
    October 2015 with the help of Mr [H]'s brother.  She believed that  she
    would be at risk on return because her brothers would believe that  she
    had brought shame on them.

5.   After leaving Iraq, the  respondent  travelled  to  Turkey.   She  then
    travelled on to Greece by boat.  She was fingerprinted in Greece on  18
    March 2016.  Her son, [AS], was born in Greece.  She then travelled  on
    to the UK via France where she stayed for about two and a half  months.
    She entered the UK clandestinely on  6  September  2016.   She  claimed
    asylum on 14 September 2016.  It is the refusal  of  that  claim  which
    gave rise to the appeal before the judge.

6.   At paragraph 9(i) - (iv) the judge  set  out  the  respondent's  asylum
    claim as set out in the grounds of appeal.  The judge at  paragraph  16
    said the key issue in this case was whether the respondent would be  at
    risk of honour based killing on return to Iraq  on  the  basis  of  her
    relationship with Mr [H] and her brother's refusal to grant  permission
    for her to marry him.  At paragraph 17 the judge said  it  was  not  in
    dispute that the respondent had a genuine subjective fear of what might
    happen on return.  The issue was whether that subjective fear was well-
    founded.  The judge  said  the  respondent  had  not,  and  could  not,
    describe any specific threats from her family as she fled  as  soon  as
    she realised she was pregnant.  Although she feared the worst, she  did
    not know how they would respond.  There appeared to be some  divergence
    between her brothers and  her  father.   Her  brothers  were  stricter,
    whereas her father had a more liberal approach.  How  that  would  play
    out should she return cannot be known.

7.   At paragraph 18 the judge stated that the most recent  guidance  issued
    by the Secretary of State was in August 2013.  Based on the  paragraphs
    drawn to his attention by the respondent's  legal  representative,  the
    judge accepted that the incidence of  gender-  based  violence  in  the
    Kurdish community of Iraq was distressingly high.  It was  not  however
    at a level where in the absence of any information (which the appellant
    could not give him) concerning her family's response to the  fact  that
    she now had a partner and  child,  could  he  find  that  there  was  a
    substantial risk to her that would be sufficient to engage the  Refugee
    Convention, humanitarian protection or Articles 2 and 3.

8.   The judge considered the guidance in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    944.  Based on that, the judge recognised  that  there  might  well  be
    practical barriers to returning the respondent to the IKR of Iraq.  The
    judge however said that would not of itself  be  sufficient  to  engage
    international protection.

9.   I accepted Mr Tufan's submission that it was  evident  from  paragraphs
    16 to 19 that the judge was dismissing the respondent's asylum appeal.

10.  Mr Nadeem confirmed that  the  respondent  has  not  lodged  an  appeal
    against those findings.  Consequently, I find that the judge's decision
    dismissing the respondent's asylum appeal shall stand.

11.  Mr Nadeem however said that the dismissal of  the  respondent's  asylum
    appeal was not material and did not  affect  the  judge's  decision  to
    allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

12.   I  was  not  persuaded  that  the  judge's   decision   allowing   the
    respondent's appeal on human rights grounds could stand as  the  errors
    identified by Mr. Tufan were material to the judge's decision.

13.  I find that the respondent could not meet the definition of partner  in
    the  Immigration  Rules  as  set  out  in  Appendix  FM  GEN.1.2.   The
    respondent is not married to the child's father and is therefore not  a
    spouse.  She met the child's father in April 2015  in  Iraq;  she  left
    Iraq on 15 October 2015, entered the UK on 6 September 2016 and claimed
    asylum on 14 September.  On these facts, she has  not  lived  with  the
    child's father in a relationship akin to a  marriage  for  at  least  2
    years prior to the date of the application.  I accept the Secretary  of
    State's argument that  the  judge  failed  to  acknowledge  this.   The
    judge's finding that the Rules could be met  without  reconciling  this
    issue was a material error of law.

14.  I find that the absence of employment and accommodation being on  offer
    in Iraq or Iran cannot constitute an insurmountable obstacle to  family
    life continuing in Iraq or Ian.  Consequently,  I  accept  Mr.  Tufan's
    submission that the judge applied the wrong test of what constitutes an
    insurmountable obstacle.  The  test  is  whether  the  refusal  of  the
    respondent's claim would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences. It
    is a stringent test as laid down in Agyarko.

15.  The judge held  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  respondent's
    partner was a British citizen  even  though  at  paragraph  11  of  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter it was stated that a  copy  of  his  British
    passport was produced in evidence to the Secretary of State.   If  that
    was the case, then the child of the respondent, who was born in Greece,
    could be registered as a British national and  could  be  a  qualifying
    child.  EX.1  could  have  applied  if  the  respondent's  partner  was
    British.  This is a matter that needs to be considered further.

16.  For the reasons that I have given I  find  that  the  judge's  decision
    cannot stand.  It is set aside in order to be remade.

17.  The appeal is remitted to Sheldon Court Birmingham for rehearing  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  8 April 201

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun




























