

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03763/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 8 January 2018                        |on 12 January 2018                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 DENING CHEN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    David C Clapham SSC, promulgated on 7 September  2017,  dismissing  his
    appeal on all available grounds.

 2. Mr McVeety at the outset conceded  that  the  article  8  decision  was
    defective (the final point in the grounds), in particular  for  failure
    to evaluate the best interests  of  the  children.   In  that  respect,
    parties agreed there should be a remit to the FtT for a fresh decision.

 3. Mr Caskie said that the appellant continued to argue the  rest  of  the
    grounds, and asked for a remit on all aspects of the case.  He  adopted
    the summary in the grant of permission:

      A decision of 15 pages, but only one page of analysis;

      First decisive paragraph, based on delay in claim from 2009 - 2015;

      Second, based on inconsistencies  in  appellant's  practice  of  Falun
      Gong, but without saying what they are;

      Third, referring to snakehead allegations, but without  a  finding  on
      the trafficking claim;

      Fourth, rejecting a summons by reference to Tanveer Ahmed but  nothing
      more;

      Fifth, referring to following LL absent special circumstances, but not
      to the submission that such circumstances applied;

      Final paragraph, addressing article 8 but without reference to part 5A
      of the 2002 Act, the case outside the rules, or the best interests  of
      the children.

 4. Mr McVeety at  first  advanced  the  argument  that  there  were  major
    discrepancies and other  weaknesses  in  the  appellant's  case,  which
    emerged clearly from the part of the decision setting out  the  lengthy
    cross-examination of the appellant and his witness, and  that  although
    the decision-making part was brief and did not spell out those defects,
    it was justified when  read  in  context.  In  course  of  submissions,
    however, it became apparent that a fresh decision is required  also  on
    the protection claim.

 5. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 6. The nature of the case is such that  it  is  appropriate  in  terms  of
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice  Statement  7.2  to
    remit the case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

 7. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge David C Clapham.

 8. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            9 January 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




