
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03811/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2020                               |On 19 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                    X C Q
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, Counsel instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Richards-Clarke  in
    which she dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a  citizen  of  China,
    against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse   her
    application for international protection.

 2. The Secretary of State's decision  was  made  on  3  April  2019.   The
    Appellant exercised her right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before Judge Richards-Clarke on 7 November 2019 and was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Her application was granted by Designated Judge Shaerf on 10
    January 2020 in the following terms

       The first ground refers to paragraph 21 of the Judge's decision. The
       Judge did not accept the Appellant's claim that her father in  China
       was still imprisoned for lack of "further evidence". The  Respondent
       did not challenge the Appellants credibility as to past matters  and
       also  found  her  account  to  be  consistent  with  the  background
       information. It is arguable the Judge erred  in  law  by  making  an
       adverse finding for lack of corroborative evidence, particularly  in
       the light of interview reply 44.

       The second ground refers to paragraph 23  of  the  decision,  it  is
       argued the Judge's consideration of the risk  to  the  Appellant  on
       return on account of her  being  in  breach  of  the  then  National
       population and family-planning laws is inadequate. No  reference  is
       made to the expert  evidence  identified  in  paragraph  17  of  the
       skeleton argument and in Yan Zheng v SSHD [2017] CSIH 41  which  was
       before the Judge. Additionally, it is evident  that  judge  arguably
       failed to take account of the fact  that  the  Appellant  has  three
       children.


       The third ground asserts the Judge's assessment of  the  Appellant's
       claim based on her private and family life was inadequate because it
       failed to take into account the evidence at paragraphs 6.2.1 - 6.3.4
       of the Home Office's CPIN  of  November  2018  in  contravention  of
       National population and family-planning laws.




Background


 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of China who has three children. Her two younger children  aged
    3 and 7 months are with her in the United  Kingdom  and  are  dependent
    upon her claim. Her elder child,  aged  8,  lives  with  her  partner's
    parents in China.  The children's father lives in  the  United  Kingdom
    but has no status here. The Appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    July 2007 and it is accepted that she was a victim of  trafficking  and
    forced labour. The Appellant claims that  she  will  be  persecuted  on
    return to China on the basis of her political opinion having taken part
    in protests against the  government's  compulsory  acquisition  of  her
    father's land and other land in the village where  she  lived.  Further
    the Appellant claims that she will  face  harm  at  the  hands  of  the
    snakehead gang who trafficked her to the United Kingdom and forced  her
    to work. The Appellant also claims to fear serious harm as, having  had
    three children, she is in breach of the national population and  family
    planning laws.


 4. In refusing the application the Respondent accepted the credibility  of
    the  Appellant's  account  both  in  respect  of  the  land  issue  and
    trafficking. The refusal letter does not deal with the breach of family
    planning laws. The Respondent considered that so far as the land  issue
    was concerned that the Appellant was no  longer  at  risk  because  the
    background evidence suggests that persons arrested in  connection  with
    this issue were released after demolition had taken place and do not in
    general face further adverse attention. The Respondent considered  that
    even though the Appellant had been trafficked the debt to the snakehead
    had been repaid so  she  would  not  face  adverse  attention  in  this
    respect. The breach of family planning law was not considered.


 5. In dismissing her appeal the Judge found (at paragraph 21)  that  there
    was no evidence of her father's ongoing imprisonment and that this  was
    a dispute that ended in 2007 and that therefore the Appellant  had  not
    shown that she was at real risk. So far as the family planning laws are
    concerned the Judge found that financial  penalties  and  disadvantaged
    access to social services did not cross the  Article  3  threshold  and
    that there was no evidence to suggest that she would  be  a  victim  of
    forced sterilisation.

Submissions

 6. For the Appellant Mr Dieu said that  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    skeleton argument submitted for the First-tier appeal are the pertinent
    documents. There are three  areas  where  the  Judge  erred.  First  in
    finding that the Appellant would not face the adverse attention of  the
    authorities it was the Appellant's  claim  that  her  father  had  been
    arrested and had not returned. The Judge says (at  paragraph  21)  that
    there is no evidence of his ongoing  imprisonment.  This  is  factually
    incorrect. The Appellant gave  evidence  to  this  effect.  The  asylum
    interview record (AIR) shows at question 44  that  the  Appellant  said
    that her father  is  still  in  prison.  Paragraph  8  of  her  witness
    statement  says  her  father  is  still  detained.  Her  oral  evidence
    confirmed this. If the Judge meant no corroborative evidence then  that
    is an error of law because corroborative evidence is not required.  The
    Appellant was found to be credible about everything else and  there  is
    little reason for Judge not to accept her evidence in this respect. The
    Judge gives no reason apart from the lack of corroboration and fails to
    engage with the Appellant's evidence  in  this  respect.  There  is  no
    reference to objective evidence and the Judge's finding  seems  not  to
    take account of her father's position and that if the Appellant makes a
    noise she may put herself at risk.


 7. Dealing with the Appellant's contravention of family planning laws  the
    decision shows inadequate reasoning. The Judge refers to  Yan  Zheng  v
    SSHD [2017] CSIH 41 but there is no analysis. Zheng was  expanded  upon
    in the skeleton argument at paragraphs 5 to  18.  AX  (Family  Planning
    Scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT 00097 (IAC) refers to forced sterilisation
    but does not deal with  sterilisation  through  duress.  The  crippling
    social and financial impact of  breaching  family  planning  law  gives
    persons  in  the  Appellant's  situation  no  choice  but  to   undergo
    sterilisation.

 8. Turning to Article 8 the Judge just gives a standard analysis.  Nothing
    is factored in about family planning  laws  and  denial  of  access  to
    medical educational and public services. The last sentence of paragraph
    23 of the decision fails to take on board that it is the  two  children
    in United Kingdom who are unauthorised.


 9. For the Respondent Mr Howells confirmed  that  there  was  no  rule  24
    response. He said the Judge gave adequate reasons at paragraph  21  for
    finding that the Appellant was not at risk in  2006/7  concluding  that
    her mother had not faced difficulties from the authorities. It is clear
    that  the  Judge  meant  no  supporting  evidence   of   her   father's
    imprisonment. Supporting evidence from a lawyer representing the family
    could be expected. The Presenting Officer did challenge the credibility
    of the Appellant's claim that her father continued to be  detained  and
    also challenged her claim that she would fight her father's cause.

10. AX is the reported country guidance case and the Tribunal was  required
    to follow it. At paragraph 23 the Judge  explicitly  applied  the  risk
    factors from headnote 12 of AX. The Scottish court  decision  in  Zheng
    was  not  binding.  In  any  event  the  Appellant's  case   could   be
    distinguished from Zheng. The Appellant  could  be  returned  with  the
    father of her children. In Zheng the Appellant would have been returned
    without the father. The Appellant would  not  be  a  lone  mother.  The
    family unit can turn to her partner's parents who pay  for  the  eldest
    child to attend school. There was no evidence of  a  crackdown  in  her
    area. She is from Chengdu in Szechuan province. Mr  Howells  said  that
    paragraphs 26-9 are an adequate assessment of s.55 and Article 8.


11. In response Mr Dieu said that it was never the  Appellant's  case  that
    lawyers had been engaged by the family in China. Referring to Zheng the
    Respondent submits it can  be  distinguished  because  the  Appellant's
    partner could return to China with them. This is a  difference  without
    substance. It does not affect the financial  penalties  and  denial  of
    access to social services. It is accepted that AX is  Country  Guidance
    but the position  in  Zhen  distinguishes  AX  in  finding  a  gap.  AX
    considered physical force whereas Zhen looks at duress.

12. I reserved my decision.


Decision


13. As the Appellant did not proceed  with  her  appeal  on  the  basis  of
    problems with the snakehead there were just two aspects of  her  appeal
    to be considered. I will deal with them separately.




14. The Appellant claims that she  faced  danger  on  return  to  China  in
    consequence of a dispute between the people of her village in  general,
    her father in  particular  and  the  Chinese  government.  It  was  the
    Appellant's claim that in 2006 the government notified the  Appellant's
    family  that  they  wanted  the  land  where  the  family  business,  a
    restaurant, was located so that a new road could be built.  Other  land
    was  also  marked  to  be  taken.  The  Appellant's  father,  with  the
    Appellants support and with other people  from  the  village  took  the
    matter to Beijing. The government delayed talks  and  when  the  group,
    including the Appellant and her father, arranged to go to Beijing  they
    were arrested. Although they were released after about a month it was a
    condition of their release that they  did  not  take  part  in  anymore
    petitions. When diggers came to the village to demolish the  properties
    on the land acquired by the  government  the  villagers,  ignoring  the
    condition placed on  their  release,  formed  a  line  to  prevent  the
    bulldozers doing their work, the police  became  involved  and  several
    villagers,  including  the  Appellants  father,  were   arrested.   The
    Appellant ran away.




15. It is important  to  note  that  the  Respondent  having  analysed  the
    Appellant's account against the objective evidence found her account in
    all the respects above to be credible (see paragraph 32 off the refusal
    letter). The refusal letter goes on just say that whilst it is accepted
    that the Appellant was involved in a  situation  where  the  government
    demolished her father's business it is not accepted that she would face
    any adverse attention if she would turn to China. This is  because  the
    Appellant was not arrested,  those  that  are  arrested  are  generally
    released and do not face any further attention and  the  Appellant  has
    not openly criticised the government. The Respondent does  not  in  the
    refusal letter deal with the Appellants claim,  clearly  shown  in  the
    interview  record,  that  her  father  has  never  been  released  from
    detention.




16. The Judge  deals  with  her  analysis  of  the  Appellants  account  at
    paragraph 21 of  the  refusal  letter.  Firstly  the  Judge  notes  the
    Appellant's claim that her father has not returned home and is still in
    prison and that if she returned she will attempt to find out  what  has
    happened to him but says that she does  not  bring  forth  any  further
    evidence regarding this aspect of her claim. The Judge adds that  there
    is no evidence about the  Appellant's  father's  ongoing  imprisonment.
    There is no further analysis.


17. In my judgment the reasons given for doubting the Appellant's  account,
    bearing in mind the lower standard of  proof,  are  not  adequate.  The
    Appellant has been generally accepted as a  credible  witness  and  the
    Respondent noted in the refusal letter that the Appellant's account  of
    events occurring in her village accorded with the  objective  evidence.
    To single out  one  aspect  of  the  Appellants  account,  her  fathers
    continued detention, and dismiss it through lack of  corroboration  and
    for no other reason is in my judgment a fundamental error of  law.  The
    Judge simply has not  engaged  with  the  Appellant's  written  witness
    statement or her oral evidence. The error is material  to  the  Judge's
    decision to dismiss her appeal because the continued detention  of  her
    father and her avowed intention to take up his cause is a  core  aspect
    of her account.


18. In dealing with the family planning  issue  the  Judge  again  confines
    analysis to  a  single  paragraph.  The  last  two  sentences  of  this
    paragraph make no real sense in the context of the  appeal.  The  Judge
    finds there is no credible evidence that  members  of  the  Appellant's
    family in China have suffered adversely because of her  breach  of  the
    family planning scheme. This ignores the  fact  that  it  is  only  the
    eldest child that lives in China in respect of whom there has  been  no
    breach of the family planning scheme and there is  nothing  to  suggest
    that the birth of her two younger children in  the  United  Kingdom  is
    known to the Chinese authorities.


19. I have dealt with the end of the paragraph first because of the obvious
    error of judgment, if not error of law, demonstrated. The rest of  this
    paragraph refers to the country guidance case of AX and  the  Court  of
    Session case on Zheng both of which were referred to  in  the  skeleton
    argument but there is no analysis of these cases.  Given  the  detailed
    skeleton argument submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  included  very
    significant submissions on the distinction between  AX  and  Zheng  the
    only conclusion that can be drawn is that the  Judge  in  her  analysis
    overlooked the arguments put forward on the Appellant's  behalf.  This,
    in my judgment was a material error of law in  that  the  reasoning  is
    wholly inadequate.




20. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal demonstrates errors of law  that  were  material  to  the
    decision to dismiss this appeal. On that  basis  this  appeal  must  be
    allowed, and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal set aside.


21. The nature of the error of law related to the credibility  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and also to the analysis of the effect  of  the
    Appellant's breach of the family planning law upon her treatment on her
    return. On this basis and in accordance with the President's  direction
    this matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing
    de novo.



Summary of decision

22. Appeal allowed. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

23. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de  novo.








Signed                                  Date: 12 March 2020


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


