
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/03469/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28th November 2017                    |     On 15th December 2017          |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                   a z a i
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms  L Logan of Counsel, instructed by Deane & Bolton
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Moxon made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 9th May 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Libya born on 29th August 1984.  He  came
    to the UK on 30th April 2014, on a student visa, and returned to  Libya
    on 31st December 2014.  He then applied for a Tier 4 visa, entering the
    UK again on 8th April 2015 and was  granted  further  leave  to  remain
    until 30th October 2017.  He made a brief visit back to Libya  in  June
    to July 2016.

 3. The appellant claimed asylum in the UK on 6th October 2016.  He claimed
    that, if returned to Libya, he would be at risk of harm by  militia  as
    he is believed to be a supporter of the Gaddafi regime, although he had
    never worked for Gaddafi and never met him.  His late father had been a
    colonel in Gaddafi's forces.  The  appellant  said  that  he  had  been
    beaten because of the family's support of Gaddafi in 2011 and had  been
    taken to prison and detained and tortured.  He was then arrested for  a
    second time in October 2012 and detained for a month.  He also  claimed
    that he could not return to Libya because his son suffers from  a  skin
    condition which requires specialist medication and healthcare.

 4. The judge reviewed all of the evidence and concluded that there was  no
    truth in his claim that he feared that his life would  be  at  risk  on
    return and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had not founded his decision on an assessment of the objective evidence
    which was generally  supportive  of  the  appellant's  claim.   He  had
    speculatively concluded that  the  son's  medical  condition  could  be
    managed in Libya and had only made passing  reference  to  the  country
    guidance case of FA (Libya - Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 413 in
    finding that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence in Baniwalid, the appellant's home area.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Alis on 7th  September  2017.
    In granting permission, the judge referred to the country guidance case
    of ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 00263 promulgated  on  28th
    June 2017 in which the Tribunal found:

         "The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence in the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person."

Submissions

 7. At the commencement of the hearing Mrs Pettersen accepted that, in  the
    light of the country guidance it was the Secretary of State's  position
    that cases involving Libyan nationals ought to be granted  humanitarian
    protection.  She otherwise defended the  determination  insofar  as  it
    dealt with the asylum claim.

 8. Ms Logan submitted that the judge had  erred  in  law  because  he  had
    reached his conclusions without having proper regard to the  background
    evidence.  The judge had  erroneously  relied  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had not been detained in the past as evidence that  he  would
    not be at risk in the future.  It was wrong for the judge to  hold  the
    delay in claiming asylum against the appellant as he had a lawful right
    to be in the UK since he had student leave until October 2017.



Findings and Conclusions

 9. Mrs Pettersen very properly conceded that there was an error of law  in
    this decision insofar as the  country  guidance  case,  which  was  not
    decided until after the decision was promulgated but was nevertheless a
    statement of the law as it was at the date of  the  hearing,  has  held
    that there is a generalised risk to  Libyan  citizens  such  that  they
    ought to be granted humanitarian protection.

10. There is no merit in  the  challenge  to  the  judge's  conclusions  in
    relation to asylum.

11. This is a thorough and well reasoned determination.  The judge set  out
    in detail what the background evidence was which he had considered from
    paragraphs 58 to 63 of the determination.  There  is  no  proper  basis
    upon which it could be concluded that he did not have it in  mind  when
    he reached his credibility findings. The other points  which  she  made
    amount to a mere disagreement with the decision.  There is  no  mention
    in the grounds nor in the submissions of the principal reason  why  the
    appellant's  credibility  was  damaged,   namely   that   he   returned
    voluntarily to Libya in 2014 and 2016 despite claiming substantial ill-
    treatment and a fear of return arising  from  detentions  in  2011  and
    2012.

12. The question of the judge's treatment of the child's skin condition  is
    not relevant to the asylum claim.

Notice of Decision

13. So far as the decision on humanitarian  protection  is  concerned,  the
    judge erred in law and the  following  decision  is  substituted.   The
    appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.  So  far  as  the
    asylum claim is concerned, his decision stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed[pic]                             Date 14 December 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


