
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/03558/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |      Decision & Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 24th October 2017                     |      On 21st November 2017       |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Nizami, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Coutts  in  relation  to  his  protection  claim.
    Aligned to that was the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    and in respect of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

2.   There is  a  detailed  background  to  this  matter  which  includes  a
    previous hearing at the Upper Tribunal in 2011.  When  considering  the
    grounds of appeal which were filed and served by the Appellant,  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth said as follows:-

         "1.  It is arguable that the  Judge  should  have  dealt  with  the
             question of the degree of westernisation of the  Appellant  in
             the context of risk on return given the  submissions  in  this
             context.


         2.   In relation to the issue of human rights it is  arguable  that
             the Judge should have dealt with the application of  paragraph
             276ADE(vi) on a fuller basis given the arguments submitted  in
             this  context  on  the  Appellant's  behalf.   The  judge   at
             paragraph 51 has stated that there was  no  assertion  by  the
             Appellant that he met any of  these  requirements,  the  Judge
             referring in this context to paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM.
              The skeleton argument submitted on behalf  of  the  Appellant
             specifically dealt extensively with the  factors  relevant  to
             the application of paragraph 276ADE(vi).  Given the  reference
             by the Judge at paragraph 51  and  given  the  extent  of  the
             analysis of the Judge it is arguable that  that  analysis  has
             been insufficient.


         3.   It is further arguable that additional  findings  should  have
             been made in respect of the Appellant being able to  find  his
             family taking all the available evidence into account."

3.   This morning before me Ms Nizami on behalf of the Appellant  has  dealt
    in detail with the grounds which had been  submitted  which  themselves
    comprehensively explained why it was being  argued  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Coutts.  Ms Nizami said that in reality there were several issues  that
    show there were fundamental errors with the decision.  Now  if  I  take
    the grounds of appeal as drafted as a base for Ms Nizami's  submissions
    they really come to this: Here was an Appellant who  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since the age of 10 and that he had only  very  recently
    turned 18 (March 2017) and that although  there  had  been  a  previous
    adverse finding against him, on that occasion when he  was  very  young
    and so he did not actually give evidence. It is said in the grounds  of
    appeal in the subheadings as follows:-



     That the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in  its  assessment
    of risk on return in relation to:-

    (a)  the Appellant's position on return in respect of  family  support;
         and


    (b)  in respect of the risks he  would  face  as  being  a  westernised
         person.


4.   Firstly it is said that the decision of the Upper Tribunal in 2011  had
    made a finding that the Appellant was not without family in Afghanistan
    and it was submitted before Judge Coutts at this instant  hearing  that
    there was new documentary evidence from  the  Red  Cross  as  indicated
    within the Appellant's bundle at pages 227 to 234. The attempts by  the
    Red Cross to find the Appellant's mother and the  Appellant's  brother,
    showed that they could not be found.  The error which it  is  submitted
    was fundamental because it was accepted, it appears, that the Appellant
    was not in touch with his family and that thereby the  Appellant  would
    be  returning  without  family  support,  but  that  somehow  once   in
    Afghanistan the Appellant would be able to trace his  family.   It  was
    submitted in the grounds and forcefully submitted today that that was a
    speculative finding, especially since this would be a "westernised' 18-
    year-old returning to Kabul.


5.   In addition there was significant reliance on background  material  and
    that background material has been provided to me as  well  following  a
    direction of the Upper Tribunal.  There is particular reliance  on  two
    documents, firstly the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for  Assessing  the
    International Protection and Needs of Asylum seekers  from  Afghanistan
    which appears in report form for 19th  April  2016.   Additionally  the
    grounds rely on a skeleton argument which was  provided  to  the  judge
    which was a detailed document and that  refers  to  further  background
    material and in particular to a document from April 2016  published  by
    the Refugee Support Network  entitled  "After  Return  documenting  the
    experiences of young people forcibly removed to  Afghanistan".  It  was
    said at section 6 of the report:-


         "When young people  return  to  Afghanistan,  there  is  often  the
         expectation that they will reconnect with their families there  and
         be supported by them.  However, many have lost contact  with  their
         family, and, despite extensive searching, in seven cases  have  not
         been able to do so".

6.   In short it is said  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  these
    important issues in relation to the support, or lack of  support,  from
    family members and the speculative  findings  show  that  there  was  a
    material error of law.  It is  submitted  that  the  decision  shows  a
    failure to consider the highly relevant background  material  and  that
    the assessment of risk was thereby flawed.

7.   Insofar as the issue of the Appellant being westernised  is  concerned,
    it was said that the Appellant had said in various  places  within  his
    skeleton argument, for example at paragraph 28 as follows:-

     "The Appellant  also  relies  on  page  84  of  the  UNHCR  Eligibility
         Guidelines which make clear presence  of  family  networks  in  the
         proposed area of internal relocation has to be considered in  light
         of the reported stigma and discrimination against those who  return
         to Afghanistan after spending time abroad: see also footnote 545 on
         page 84.  Please also see the UNHCR  Guidelines  at  pp  44-47,  in
         particular at 332 - 'Persons who resist recruitment are  reportedly
         at risk of being killed or punished'; also at regarding  the  risks
         associated witnesses 'westernization'".

     It is said in relation to this aspect of the  grounds  that  the  judge
    failed to make any findings on this  evidence  which  was  key  to  the
    Appellant's case who had been here in the  UK  since  the  age  of  10.
    There is then reference to Article 8 and to paragraph  276ADE.   It  is
    submitted that the judge had proceeded on a mistaken  basis  and  again
    the skeleton argument is referred to and that at paragraph 43 stated as
    follows:-

     "The following factors are relevant to considering whether there  would
         be  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  integration:  the
         Appellant has been out of Afghanistan since 2009, he has  not  been
         back to Afghanistan and he has developed a  family  life  with  his
         girlfriend (notwithstanding the face (sic) they  odn't  (sic)  live
         together) and a private life.  He is not in contact with any of his
         family back in Afghanistan: see Red Cross correspondence in support
         of this.  He has obtained a number of  educational  qualifications.
         In the event the FTT were to find that the Appellant's asylum claim
         is not made out this would not necessarily mean that he  would  not
         face significant obstacles to his integration.  The Appellant  also
         relies on page 41 of the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines which  states
         that anti-government elements target individuals perceived to  have
         adopted values and/or appearances associated with Western countries
         due  to  their  imputed  support  for  the   Government   and   the
         international community.  The Appellant also relies on the problems
         identified in the 'After Return' report"

     and of course it is said in  the  grounds  the  First-tier  has  simply
    failed to engage with this part of the Appellant's case and the grounds
    relied on previously detected the approach  to  what  very  significant
    obstacles to integration in Afghanistan might mean.

8.   In her submissions today Ms Nizami eloquently set out those grounds  of
    appeal, she developed them and she assisted me  further  by  explaining
    them in greater detail.  She also referred to the fact that this was an
    Appellant who was not able to  avail  himself  of  different  parts  of
    paragraph 276ADE because by the time the Secretary of State's  decision
    was made he was aged 19  days  or  so  over  his  minority,  and  as  a
    consequence the delay in the decision making was a factor  that  should
    have been taken into account in assessing proportionality and that  was
    an issue raised again in the skeleton argument submitted by Counsel  at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

9.   Mr McVeety in his helpful and concise  submission  said  that  although
    the judge's decision was not the most  detailed,  this  was  against  a
    backcloth of the Appellant not having been found credible  in  relation
    to his account, and regardless to issues in relation to the Red  Cross,
    none of that went to the adverse credibility findings  which  had  been
    made.

10.  Insofar as issues relating to westernisation are concerned, this was  a
    problematic  turn  and  whilst  the  Appellant  had  been   away   from
    Afghanistan for some period of time, the issue was whether or  not  the
    cursory manner in which the judge may have dealt with this  aspect  did
    not mean it was necessarily one which showed a material error  of  law.
    Indeed it would be speculation to assume that this was an Appellant who
    was westernised and that he would not be able to integrate.   The  more
    speculative  finding  would  be  that  he,  the  Appellant,  would   be
    stigmatised by his family.  In short, what Mr McVeety said was what was
    it about this Appellant, other than he had been away  from  Afghanistan
    since 2009 that would put him  into  the  category  of  being  seen  as
    westernised?  Again, Mr McVeety said he acknowledged  the  decision  of
    the judge was brief, but the history of the Appellant's claims was  the
    reason for that briefness.

11.  Insofar as Article 8 and paragraph 276ADE  was  concerned,  Mr  McVeety
    agreed that the judge did err by not saying that the  issues  were  not
    raised, but the judge did actually go on to consider  both  276ADE  and
    Article  8.   Again,  this  was  in  a  reasonably  brief  manner,  but
    sufficiently, for example in relation to the Appellant having a partner
    in the UK, where ultimately did this get the Appellant?  The judge  had
    considered the facts, he had considered the  obstacles  to  return  and
    issues in respect of integration, language and the like.

12.  The nineteen days  point,  i.e.  the  decision  being  made  after  the
    Appellant's minority, was a near-miss argument and the  Tribunal  would
    be well-aware of what the stance of the higher courts is, is the way in
    which I understood Mr McVeety's submissions.  There would  still,  even
    in those sorts  of  cases,  have  to  be  the  requirement  to  meet  a
    reasonable test, and although  it  was  different  it  was  not,  as  I
    understood Mr McVeety to say,  not  an  automatic  grant  just  because
    somebody had been able to show they had been in the UK for seven  years
    or longer.

13.  Again,  Mr  McVeety  said  he  was  not  submitting  that  this  was  a
    determination of the strongest of events, but it  was  because  of  the
    history of the Appellant.  The risk from the Taliban had not been found
    to be there.  He said that the decision just about stood up but that he
    acknowledged it was brief.  He said that if I was to find an  error  of
    law then the case ought to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

14.  Ms Nizami in her reply took me to what she said was the starting  point
    with the Upper Tribunal's decision, but since then, as I understood her
    submissions, there was considerable "water under the bridge".  She took
    me to the UNHCR Guidelines and she took me  to  what  might  happen  in
    practice according to those Guidelines.  In the end she said  that  the
    issues had not been properly considered by the judge.

15.  Looking at the judge's decision as a whole,  it  has  been  fairly  and
    properly said by Mr McVeety that considering the number of issues  that
    the judge had to deal with, this was a relatively brief decision.  That
    of itself is not necessarily indicative of whether or not  there  is  a
    material error of law. Indeed brevity is to be encouraged.  However, in
    my judgment there were very significant issues that the  judge  had  to
    deal with in terms of  the  risk  on  return,  and  although  the  2011
    decision of the Upper Tribunal was indeed a starting point,  there  was
    now very considerable evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    which needed to be evaluated against the background material which  had
    also been submitted, and in my judgment  the  fact  that  the  skeleton
    argument  had  highlighted  significant  particular  aspects,  it   was
    necessary for the judge to deal with them.

16.  I have some sympathy for the experienced judge because  it  appears  to
    be accepted that the detailed skeleton argument was submitted  only  on
    the morning of the hearing, but nonetheless, the fact that those issues
    and those matters were before the judge meant that they had to be dealt
    with in a way which showed that the  most  anxious  scrutiny  had  been
    applied to the Appellant's protection claim.

17.  In my judgment the grounds are made out in respect of  the  failure  to
    consider the "westernisation" aspect of the case  and  the  failure  to
    consider whether or not this Appellant would  require  there  to  be  a
    family member or family members to assist him if he was to be returned.
     It does indeed appear that on the face of it, the  British  Red  Cross
    documentation which was within the Appellant's bundle before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did indeed suggest that  there  would  not  be  the
    necessary support from family members.  It was against that  background
    that the judge had to consider the material which was relied  upon  and
    which was cited within the grounds of appeal and skeleton argument.

18.  Similarly, in relation to paragraph 276ADE and Article 8,  although  Mr
    McVeety is right that the judge erred at paragraph 51 when he said that
    there was no assertion  by  the  Appellant  that  he  met  any  of  the
    requirements of 276ADE, and although the judge went on to deal  briefly
    with those matters, he did not do so against the proper factual  matrix
    which was presented to him. Whether within the skeleton  argument,  and
    the witness statements or the background material. Nor  did  the  Judge
    then undertake that analysis against the background of the Secretary of
    State's decision having been made very shortly after the Appellant  had
    reached his majority.  I make it clear that the fact that the Appellant
    was 19 days into his majority would not of itself usually lead  to  the
    Appellant's appeal succeeding, but not making a decision in respect  of
    it at all does  not  show  that  the  proper  exercise  of  considering
    proportionality was undertaken by the Judge and therefore it shows that
    the decision making was flawed relating to Paragraph 276ADE and Article
    8 too.

19.  Taken as a whole, although in many instances brevity  in  decisions  of
    the First-tier Tribunal are to be commended, in this instance, in  view
    of  the  voluminous  documents  and  matters  raised  in  the  skeleton
    argument, it was essential to assess the case in a much  more  detailed
    and comprehensive way and therefore I conclude that Mr McVeety is right
    that the decision is brief, but  I  also  conclude  that  the  decision
    contains material errors of law.

Notice of Decision

20.  In the circumstances, I conclude that the appropriate step is to  remit
    the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  all  issues  can  be
    properly assessed. There will be a complete re-hearing.

There was an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  I  set
    it aside.
There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed: A Mahmood                 Date: 24th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood








