


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal number:
PA/03190/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |       Decision and Reasons          |
|                                     |Promulgated                          |
|On 31 October 2019                   |       On 06 November 2019           |
|                                             |                            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     R R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr U Aslam, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  He first arrived in the UK in
    1999.  After exhausting his asylum claim, he was removed in  2009.   He
    returned on a forged Malaysian passport on 14 February 2018  and  again
    sought protection.  The respondent refused his claim  for  reasons  set
    out in a decision dated 12 March 2019.  FtT Judge  Bell  dismissed  his
    appeal by a decision promulgated on 7 August 2019.

 2. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  set  out  in  his
    application  dated  21  August  2019.   Permission  was  granted  on  4
    September 2019.

 3. The grounds at [3-4] assert error at [71] of the decision  in  relation
    to [29] of a report by Dr Ross, by overlooking that the  assessment  of
    suicide risk was in the event of return, which had not yet been finally
    decided or attempted;  accordingly, the facts that  the  appellant  had
    not been referred to psychiatric of secondary mental  health  services,
    had no hospital admissions, and the GP had no current health  concerns,
    were "wholly irrelevant", or could not be held to disclose no high risk
    of suicide if return were to be decided and attempted.

 4.  The  errors  are  categorised   as   having   regard   to   irrelevant
    considerations, making inferences not rationally available, and  giving
    "manifestly inadequate weight to Dr Ross's expertise".

 5. It may be obvious that any risk of  self-harm  would  be  at  its  most
    intense at the  stage  of  actual  removal;  but  it  would  be  highly
    artificial to say that absence of  any  current  concern  or  need  for
    treatment is irrelevant to the reality of that risk.

 6. As Mr Govan pointed out, the appellant has  already  been  through  the
    whole process of application, appeal and removal, and is  well  through
    it again.  He should be aware of impending  reality.   This  is  not  a
    prospect yet to dawn upon him.

 7. The ground does not acknowledge the totality of the judge's reasons  at
    [63 - 73] for finding Dr Ross's view "too speculative to be  reliable".
    These include the significant point that  Dr  Ross  took  it  that  the
    appellant had given an accurate account of detention and torture in Sri
    Lanka in 1997, although he  had  failed  to  establish  that  claim  in
    previous proceedings.  The issue is also to be placed in context of the
    appellant failing again to establish that claim before Judge Bell,  and
    failing to establish his further claim  of  detention  and  torture  in
    2018.

 8. This ground discloses no error in the treatment of  the  report  by  Dr
    Ross.

 9. The grounds at [5] assert error at [72-73] by "applying the wrong  test
    et  separatim  the  wrong  standard  of  proof".   The  suggestion,  as
    developed in submissions by Mr Aslam, is that the reference in J v SSHD
    [2005] Imm AR 409 to a high threshold, which goes to the level of harm,
    has been misunderstood as going to the standard of proof.

10. The lower standard of proof in both  asylum  and  article  3  cases  is
    perhaps the best  known  feature  of  this  jurisdiction.   It  may  be
    possible to suggest  error  by  taking  phrases  out  of  context,  but
    decisions are to be read fairly and as a whole. The wording at [72]  of
    a need for "the clearest possible evidence" is followed by "of  a  real
    risk".  At [73] inability to find that the risk of suicide "is high" is
    followed by "far short of high".

11. I am not persuaded  that  the  Judge  decided  this  case  against  the
    appellant by applying a higher  standard  of  probation  than  the  law
    requires.

12. The third error asserted in the grounds, at [6],  is  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons, or giving manifestly inadequate weight to a  relevant
    consideration, in finding that risk could be managed  at  the  time  of
    removal,  when  the  appellant  had  self-harmed  during  his  previous
    removal.

13. As I observed at the hearing, the history of self-harm could as readily
    be interpreted as going against the appellant's case.   The  respondent
    cannot possibly eliminate all  attempts  at  self-harm.   Although  the
    appellant may have frustrated the first attempt to remove him in  2009,
    his  removal  was  subsequently  managed.   If  anything,  that  is  an
    indication that it could be  managed  again.   It  is  within  judicial
    knowledge that the respondent has appropriate policies  and  mechanisms
    in place.

14. The ground essentially argues that because the appellant self-harmed in
    2009, it is impossible to  find  that  his  removal  might  be  managed
    successfully in 2019.  There is no error in holding to the contrary.

15. I am fortified in my view of all the grounds by the consideration  that
    the case fell well short of the six parameters of J, set out by the FtT
    at [39].  On the adverse credibility findings as to alleged  events  in
    1997 and in 2018, there was no causal link between removal and  inhuman
    treatment, and no objective risk from the foreign state.

16. Separately and together, the grounds do not show that the  decision  of
    the FtT involved the making of any error on a point of law  whereby  it
    should be set aside.  The decision shall stand.

17. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  Anonymity is preserved herein.

      [pic]

      Dated 1 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




