
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/03838/2017
                                                               PA/04056/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2019                            |On 3 May 2019                 |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    S M F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan of Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sweet promulgated on 1 February 2019.


2.   I discuss below the circumstance of the  Appellant  having  two  appeal
    references herein. However, for the purposes of  consideration  of  the
    issue of error of law it is convenient to approach the case as if there
    were a single appeal -  and  indeed  in  substance  the  Appellant  has
    advanced a single protection claim.


3.   The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal pursuant  to  permission  to
    appeal granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes on 6 March 2019.   In
    granting permission to  appeal  Judge  Boyes  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that there had been "a wholesale [failure] to engage with  any
    of the evidence" and characterised the decision of Judge Sweet as being
    "excruciatingly short" in respect of 'findings'.


4.   I have little hesitation in finding a material error  of  law,  and  in
    accepting the essential basis of the challenge to the Upper Tribunal to
    the effect that the Judge's reasons were inadequate.


5.   In the circumstances,  and  where  the  decision  in  the  appeal  will
    require to be remade before the First-tier Tribunal with all issues  at
    large, I do not propose to rehearse the full facts and circumstances of
    the Appellant's case - which are a matter of record and adequately  set
    out in the materials on file.


6.   In my judgement the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  almost
    completely devoid of any reasoning.  What  little  reasoning  there  is
    lacks coherence, and otherwise fails  to  address  in  any  detail  the
    substance  of  the  Appellant's  claim  and  the  extensive  supporting
    materials filed in support of his protection appeal.


7.   The Appellant had filed medical evidence, both in respect  of  physical
    injuries and his mental health. He relied on such evidence  in  support
    of a submission that he should be treated as a vulnerable witness,  and
    his testimony be seen through that prism.   The  medical  evidence  was
    also relied upon as  corroboration  of  his  account  of  events.   Yet
    further it was said to support a submission in respect of Article 3  of
    the ECHR with  regard  to  suicide  risk.   The  Appellant  also  filed
    supporting testimony from his father by way of a letter.  He  filed  an
    arrest warrant. He raised arguments in  respect  of  a  risk  from  the
    redocumentation process in the event that he might be returned  to  Sri
    Lanka.  All such matters were clearly articulated and presented to  the
    First-tier Tribunal by way of a Skeleton Argument  drafted  by  Counsel
    who appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.


8.   There is no discernible  engagement  on  the  face  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Decision with any of  those  matters.  The  documents  in  the
    appeal are listed at paragraph 12 of the Decision, but mere listing  of
    the documents is  not  adequate.   There  is  brief  reference  to  the
    Appellant's father's letter at paragraph 28, but no analysis or finding
    in respect of the weight or otherwise to be accorded to that evidence.


9.   Mr Lindsay on behalf of the Secretary of State sought to make a  virtue
    of the brevity of the Judge's decision,  commending  it.  He  submitted
    that providing a decision covered the issues in the appeal it  did  not
    have to be of any particular length, or cover  every  single  piece  of
    evidence. In principle the latter observation is sound. However, in  my
    judgement, on the facts of this particular case it does not  avail  the
    Respondent.


10.  Judge Sweet's analysis of the materials and evidence in the  appeal  is
    essentially limited to points in respect of a letter from a Sri  Lankan
    lawyer that had been submitted by the Appellant. I acknowledge that the
    Judge's observations in respect of this letter demonstrate a degree  of
    dissatisfaction with  the  contents  of  the  letter  and  perhaps  its
    provenance:

          "Yet, the alleged robbery took place on  2003  and  there  was  no
         explanation given to me why the complaint was  not  made  until  21
         March 2015, before the appellant left Sri  Lanka.   Furthermore  he
         refers to the appellant with an additional name (Mohamed)  -  which
         is said to be his father's name - and appears to have  a  different
         email address [which is then cited] to that used by the appellant's
         UK solicitors [which is also then cited].  No explanation was given
         over the two different email addresses." (paragraph 27).


11.  However, the Judge does not take this  analysis  any  further  forward,
    and does not state in terms what he makes of the rest of  the  contents
    of the lawyer's letter. Nor is there any  finding  in  respect  of  the
    arrest warrant.  The reader is, as it were, 'left hanging'.


12.  There then follows a paragraph where  essentially  the  Judge  does  no
    more than rehearse the contents  of  the  Appellant's  father's  letter
    (paragraph 28). This is then followed by an expression of  the  Judge's
    conclusions:

     "Taking all these factors into account I have not found  the  appellant
         to be credible.  These events, if  indeed  they  took  place,  took
         place a long time ago.  He  continued  to  work  for  the  regional
         government over a long period and  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
         appellant is at risk on return." (paragraph 29).


13.  Paragraphs 27 and 29 contain the entirety of the  Judge's  reasons  and
    findings.


14.  As regards paragraph 29, given that the Appellant claims to  have  been
    arrested in March 2015, (shortly before fleeing to the UK in June  2015
    and claiming asylum on 9 July 2015), it can hardly  be  said  that  the
    matters relied upon "took place a long time ago".  I  acknowledge  that
    potentially the fact that an asylum  seeker  was  in  employment  by  a
    regional government, (although it is  to  be  noted  not  the  national
    government), might be a matter  of  adverse  weight  depending  on  the
    circumstances; but this is not inevitably so. In the instant  case  the
    Appellant says in his narrative account that although he  had  come  to
    the attention of the authorities on two previous occasions in 2003  and
    2009 he had been released without charge; it might be  considered  that
    this signified that there was no continuing interest  in  him  at  that
    time such that employment by a  regional  government  was  not  contra-
    indicated. His case is in significant part based on a  resurrection  of
    interest, and therefore it might  be  concluded  that  his  intervening
    employment is not inevitably a matter that should count against him. It
    is a matter of nuance to be decided in all  the  circumstances  of  the
    case; it is not a matter that can bear  near  determinative  weight  in
    itself such as to obviate a need  to  make  reasoned  findings  on  the
    details of the claim. In my judgement the analysis and reasoning of the
    First-tier Tribunal falls far short  of  what  the  parties  -  and  in
    particular the Appellant - could have expected in  light  of  the  case
    presented to the First-tier Tribunal.


15.  I find the deficiency of  reasoning  material.  I  do  not  accept  the
    Respondent's submission that the Judge  would  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion irregardless. In any event 'materiality' is not always to be
    determined solely on the basis that the same outcome  would  have  been
    likely even if all such matters had been duly considered.


16.  The consequence is that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  must
    be set aside. Because in substance the Appellant has not had a full and
    proper consideration of his appeal, the only just outcome is  that  the
    decision in the appeal be remade pursuant to a new hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal by a Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sweet with all issues at large.


The Two Appeal References

17.  Finally, it is to be noted that the Appellant's case comes  before  the
    Upper Tribunal with two appeal references.  The  explanation  for  this
    can be found in part at paragraph 4 of the Decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: the Appellant had made an application for  asylum  which  had
    been initially determined, seemingly because of his failure  to  engage
    with  the  process  on  19  November  2015;  he  lodged  an  appeal   -
    considerably  out  of  time  on  19  April  2017  (ref  PA/03838/2017);
    thereafter the Respondent reconsidered the asylum claim, culminating in
    a second decision (12 March  2019),  and  a  second  Notice  of  Appeal
    (accorded reference PA/04056/2018).  From paragraph 12 of the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal it appears it was common ground between  the
    parties that in substance it was  the  second  decision  that  was  the
    subject of the proceedings: "It was agreed by  both  parties  that  the
    appeal relating to the second decision (of 12 March 2018) had  subsumed
    the first decision 19 November 2015".


18.  I raised with the representatives the question  of  whether  the  first
    appeal should not now be brought administratively to a  conclusion.  Mr
    Nathan was resistant to the idea for the sole reason that he wished  to
    preserve the possibility of the  Appellant  securing  a  fee  award  in
    respect of both appeals were he to  be  ultimately  successful  in  the
    proceedings.


19.  In circumstances where the full procedural history was not  immediately
    apparent from the materials available to him, Mr Lindsay indicated that
    he considered the prudent course of action  would  be  to  permit  both
    appeals to return to the First-tier Tribunal whereupon  any  issues  in
    respect of the formality of terminating the process in  one  appeal  or
    the other, or deciding both appeals, and any consequent  issues  as  to
    fee awards might then be resolved.


20.  For the avoidance of any doubt:  neither  representative  was  able  to
    state with any certainty that there had been either a withdrawal  of  a
    decision or a withdrawal of an appeal;  further  there  was  before  no
    attempt by either party to withdraw one  or  other  the  decisions,  or
    withdraw one or other of the appeals.


21.  Perusal of the two appeal files  subsequent  to  the  hearing  reveals,
    amongst other things, that the decision of the Respondent to reconsider
    the  Appellant's  application  for  asylum  appears  to   have   arisen
    subsequent to  Directions  issued  by  the  Tribunal  following  appeal
    PA/03838/2017 being listed for hearing on 19 May 2017. On that occasion
    counsel for the Appellant successfully applied for  an  adjournment  to
    allow the Respondent to consider  the  Appellant's  substantive  claim.
    Directions were issued on 17 June 2017 that  the  Respondent  "consider
    the  Appellant's  claim  substantively   including   interviewing   the
    Appellant", and also that the Respondent "issue a supplementary  letter
    dealing with the Appellant's substantive claim".


22.  Putting aside the propriety of those Directions,  it  is  to  be  noted
    that the Appellant was in due course  interviewed  by  the  Respondent.
    PA/03838/2017 was listed again for hearing on  22  November  2017,  and
    adjourned on the application  of  the  Appellant  -  unopposed  by  the
    Respondent - on the basis that although an interview had taken place no
    consequent decision letter had yet been  served.  Appeal  PA/03838/2017
    was adjourned with further Directions.


23.  It would appear from the foregoing that the 'new' decision of 12  March
    2018 was anticipated  within  the  proceedings  of  PA/03838/2018,  and
    Directions had been given by the Tribunal to accommodate  consideration
    of that decision within the scope of PA/03838/2018.


24.  In such circumstances it is unclear why  the  Appellant  -  and/or  his
    representatives - considered it appropriate to lodge the second appeal,
    PA/04056/2018.  In  so  doing  it  has  given   rise   to   unnecessary
    correspondence attempting to link the two appeals, and indeed trying to
    unravel the history in this regard has  taken  me  almost  as  long  as
    resolving the issue of error of law. Be that as it may, it may be  that
    ultimately the Appellant will need to take up the question of  the  fee
    for the second appeal - which may have been lodged unnecessarily - with
    his solicitors. However, as I have uncovered  this  procedural  history
    subsequent to the discussion with the representatives, I have not heard
    argument on this particular issue.


25.  Accordingly in all the circumstances it is  presently  administratively
    more convenient that both appeals return to the First-tier  Tribunal  -
    as was in any event the joint position of the representatives before me
    - and for any arising issues to be resolved there. In  this  context  I
    merely note that the issue that Mr Nathan is anxious to protect -  that
    of the fee award - will only arise if the Appellant  is  successful  in
    establishing his grounds for protection; if he  should  at  that  point
    seek to recover both fees in full he  may  reasonably  be  expected  to
    explain why the second appeal was lodged whilst his  first  appeal  was
    still pending and the reconsideration of his asylum  claim  was  taking
    place pursuant to Directions in that first appeal.


Notice of Decision

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


27.  The decision in the appeals is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet,  with
    all issues at large.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the  hearing  to  which  I  have  added  further  comments
pursuant to a consideration of the court files in respect of the history  of
there being two appeal references.



Signed:                                 Date: 30 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

