
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03195/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2016                  |On 25 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           Mohammad Hassan Abdulah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Patel, instructed by Brudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Mohammad Hassan Abdulah, was born on 1  January  1987
    and is a male citizen of Libya.  The appellant had appealed against the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 17 November 2015 to refuse  to
    grant him asylum.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  M  Davies)  in  a
    decision promulgated  on  27  July  2016  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside.  I have reached that conclusion for the following  reasons.   By
    any standards, some of the reasoning of Judge M Davies is difficult, if
    not impossible, to understand.  At [39], the judge wrote that,  "it  is
    clear that the appellant was not subjected to persecution or  treatment
    which amounted to serious harm  prior  to  his  departure  from  Libya.
    Whilst I accept that black Libyans are or may be persecuted in Libya it
    is clear such treatment does  not  amount  to  persecution  or  serious
    harm."  It is just about possible to achieve  a  construction  of  that
    last sentence which makes sense (the judge may have been  referring  by
    the use of the words "such  treatment"  to  the  treatment  which  this
    appellant received in Libya, rather than the persecution  generally  of
    black Libyans in that country).  However, the purpose of  any  decision
    or judgment is primarily to explain to the losing party  in  clear  and
    unequivocal terms why he or she has lost.  It is not appropriate, in my
    opinion, for the losing party to have  to  wrestle  with  semantics  in
    order to impose meaning upon a judgment which prima facie does not make
    sense. The lack of clarity in this instance is such that  the  decision
    cannot stand.

 3. I would say that I also find that the remainder of the analysis at [40-
    44] consists, at least in part, of a series of  assertions  unsupported
    by reasoning, rather than of cogent findings of fact.

 4. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  There  will  need
    to be a new fact-finding exercise; none of the findings of  fact  shall
    stand.  That is an exercise better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal
    to which this case has returned.  I do not suggest that any part of  my
    decision should influence the next  judicial  decision  maker.   Having
    found the facts, the new Tribunal must make a new decision applying the
    relevant law and country guidance.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  27
    July 2016 is set aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge M Davies) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.
     None of the findings of fact shall stand.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
