
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03028/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 September 2017                       |On 22 September 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                LE Cuong Viet
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Daykin, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Le Cuong Viet, was born on 1 February 1996 and is a male
    citizen of Vietnam.  He appealed against a decision of  the  respondent
    dated 10 March 2017 to refuse his asylum claim and to  give  directions
    for his removal.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chana) in  a  decision
    promulgated on 1 June 2017 dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Before Judge Chana, Miss Daykin (who  also  appears  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal)  made  an  application  on  the  appellant's  behalf  for  an
    adjournment of the  hearing.   Judge  Chana  refused  that  application
    giving her reasons at [28].  When considering whether or not  to  grant
    an adjournment of the hearing, Judge Chana  unfortunately  applied  the
    old Procedure Rules (The  Tribunal  (Procedure)  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    Rules 2005) rather than the current Rules (Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014).   The
    reason for  the  application  for  the  adjournment  was  that  medical
    evidence needed to  be  obtained  from  the  Helen  Bamber  Foundation.
    Applying the "old" Procedure Rules, in  particular  Rule  21(2),  Judge
    Chana noted this provided "that the Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing
    of an appeal on the application of the party unless satisfied that  the
    appeal cannot otherwise  be  justly  determined".   The  correct  (new)
    provision appears in the 2014 Procedure Rules at paragraphs 2 and 4:

         'Overriding objective and parties' obligation  to  co-operate  with
         the Tribunal

         2.-(1) The overriding objective of these Rules  is  to  enable  the
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly. [my emphasis]

         (2) Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-

         (a) dealing with the case in ways which are  proportionate  to  the
         importance of the case, the

         complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources
         of the parties and of the

         Tribunal;

         (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility  in  the
         proceedings;

         (c) ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are  able  to
         participate fully in the

         proceedings;

         (d) using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; and

         (e) avoiding delay, so far as compatible with proper  consideration
         of the issues. [my emphasis]

         (3) The Tribunal  must  seek  to  give  effect  to  the  overriding
         objective when it-

         (a) exercises any power under these Rules; or

         (b) interprets any rule or practice direction.

         (4) Parties must-

         (a) help the Tribunal to further the overriding objective; and

         (b) co-operate with the Tribunal generally.




         Case management powers

         4.-(1) Subject to the provisions of the  2007  Act  and  any  other
         enactment, the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.

         (2) The Tribunal may give a direction in relation to the conduct or
         disposal of proceedings at any

         time, including a direction amending, suspending or  setting  aside
         an earlier direction.

         (3) In particular, and without restricting the  general  powers  in
         paragraphs (1) and (2), the Tribunal may-

         (a) extend or  shorten  the  time  for  complying  with  any  rule,
         practice direction or direction;

         (b) consolidate or hear together two or more sets of proceedings or
         parts of proceedings

         raising common issues;

         (c) permit or require a party to amend a document;

         (d) permit  or  require  a  party  or  another  person  to  provide
         documents, information, evidence

         or submissions to the Tribunal or a party;

         (e) provide  for  a  particular  matter  to  be  dealt  with  as  a
         preliminary issue;

         (f) hold a  hearing  to  consider  any  matter,  including  a  case
         management issue;

         (g) decide the form of any hearing;

         (h) adjourn or postpone a hearing; [my emphasis]

         (i) require a party to produce a bundle for a hearing;

         (j) stay (or, in Scotland, sist) proceedings;

         (k) transfer proceedings to another court or tribunal if that other
         court or tribunal has

         jurisdiction in relation to the proceedings and-

         (i) because of a change of circumstances since the proceedings were
         started, the

         Tribunal no longer has jurisdiction in relation to the proceedings;
         or

         (ii) the Tribunal considers that the other court or tribunal  is  a
         more appropriate forum for the determination of the case; or

         (l)  suspend  the  effect  of  its   own   decision   pending   the
         determination  by  the  Tribunal  or  the  Upper  Tribunal  of   an
         application for permission to appeal against,  and  any  appeal  or
         review of, that decision.'




 3. Mr Mills, for the Secretary of  State,  accepted  that  the  judge  had
    fallen into material error.  He submitted that the 2014 Rules  differed
    substantively  from  the  2005  Rules  upon  which  Judge   Chana   had
    incorrectly relied.  The overriding  objective  provides  that  a  case
    should be dealt with "fairly and justly"  and  there  is  no  longer  a
    mandatory obligation on the Tribunal to proceed with a  hearing  unless
    it can otherwise not be justly  determined.   Further,  the  overriding
    objective at 2(1)(e) provides that the avoiding of delay (in this  case
    by  way  of  an  adjournment)  should  be   "compatible   with   proper
    consideration of the issues".  Both advocates agreed that the  question
    of the appellant's medical condition had been raised before the hearing
    before Judge  Chana.   The  Helen  Bamber  Foundation  (HBF)  had  been
    approached  and  had  given  estimates  for  the  likely  date  of  the
    production of a report.  Miss Daykin  submitted  that  given  that  the
    decision in the case had been taken in March 2017 and there had been  a
    First-tier Tribunal hearing in April 2017 a delay of a couple of months
    beyond that date was not excessive.  A Rule 35 report had already  been
    obtained and revealed scarring on the appellant's body.  The HBF report
    had been commissioned whilst  the  appellant  had  been  in  detention.
    Judge Chana had dealt  with  the  Rule  35  report  at  [67]  but  both
    advocates  agreed  that  this  evidence  of  the  appellant's   medical
    condition and scarring was inadequate.  Further,  both  representatives
    referred  me  to  [48]  at  which  the  judge   recorded   that   "this
    [inconsistent answers given to questions by the appellant]  ...  cannot
    be explained away by his mental health and ability to recall".  As Miss
    Daykin submitted, the judge here attempts her  own  assessment  of  the
    appellant's mental health but  does  so  without  any  relevant  expert
    evidence to guide her.

 4. I am aware that at [28] the judge does remark that the appeal needed to
    be "fairly determined" but there is no doubt that she applied the wrong
    procedure rule test when deciding whether to adjourn the hearing; I  am
    not satisfied that this is an instance when the judge may have  had  in
    mind the relevant procedure rule but has accidentally referred  to  the
    former provision.  In any event, given that the appellant's medical and
    psychological condition had been raised before the hearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal and given also that the likely  completion  dates  for  a
    report were available to the judge and in light of the fact  also  that
    the delay from the respondent's decision to the  likely  completion  of
    the medical evidence was not by any standard excessive, it seems to  me
    that the judge, by refusing the adjournment application, has failed  to
    put the Tribunal in a position where it might be able to  carry  out  a
    "proper consideration of the issues."  Indeed, in my view, her decision
    on that issue was legally flawed under both the 2005 and 2014 Procedure
    Rules.

 5. I set aside Judge Chana's decision.  None of the findings of fact shall
    stand.  Fresh evidence has been produced including the report from  the
    Helen Bamber Foundation.  This evidence is now on the Tribunal file and
    I note that it has been served on the Secretary of State.   There  will
    need to be a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal which  will  then
    remake the decision.  Any evidence upon which either party may seek  to
    rely at the next hearing should be filed at the Tribunal and served  on
    the other party no later than ten clear days before the hearing.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 1 June  2017  is
    set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.   The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Chana) for that Tribunal
    to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 21 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 21 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

