
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/03657/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 April 2021                     |On 15 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     ABS

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Ms S Khan,  instructed  by  Parker  Rhodes  Hickmotts
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I indicated my decision and reasons in brief,  reserving  my  full  reasons,
which I now give. The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity from  Kirkuk,
    with date of birth given as 1.1.90, has appealed with permission to the
    Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    promulgated 20.11.19 (Judge Mensah),  dismissing  on  all  grounds  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  22.3.19,
    to refuse his claim for international protection, first made in 2008.

 2. A  previous  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  from  2009  (Judge  Lever)
    dismissed the appeal, rejecting the factual basis  of  the  appellant's
    claim. The appellant subsequently made several further applications and
    submissions. The most  recent  refusal  decision  arises  from  further
    submissions accepted as  a  new  claim  within  paragraph  353  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.  A  further  right  of  appeal   arose   from   the
    respondent's refusal of the new claim.

 3. At the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing, the appellant did  not  seek
    to go behind Judge Lever's 2009 findings but  relied  on  Kirkuk  as  a
    'contested area' and the absence of CSID documentation  to  enable  the
    appellant to return to his home area. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mensah
    followed the then extant Country Guidance, declining  the  respondent's
    invitation to depart from AA, and concluded that  the  appellant  could
    not return to Kirkuk. Although the appellant had filed  copies  of  his
    CSID and INC, the judge appeared  to  have  accepted  at  [25]  of  the
    decision that he did not have access to the originals. However, at [26]
    of the decision, the judge found  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that he could not produce documentation  needed  to  obtain
    replacement documents from the Embassy or Consulate in the UK  or  with
    the assistance of his family in Iraq (Judge Lever  found  that  he  had
    family in both Kirkuk and Erbil). At [26], Judge Mensah stated, "He has
    failed to prove where his original documents are and that they are  not
    in fact  already  in  his  possession."  In  the  premises,  the  judge
    concluded that whilst he could not  return  to  Kirkuk,  the  appellant
    could relocate to the IKR and there receive family assistance,  and  so
    dismissed the appeal.

 4. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 13.2.20.
    However, when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Blundell granted permission on 5.11.20,  considering  it
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into account  (not
    mentioned in the decision) the appellant's evidence as to  unsuccessful
    attempts to redocument himself from the Iraqi authorities in the UK. It
    was also considered arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  resolve  the
    conflict between the appellant's assertion that he had given  the  Home
    Office his  original  documents  and  the  respondent's  denial.  Judge
    Blundell also considered arguable that the claimed  insistence  by  the
    Iraqi authorities that the appellant should produce  an  original  CSID
    before a replacement could be issued was material to the ability of the
    appellant's family to assist him to redocument himself. Finally,  Judge
    Blundell pointed to potential tension  between  findings  made  by  the
    judge at [17], [24] and [25] of the decision regarding contact with his
    family.

 5. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the submissions made to me and the grounds of  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. At [12] of the decision the judge observed that the evidence  had  been
    recorded in the record of proceedings and had been carefully considered
    before coming to a decision. It is  not  necessary  for  the  judge  to
    recite or even summarise the evidence, provided it is clear that it has
    been taken into account and that cogent reasons  justify  the  findings
    made.

 7. However, at [26], in finding that the  appellant  "failed  to  show  he
    cannot produce the documents needed  to  obtain  replacement  documents
    from the Embassy or Consulate or from his family abroad," the judge did
    not mention the Consulate letter of 5.8.19 which states the requirement
    to produce the original Iraqi documents  before  a  passport  could  be
    issued. This was supported by the appellant's supplementary  statement.
    No mention was made of the appellant's alleged unsuccessful attempts to
    redocument himself.  I am satisfied that  this  was  an  error  of  law
    undermining the reliability of the finding  that  he  could  redocument
    himself.

 8. With regards to the related issue  of  the  location  of  the  original
    documents, at [25] the judge rejected the claim that the  appellant  is
    undocumented. At [26] the judge added, "He has failed  to  prove  where
    his original documents are and that they are not in fact already in his
    possession." In reaching this finding, the judge did  not  resolve  the
    conflict between the claim that the appellant had  given  his  original
    identity  documents  to  the  respondent  during  interview   and   the
    respondent's assertion in the letter of 23.5.19 confirming that  whilst
    there were on file photocopies of what appeared to be  a  CSID  and  ID
    booklet, there were no original ID documents on file. In the  premises,
    the finding that the appellant failed to demonstrate he did not in fact
    have the originals is unsupported  by  cogent  reasoning  and  entirely
    fails to resolve the clear conflict  of  evidence  as  to  this  issue.
    Again, I am satisfied that this was an error  of  law  undermining  the
    reliability of the finding.

 9. At [17] the judge rejected the appellant's  claim  to  have  maintained
    contact with his family up  until  October  2017  but  thereafter  lost
    contact. The justification for that finding is set out in the preceding
    paragraphs between [14] and [16]. Possible confusion  arises  from  the
    finding at [24] that as a result of destruction and displacement it was
    reasonably likely that the appellant was unable to contact  his  family
    in Kirkuk in October 2017. However, at  [25]  the  judge  repeated  the
    rejection of the claim  that  contact  was  maintained  only  up  until
    October  2017,  noted  Judge  Lever's  unchallenged  finding  that  the
    appellant has family in other places in Iraq,  including  Erbil  within
    the IKR, so that the judge rejected  "the  submission  he  now  has  no
    contact with any family in Iraq, or that he is  undocumented."  Reading
    the decision as a whole, I do not accept that there  is  any  'tension'
    between these findings. The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  would
    have been unable to contact his family in the month of October 2017 but
    rejected the claim that all contact thereafter had been  lost.  In  any
    event, this was not a pleaded ground and given the unchallenged finding
    that the appellant has family in Erbil, any alleged error is immaterial
    to the finding that the  appellant  would  have  family  assistance  in
    relocating to the IKR.

10. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I find material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that it must
    be set aside to be remade. Given that there was no attempt to go behind
    Judge Lever's findings, the remitted appeal can properly be limited  to
    the issues of the location of the appellant's return to  Iraq  and  the
    identity documentation necessary to enable him to do so.  Clearly,  the
    Country Guidance of AA has been overtaken by SMO but there is also  the
    June 2020  CPIN  indicating  that  as  Kirkuk  has  installed  the  new
    terminals, no CSID can be issued as attendance in person for  biometric
    information to be recorded is necessary. These  are  all  issues  which
    will need to be grappled with.

11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiate the findings of fact and  the  conclusions  from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues in the appeal.

12. In all the circumstances, I relist this appeal for a fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that this is a  case  which  falls
    squarely within the Senior President's Practice Statement at  paragraph
    7.2.

Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The decision in the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    remade afresh on the limited issues of location of return and  identity
    documentation only.

    I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       13 April 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       13 April 2021





