
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03322/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2020                  |On 23 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     BS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Boyle, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  refer  to  him.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Hands)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who, in a determination  promulgated  on  the  22nd  May  2019,
    dismissed his claim for protection.

The factual background:

 3. The background to the Appellant's protection claim is set  out  in  the
    determination of the FtTJ at paragraphs 9-29 and in the decision letter
    of the Secretary of State issued on 22 March 2019.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Iraq. He claims to  have  left  Iraq  in
    October 2014 and travelled to Turkey and  then  through  several  other
    countries. He was fingerprinted in Germany in October 2015. On  release
    he travelled to France and then  to  the  UK.  He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 24 September 2016 and made an application for asylum  and/or
    humanitarian protection. His claim was referred  to  the  Third  County
    Unit and his claim was refused in 2016.  However, it was later  decided
    that the UK would be responsible for his claim and a decision was  made
    on the 22 March 2019.

 5. The basis of his claim was that he  was  a  national  of  Iraq  and  of
    Kurdish ethnicity. Firstly, was in fear of his mother's family and  her
    ex-husband because of a blood feud which had resulted in attacks on the
    family. Secondly, in 2003 as a result of his father having  arrested  a
    prominent member of the Kxx tribe, the appellant claimed that Daesh and
    members of the tribe took retribution by kidnapping and  torturing  him
    in 2003 or early 2004. When Daesh invaded Jalawla the appellant  feared
    that he would be singled out personally and therefore fled the town.

 6. The decision letter of the Secretary  of  State  dated  22  March  2019
    considered that he did not have a genuine subjective fear on return  to
    Iraq. It was not accepted that the appellant had  been  involved  in  a
    blood feud  or  that  his  fears  concerning  Daesh  were  credible  or
    consistent.  The  decision  letter  set  out  several  issues  of   the
    credibility and consistency of his factual account.

 7. The respondent to set out  the  country  materials  and  the  CPIN  and
    consideration  was  also  to  the  country  guidance  decisions  in  AA
    (Article15 (c ) Iraq CG [2015] KUT 544  as  amended  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AA Iraq v SSHD[2017] EWCA  Civ  944  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds-
    internal relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 0212.  Specific  consideration  was
    given to documentation  and  feasibility  of  return.  Considering  the
    factors identified in the case law and country materials, it was stated
    (wrongly) that his  home  area  was  in  the  IKR  but  that  he  could
    internally relocate to the IKR via Baghdad. As to documentation it  was
    stated that as he had possessed documents such as his passport and that
    his family could assist him by attending at his the CSID office of  his
    home governorate. His claim was refused on all grounds.

 8. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal against that decision.

 9. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal before FtTJ Hands. In  a
    decision promulgated on 22 May 2019, the FtTJ dismissed his appeal.

10. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and was granted on the 21
    June 2019 by FtTJ Andrew for the following reasons:

         "I am satisfied that there is an arguable  error  of  law  in  this
         decision in that the Judge did not consider whether  the  appellant
         could return to his home area of Jalawla taking into  account   the
         country guidance case of AA (Article 15 ( c) Iraq [2015] UKUT."

11. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper  Tribunal.  Mr  Boyle,
    who had not appeared  before  the  FtTJ,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and Ms Petterson,  senior  presenting  officer,  appeared  on
    behalf of the respondent.

12. In his submissions he relied upon the grounds in which  it  was  stated
    that the appellant had based his asylum claim on his political opinion,
    his fear of Isis and in respect of  the  blood  and  tribal  feud.  The
    appellant originated from the contested  area  of  Jalawla  within  the
    Diyala province as confirmed by the country  guidance  decision  of  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  and  therefore  he  had  claimed
    humanitarian protection in the alternative. However, the FtTJ erred  in
    law by failing to consider the humanitarian protection claim  and  only
    focused on the appellant's asylum claim.

13.  It  was  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  was  required  to  consider   the
    humanitarian protection claim in its own right following the refusal of
    the asylum claim. Mr Boyle submitted that the  correct  approach  would
    have been to consider whether Diyala remained a contested area  and  if
    so, the FtTJ  would  then  need  to  consider  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation. However, if the judge did not consider Diyala to  remain  a
    contested area, then the judge would have to  give  strong  and  cogent
    reasons to depart from the country guidance caselaw.

14. The grounds go on to state that whilst it  was  acknowledged  that  the
    judge discussed internal relocation  in  the  context  of  the  country
    guidance caselaw of AAH, this was  solely  in  respect  of  the  asylum
    claim.

15. In his oral submissions Mr Boyle sought to advance other grounds  which
    were not set out in the application for permission  to  appeal  and  in
    particular sought to  challenge  the  judge's  assessment  of  internal
    relocation and also the issue of documentation.  As  to  the  issue  of
    relocation to Baghdad,  he  submitted  that  at  paragraph  35  of  the
    decision the judge was in error by  failing  to  consider  his  Kurdish
    ethnicity. He further submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
    issues of accommodation and employment is  living  in  Baghdad  itself.
    Thus, he submitted inadequate reasoning had been  given  by  the  judge
    when reaching a consideration that  the  appellant  could  relocate  to
    Baghdad. When asked to point the tribunal  to  any  objective  evidence
    that made reference to the position of Kurds in  Baghdad,  he  was  not
    able to do so.

16. A further ground which had not been  pleaded  in  the  application  for
    permission related to the issue of  documentation.  He  submitted  that
    paragraph 32 of the decision was in error by stating that he  had  left
    Iraq with documents but had made no finding on this he  submitted  that
    the assessment made which concluded that he would be able to  obtain  a
    passport was not consistent with the country guidance.

17. As to internal relocation to the IKR, he submitted that the  judge  did
    not consider the headnote at paragraphs 9 and 10 of AAH as  to  how  he
    would be able to live in the IK are without the  assistance  of  family
    and whether he would be able to secure employment.

18. Ms Petterson on behalf of  the  respondent  relied  upon  the  rule  24
    response which responded to the grounds for permission and the grant of
    permission  which  related  solely  to  the   issue   of   humanitarian
    protection.

19. In the rule 24 response it was submitted that the FtTJ had  dealt  with
    all aspects of the appellant's claim and that it was open to the  judge
    to dismiss his claim to fear persecution or serious harm by  virtue  of
    the claimed tribal feud and the risk of honour  killing  and  that  the
    judge provided adequate and sustainable reasons in this respect.

20. Furthermore, it was submitted that the appellant  had  not  been  fully
    open about his family connections in Iraq at paragraph 21.

21. The respondent submitted the  contrary  to  the  grounds  advanced  and
    looking at the determination holistically, whilst it is clear  that  in
    the context of Article 15 ( c) element of humanitarian  protection  the
    judge failed to expressly make findings regarding his ability to return
    to his home area this was not a material  arguable  error  because  the
    judge had gone on to consider internal relocation and that it was  open
    to the judge to find that he had documents in the past and could be re-
    documented in the UK.

22. Ms Petterson submitted that the grounds had not sought to challenge the
    assessment of internal relocation nor had it sought  to  challenge  any
    findings made by the judge  relating  to  the  issue  of  documentation
    either and solely relied upon the  issue  of  humanitarian  protection.
    Therefore, she submitted the grounds should  not  be  widened  at  this
    stage to encompass those additional issues when no permission had  been
    granted on that basis.

23. Dealing with the grounds as pleaded, she submitted  that  whilst  there
    was no dispute that he was from a contested area, there was no material
    error capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal because the  judge
    had gone on to consider internal relocation in any event.

24. When considering the submissions made for which no permission had  been
    granted, she submitted that in respect of relocation to  Baghdad,  that
    the appellant's representative had not  pointed  the  tribunal  to  any
    material concerning problems expressly for Sunni Kurds but in any event
    the judge had made a proper assessment as to why  the  appellant  could
    relocate to the IKR where he had family members.

25. By way of reply Mr Boyle submitted that the grounds  were  sufficiently
    pleaded for the tribunal to take into account the issue of  relocation.
    He accepted that the grounds should have been fuller but  that  it  was
    necessary to consider  whether  the  consideration  of  relocation  was
    correct.

26. The conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Discussion:

27. I remind myself that I can only interfere with the decision of  a  FtTJ
    if it is demonstrated that the FtTJ made a decision which involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

28. The FtTJ set out her findings of fact at paragraphs [13]-[28]. The FtTJ
    rejected the appellant's account as to the  events  in  Iraq  and  gave
    adequate and sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusion  that  the
    appellant overall had not given a credible account as to events in Iraq
    and those reasons were based on the evidence before her.  There  is  no
    challenge to those factual findings.

29. The grounds raise one issue only and that is in respect of the  failure
    by the FtTJ to make an assessment of his humanitarian protection claim.
    That is also made clear by the grant of permission by Judge Andrew  who
    identified that it was an arguable error of law for the judge  to  fail
    to consider whether the appellant could return  to  his  home  area  of
    Jalawla taking into account the country guidance of AA  (article  15  (
    c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT.

30. I cannot accept the submission made by Mr Boyle  that  the  grounds  do
    seek to challenge the issue of internal relocation  and  the  issue  of
    documentation. There is no assertion made in the grounds that relate to
    the  issue  of  internal  relocation  by  reference  to   the   judge's
    determination or by reference to the  country  guidance  decision.  The
    reference to internal relocation at paragraph 4 is in  the  context  of
    the error alleged to have been made by failing to consider humanitarian
    protection.

31. There has been no application to amend the grounds  either  before  the
    hearing with a written application or indeed at the hearing itself.

32. In the decision of Das (paragraph 276B - s3C  -  application  validity)
    [2019] UKUT 00354 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal stated at [16]:

         "16  It has recently been necessary for  the  Court  of  Appeal  to
             underline the importance of adherence to proper  standards  of
             appellate  advocacy  in  immigration  appeals.   It   is   not
             permissible, whether in that court or in the  Upper  Tribunal,
             for advocates to consider that they are at liberty to  advance
             any argument which occurs to them, whether or not  it  appears
             in the grounds of appeal and whether or not any notice of  the
             argument has  been  given  to  the  respondent  or  the  Upper
             Tribunal.  The grounds of appeal frame the arguments which are
             to be advanced.  As Hickinbottom LJ said  in  Harverye  [2018]
             EWCA Civ 2848,  the  grounds  are  the  well  from  which  the
             argument must flow: [57].  And as Lewison LJ stated in ME (Sri
             Lanka) [2018] EWCA Civ 1486, the arguments which can be raised
             on appeal are limited by  the  grounds  of  appeal  for  which
             permission has been granted: [22].  These  observations  apply
             with equal force to appellate  proceedings  before  the  Upper
             Tribunal.  An application may be made to vary  the  notice  of
             appeal but, in the absence of such a notice, advocates  should
             expect that scope of their argument will be restricted to  the
             grounds upon which permission was granted."

33. I therefore consider the grounds as drafted. Dealing with the  grounds,
    it is clear that the FtTJ did not refer to the appellant's home area as
    a "contested area".  However,  I  accept  the  submission  made  by  Ms
    Petterson and as set out in the rule 24 response that when  considering
    the decision holistically whilst the judge  found  that  the  appellant
    faced no risk of serious harm in his home area, the judge did  not  end
    her consideration there but went on to consider internal relocation  to
    another area (not his home area) to either Baghdad or to  the  IKR  and
    therefore any  error  in  that  regard  was  not  material.  The  error
    identified in the grounds would not have affected the  outcome  of  the
    appeal because even if the judge had expressly  stated  that  his  home
    area was situated in a "contested area" the judge would  have  to  then
    consider issues of internal relocation which is what the judge in  fact
    did.

34. Consequently, I am satisfied that there is no material error of law  in
    the decision as asserted in the grounds.

35. Even though no application has been made  by  Mr  Boyle  to  amend  the
    grounds, and even if I were to waive any procedural requirement for the
    amendment of the grounds, I am not satisfied that the  judge  erred  in
    law in her assessment of the issues of documentation or relocation.

36. The most recent country guidance case on the return of Iraqi  Kurds  is
    AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT  212  (IAC)
    which  concerned  an  ethnic  Kurd  from  Kirkuk.  The  redocumentation
    question was not an issue for that particular appellant, however, as he
    was in  possession  of  his  Civil  Status  Identity  Document  (CSID).
    Nevertheless, the issue was considered with  the  Tribunal  recognising
    that the Iraqi civil registration system was in disarray and  that  the
    possibility of an applicant to obtain a new CSID  had  to  be  assessed
    against that background and on various factors which required  specific
    consideration (at 104-107).

37. It is clear from the country guidance decision  in  AA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944, where the amended country guidance set out  in  an
    Annex, that:

         "an international protection claim made  by  P  cannot  succeed  by
         reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of  a
         current or expired Iraqi passport  or  a  laissez  passer,  if  the
         Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account
         of a lack of any of those documents ."

38. The basis for that guidance, amended  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
    consensual basis, is set out at [36]-[41] of the judgment. It is  based
    upon that court's earlier decision in HF (Iraq) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1276 (see [38]-[39] of AA). The  context  means  that  a  claim  cannot
    succeed where an individual assert  that  they  are  at  risk  in  Iraq
    because they lack the very documentation needed to return to Iraq,  the
    absence of which would put them at risk (see [38] of AA).  However,  if
    the absence of a document, once in Iraq, creates a risk in the country,
    then it is a live issue as to whether or not an appellant will be  able
    to obtain such a document. That, of course, is the basis of the country
    guidance in both AA and AAH, that possession of a CSID is an  important
    document when considering an international protection claim based  upon
    an individual's circumstances once in Iraq.

39. The following guidance from AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944

         "D.  INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)

         As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

         In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P to
         relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however, likely  to
         be relevant:

         (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see Part C
             above).

         (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are  less  likely
             to find employment).

         (c)  whether P has family members or friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
             accommodate him.

         (d)  whether P is a lone female (women  face  greater  difficulties
             than men in finding employment).

         (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel  room  or  rent
             accommodation.

         (f)  whether P is from a minority community.

         (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there
             is some evidence  that  returned  failed  asylum  seekers  are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.

         There is not a real risk of an ordinary  civilian  travelling  from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).

40. In AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 - in particular I note the following:

         "9.  Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
             necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
             obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. ...

         10.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
             as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil
             Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi
             passport (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does
             not have such a passport, P's ability to  obtain  a  CSID  may
             depend on whether P knows the page and volume  number  of  the
             book holding P's information (and that  of  P's  family).  P's
             ability to persuade the officials that P is the  person  named
             on the relevant page is likely to  depend  on  whether  P  has
             family members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch
             for P."

41. Paragraphs 9 to 11 of the annex to AA (Iraq) CG  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944
    deals with the importance of, and availability of, a CSID.

42. As explained by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ
    944 "A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
    financial  assistance  from  the  authorities,  employment,  education,
    housing and medical treatment. If P shows there are no family or  other
    members likely to be able to provide means of support, P is in  general
    likely to fail and face a real risk of destitution amounting to serious
    harm if by the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary  of  State
    or agents to assist P's return have been exhausted,  it  is  reasonably
    likely that P will still have no CSID."

43. The FtTJ considered that the appellant may be able  to  obtain  a  CSID
    from the Iraqi Embassy in London (at paragraph  32).  Contrary  to  the
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant,   in  AA  (Article  15(c))
    Iraq CG it was said that a person who is able to produce a  current  or
    expired passport and/or the  book  in  page  number  for  their  family
    registration details may be able to obtain a CSID in the UK through the
    consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in London.

44. Ms Petterson, for the respondent, submitted that the  FtTJ  had  before
    her the Upper Tribunal decision of AA (Article 15(c)  Iraq)  CG  [2015]
    UKUT 544 (IAC).  Whilst the  FtTJ  did  not  expressly  refer  to  this
    section, the decision expressly refers to 'Obtaining a CSID  whilst  in
    the UK'. It recites the expert evidence upon which  the  judge  relied,
    which included the evidence of Dr Fatah and ties  the  various  strands
    together with a concluding paragraph [177]. This is replicated  in  the
    CG decision of AAH (Iraqi Kurds-internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 00212 and which reads:

         "177.    In summary, we conclude that it is possible for  an  Iraqi
         national living in the UK to obtain a  CSID  through  the  consular
         section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able to
         produce a current or expired passport  and/or  the  book  and  page
         number for their family registration details.".

45. At [34] Dr Fatah's evidence was  recorded  that  it  would  be  for  an
    individual to satisfy  the  consular  staff  as  to  his  identity  and
    nationality but having a CSID or passport, current or expired would  be
    of great assistance. If the applicant did not have  such  document,  he
    could demonstrate his identity by calling on  documented  relatives  to
    vouch for him.

46. The assessment made by the FtTJ was that  the  appellant  did  hold  an
    Iraqi passport and had identity cards he identified  as  Karti  Zanyary
    and Jensya ( at paragraph 31) and the FtTJ began her assessment on  the
    basis that he had previously been issued with an Iraqi  passport  which
    the judge found  was  "either  still  in  his  possession"  or  in  the
    alternative "if he genuinely no longer does, I  am  satisfied  that  he
    could apply for a replacement passport to the Iraqi Embassy".

47. There is no challenge in the grounds to any  of  the  factual  findings
    made by the FtTJ who found  that the appellant  to have fabricated  his
    account in order to substantiate his claim for protection and that that
    he had planned his journey to the UK ( see paragraph 28). Against  that
    background it was reasonably open to the FtTJ to reach  the  conclusion
    that he had also not been truthful about whether the passport was still
    in his possession.  At paragraph 21 the FtTJ found that  the  appellant
    had not given a truthful account of the whereabouts of the other family
    members. Furthermore, in his interview he had stated that  he  had  his
    members  of  his  mother  family  and  his  uncle  living  in  the  IKR
    (Sulaymaniyah) (Q36). Consequently, it was open to the  FtTJ  to  reach
    the conclusion that he had his passport or had  information  concerning
    the details on his passport which, combined  with  assistance  provided
    from his family relatives in Iraq would enable him  to  obtain  a  CSID
    either in the UK or as stated at paragraph 33 "  comparatively  quickly
    on his return".

48. As the judge considered that the appellant would be able  to  obtain  a
    CSID within a reasonable timeframe if in Iraq this is  consistent  with
    the decision of AAH.

49. The second issue raised by Mr Boyle, although again the issue  was  not
    set  out  in  the  grounds,  relates  to  the  assessment  of  internal
    relocation to Baghdad. In the decision of the FtTJ at paragraph 35, the
    judge applied the guidance set out in the decision of  BA  (returns  to
    Baghdad) and reached the conclusion that it would not be  unduly  harsh
    for the appellant to relocate to Baghdad as a single, male  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity and as Sunni Muslim. Mr Boyle submitted that the FtTJ was  in
    error because the FtTJ did not consider his Kurdish  ethnicity  or  the
    issues of accommodation or whether  he  had  support  from  friends  or
    family. He submitted  that  the  assessment  took  no  account  of  his
    ethnicity as a Kurd.

50. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent submitted that  there  was  no
    separate assessment of Sunni Kurds beyond the headnote in  BA  (returns
    to Baghdad) relating to ethnicity but in any event that  Mr  Boyle  had
    not referred the Tribunal to any objective material as to whether there
    were any Kurdish communities in Baghdad.  She  further  submitted  that
    that even if the assessment as to Baghdad was  in  error,  it  was  not
    material as the FtTJ had gone on to consider that the  appellant  as  a
    Kurd could internally relocate to the IKR at paragraphs  36-37  of  her
    decision.

51. The decision of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017]  UKUT  18  (IAC)
    states in the head note:

         "(v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal  of  US-
         led coalition forces in 2012 but is not at the levels seen in 2006-
         2007. A Shia dominated government is supported by Shia militias  in
         Baghdad. The evidence indicates that Sunni men are more  likely  to
         be targeted as suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups  such
         as ISIL. However, Sunni identity alone is not  sufficient  to  give
         rise to a real risk of serious harm.

         (vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves  create
         a real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a
         real risk for the purpose of the Refugee Convention, Article  15(c)
         of the Qualification Directive or Article  of the decisio3  of  the
         ECHR if assessed on a cumulative basis. The assessment will  depend
         on the facts of each case.

         (vii)    In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and  in
         the case of Sunni complainants,  are  likely  to  be  unwilling  to
         provide sufficient protection."

52. At paragraph 35 the  FtTJ  did  consider  the  appellant's  "individual
    characteristics" in accordance with the  guidance  which  included  his
    ethnicity as a Kurd (as the FtTJ expressly referred to  him  as  "Sunni
    Kurd"). Whilst it was accepted that he had no family links to that city
    or any family members there who could support him, the FtTJ found  that
    he could avoid destitution by being provided with the funds provided by
    the UK for those returning to Iraq  and  the  assistance  available  to
    returnees from the Iraqi authorities holding a CSID.  In  view  of  the
    FtTJ's finding that he could obtain a CSID and that he would  have  the
    assistance form family relatives in Iraq, the assessment  made  by  the
    FtTJ was reasonably open to her.

53. Even if the FtTJ was in error in  reaching  her  conclusions  that  the
    appellant  could  internally  relocate  to  Baghdad,   I   accept   the
    submission made by Ms Petterson that any error would not be material to
    the outcome because the FtTJ also found , in the  alternative  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh  for  him  to  relocate  to  the  IKR  (  see
    assessment at paragraphs  36-37). The FtTJ applied the country guidance
    in AAH and that the appellant as a Kurd, but not from the IKR, he could
    obtain entry as a visitor and then renew his  entry  permission  for  a
    further 10 days. Whilst  the  FtTJ  did  not  expressly  refer  to  the
    whereabouts of  the  appellant's  family  members,  the  appellant  had
    members of his mother's family and his  uncle  living  in  Sulaymaniyah
    (Q36) and therefore he would be able to access assistance from them. On
    the evidence before the FtTJ the appellant had experience as a labourer
    and therefore had the likelihood of obtaining employment in addition to
    family members in the IKR who could provide assistance to him.

Conclusion:

54. In summary, the assessment made was one reasonably open to the FtTJ  on
    the evidence, both oral and documentary, and I am  not  satisfied  that
    the decision of the FtTJ demonstrates the making of an error on a point
    of law to justify the setting aside of the decision.  The  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

55. The decision of the FtTJ did not involve the making of an  error  on  a
    point of law; the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 30/3/2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


