
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03649/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th August 2017                   |On 27th September 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     f m
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
`Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Williams
     Instructed by: Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
 1. Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify them or any member of  their  family.   This  order
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant is a Congolese national born in  1980,  who  appeals  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  A  D  Troupe),  sitting  at
    Newport on 9th January 2017, dismissing  his  international  protection
    appeal.

 4. The Appellant arrived in the UK with entry clearance as a  visitor,  to
    see his niece, on  20th  October  2015.   He  claimed  asylum  on  30th
    November 2015 asserting  that  following  his  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom he had been told by his brother, on 23 October 2015,  from  the
    Congo, that he was wanted by the police as a result  of  his  political
    work for the Union Pan-Africain pour la Democratie Sociale  (UPADS)  in
    the referendum campaign of October 2015.  The Appellant  asserted  that
    on 28th October 2015 the authorities destroyed his home, setting it  on
    fire, and had arrested and tortured to death  his  brother.   His  wife
    fled the property to her parents' home and then on  to  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo,  and  her  whereabouts,  along  with  those  of  his
    children, were unknown.

 5. The Respondent rejected  that  claim  finding  that  the  documentation
    submitted in support  namely  a  UPADS  membership  card,  a  newspaper
    report, a wanted notice, and a letter from the Appellant's  wife,  were
    unreliable, carrying difficulties on their face and being  inconsistent
    with the Appellant's claim, which itself contained inconsistencies  and
    contradictions.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge had the benefit of hearing and seeing the Appellant give  his
    evidence but did not believe his account concluding at [60]

         "Having considered the Appellant's evidence in detail  and  in  the
         round, and  in  the  context  of  the  objective  evidence  of  the
         political situation in Congo at the time, I  find  the  Appellant's
         account to be less than realistically likely  and  indeed  to  have
         been fabricated in an effort to remain in the UK."

 7. I briefly set out the main findings of the judge.

 8. The judge noted the Appellant's explanation that his  UPADS  membership
    card, conceded not to give the full name of  UPADS  accurately  and  to
    misstate the number of the Appellant's children and  have  misspellings
    of his names, contained printing errors, and his argument  that  if  he
    had wanted to falsify the membership card he would  have  ensured  that
    the details within it were correct.   The  judge  attached  no  adverse
    weight to the difficulties on the face of the card.

 9. The judge noted the Appellant's explanation that the newspaper  article
    incorrectly described him as a member of  another  party,  rather  than
    UPADS as a  journalistic  error.  The  judge  did  not  find  that  the
    inaccuracy determinative.

10. The judge noted the claim that even if the newspaper  article  did  not
    corroborate that the Appellant was a member of UPADS, because it  named
    the wrong party, it still reflected that he was known as an  opposition
    activist,  and  was  currently  actively  sought  by  the  police   for
    investigation.

11. The judge found that the content of the article was  inconsistent  with
    the Appellant's claim when it asserts that he had actively participated
    in demonstrations because  the  demonstrations  took  place  after  the
    Appellant had left the country.  The  judge  found  that  it  was  also
    inconsistent with the Appellant's account because he had not claimed to
    have "mobilised activists for the last meeting  of  the  opposition  in
    Pointe Noire" as the article asserts.  Further, the  judge  noted,  the
    Appellant had not claimed  at  any  time  that  he  was  involved  with
    "violent exchanges with the police"  as  the  article  described.   The
    judge concluded that the article added little to the Appellant's case.

12. Turning to the wife's letter the judge noted that  it  was  dated  21st
    November and addressed from  Pointe  Noire  and  was  expressed  to  be
    written from her parents' home and found the position was  contrary  to
    the Appellant's claim that she had fled to the DRC by  that  time.  The
    noted that when this discrepancy was pointed out to  the  Appellant  at
    the hearing he offered the explanation that  he  did  not  really  know
    because had not phoned his in-laws to enquire after her, because he was
    worried that they would ask him for  money.  The  judge  rejected  that
    explanation as:

         "unsatisfactory and less  than  credible.   I  find  that  had  the
         Appellant been concerned for his wife's safety he would have phoned
         his in-laws to have enquired after her, but in fact he chose not to
         do so as it is plain from her letter that she was residing with her
         parents and was not seeking refuge in the DRC or anywhere  else  as
         the Appellant now asserts."

13. In respect of the wanted notice the judge noted the document  had  been
    emailed to the Appellant on 2nd November 2015  but  he  was  unable  to
    explain how the document had come into the sender's possession, or  who
    had sent it to him.  The Appellant had been unable to offer  the  judge
    an explanation as to how, on 23 October 2015, days before its issue  on
    25th October and the authorities coming to the house in pursuance of it
    on 28th October, his brother had told him  by  telephone  that  he  was
    wanted.  The judge noted that the wanted notice contained no  reference
    number in the space provided in the heading, and the Respondent's point
    [54] that it was odd that it was issued three days  before  the  police
    visited the Appellant's home, when it would be supposed that the police
    would have attempted to seek him out before issuing  a  wanted  notice.
    The judge noted the absence of any verification of the document [55].

14. The judge found that the Appellant's account of his being sought by the
    police, and in that context his brother being tortured to death and his
    house burnt down,

         "to be wholly  disproportionate  in  the  context  of  the  broader
         country evidence.  It is clear from the objective evidence that  up
         to eighteen demonstrators had been killed in the demonstrations  of
         20 and 21 October, and that opposition leaders  had  been  arrested
         and detained, and Mr Makaya, an opposition party leader,  had  been
         sentenced to two years' imprisonment.  There is no objective report
         however that the police attacked  the  Appellant's  house  and  his
         brother as he claims  and,  given  the  Appellant's  low  political
         profile, I find that it is less than realistically likely that  the
         police would have sought him out, let alone  acted  in  the  manner
         which the Appellant now claims."

15. The judge at [57, 58 and 59] gives examples of further  inconsistencies
    in the Appellant's account of the police interest in him, pointing  out
    difficulties with the provenance of the claimed letter from  his  wife,
    the difficulty with the  account  in  the  letter  asserting  that  the
    Appellant's wife was at home when the claimed  arson  attack  occurred,
    when at paragraph 19 of his witness statement the Appellant  said  that
    his wife had left the home  on  23rd  October,  the  attack  apparently
    happening on 28th October.

The Grounds of Appeal

16. The grounds of appeal assert that in assessing the credibility  of  the
    claim the judge failed to give weight to the death certificate produced
    in relation to the appellant's brother which indicated that he had died
    as a result of wounds inflicted through torture.  At  the  hearing,  Ms
    Williams for the appellant made no separate submission on this point. I
    deal with it briefly. It is wrong to say the judge gave  it  inadequate
    consideration, he refers to it specifically in terms of the documentary
    evidence before him, and further takes it into account at  para  56  as
    part of the evidence available going to the account of the  authorities
    razing the appellant's house to the ground, causing his wife  to  flee,
    and in that context torturing and killing his  brother  on  28  October
    2015.  The judge mentions the certificate at the very beginning of  his
    consideration so that it is clear he had  it  in  mind  throughout  the
    assessment that follows. The death certificate is not determinative  of
    the position, and the judge gives many and cogent reasons  for  why  he
    did not accept the account.  The  grounds  do  not  significantly  take
    issue with any of those adverse credibility findings. The judge did not
    need, as the grounds aver, to decide if the  death  certificate  was  a
    forgery.

17. The Appellant appeals the judge's decision on the basis that the  judge
    has inadequately assessed the article of 17 November 2015 submitted  in
    support. The article did not limit the description of  the  Appellant's
    activities to the demonstrations that occurred after he left, and there
    was evidence that there had been demonstrations  before  the  Appellant
    left, so that in fact his activities as claimed  were  consistent  with
    it. The judge could not find that it was inconsistent with his claim.

18. I find no merit in that ground because, as the  judge  rightly  pointed
    out, it had never been  part  of  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  was
    involved in any violent clashes with the police. The  grounds  rely  on
    isolating a part of the evidence to read it in a way which  could  make
    it encompass earlier clashes. It is a nit-picking forensic approach, in
    effect reaching for a case that could  have  been  drawn  out  on  that
    particular piece of evidence. It fails to consider the basis upon which
    the claim was put. Similarly, even were  there  earlier  demonstrations
    the Appellant had not claimed to attend or mobilise for them. The judge
    was entitled to deal with the claim as it was made.

19. It is submitted that the Appellant's account could at least be said  to
    be consistent with one of the claims in the article, namely that he was
    "mobilising activists to attend the last meeting at Pointe Noire", i.e.
    the demonstration that took place after he left the country.  Mr  Mills
    for the Respondent conceded that the article could be read so that  the
    reference to "the last meeting at Pointe Noire" was a reference to  the
    demonstration which was held at Point Noire, and which took place after
    he had left the country, so that the wording was  consistent  with  the
    Appellant having been encouraging people to go  to  the  demonstration,
    even though he was not in the country when  it  took  place.  I  agree.
    However, I find that it does not carry the significance argued  for  by
    the Appellant because it does not disturb the judge's finding that  the
    low-level  activists  who  were  encouraging  people  to  attend  those
    demonstrations are not shown by the objective evidence  to  be  of  any
    interest to the authorities.  As Judge Troupe noted on the  Appellant's
    account he was known to the police before he left Congo in the  context
    of his efforts to mobilise people and yet he was allowed to leave on 20
    October 2015 on his own passport without any difficulty, and the  judge
    was entitled to conclude, as he did, that he  was  not  wanted  on  the
    basis of his activities at that time.

20. At its highest, as Ms Williams accepted, the photocopy of the newspaper
    article of November 2015, by describing  the  Appellant  as  a  leading
    light at the Pointe Noire demonstration incorrectly gives the Appellant
    a greater role than he really had.  The submission before me, extending
    the case  for  the  Appellant,  encompasses  the  argument    that  the
    mischaracterisation of the Appellant in  the  newspaper  article  would
    itself give rise to a risk on return. The submission is that this is  a
    Robinson obvious point that required an express finding from the  judge
    as to whether the article was in fact a forgery, so  that  the  judge's
    Tanveer Ahmed assessment of the photocopied article  adding  little  to
    the Appellant's case is inadequate. I find no merit in the  point.  Not
    least because counsel did not raise it before the judge. The suggestion
    made for the first time in  these  proceedings:  that  the  authorities
    would be aware of and hold the article sufficient evidence to give rise
    to risk is highly speculative and without  evidential  foundation.  The
    argument fails to recognise that the article is not reliable  evidence,
    it purports to indicate a pre-existing risk resulting in the flight  of
    the Appellant which is incoherent on the Appellant's account because of
    his evidence that he was known to  the  authorities  and  was  able  to
    leave. The article lacks any authority because it is grossly inaccurate
    in many respects, but additionally it adds nothing to  the  authority's
    knowledge because as  his  passport  shows,  and  the  authorities  had
    permitted, he was out of the  country  and  not  at  the  Pointe  Noire
    demonstration as the article states.

21. The judge  correctly  following  the  guidance  in  Tanveer  Ahmed,  he
    assessed the weight to be given to the article in  the  round,  to  the
    point that on the Appellant's case the  information  contained  in  the
    newspaper article  that  applied  to  him  was  already  known  to  the
    authorities i.e. he was a low-level activist who had  been  encouraging
    people to attend the Pointe Noire demonstration, but  was  out  of  the
    country at the time. The conclusion that that would not  be  enough  to
    cause him difficulties is unassailable.

22. Accordingly, the Appellant's second ground that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider that the article revealed him as being  prominent  within  the
    protest groups or would bring him to the attention of  the  authorities
    in any event, does not succeed.

23. The third ground challenges the judge's findings that the Appellant had
    failed to establish his account of the police interest in him.  This is
    a discrete point from that of the article because the article is  dated
    17th November and so it cannot be  said  the  claimed  events  of  28th
    October have arisen from it.  The grounds  complain  that  the  judge's
    criticism of the Appellant for his inability to respond to the point at
    the hearing is unfounded because it fails to take account that  in  his
    interview he did give an answer: he said that his  brother  might  have
    been aware of that position because the police had been arresting other
    activists in the neighbourhood. There is nothing in this point. As  the
    judge notes, if they were looking for him they could have come  to  his
    house. It was not his evidence that in the days prior the  police  were
    going to neighbours searching for the Appellant's address, so  that  it
    was commonly known that he was being looked for.  The  suggestion  that
    the answer can be read as implying that the  brother  would  have  been
    able to put two and two together and warn the  Appellant  that  as  the
    police were looking for people involved in the  demonstrations  he  was
    being looked for misses the concern. As the judge noted the Appellant's
    case was that his brother told him the  authorities  were  looking  for
    him.   He  was  unable  to  explain  how  his  brother  knew  that  the
    authorities were looking for him. It is not surprising given  that  the
    judge did not refer to the interview evidence. There is no evidence  it
    was drawn to his attention as sufficient to  fill  the  gap  which  had
    become apparent in response to examination, but in any event,  it  does
    not provide an answer because it is merely speculation offered  by  the
    Appellant. It leaves intact the judge's point that  the  Appellant  was
    unable to say how his brother knew that the  authorities  were  looking
    for him.

24. Additionally, the point does not disturb the judge's conclusion that in
    the context of the background evidence it was not  realistic  that  the
    police would be looking for him  at  all,  the  difficulties  with  the
    wanted notice document itself, nor the lack of verification. The  judge
    was entitled to conclude that any weight to be  placed  on  the  wanted
    document depended on the overall credibility  of  the  Appellant.   The
    judge has given numerous  and  cogent  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant lacked credibility.  I remark for completeness that  many  of
    those credibility findings, including the entirety of the  difficulties
    of the Appellant's account in respect of his wife being present  during
    the claimed attack on his property, are not  challenged.  The  decision
    reveals no material error. The  judge  was  entitled  to  find  on  the
    evidence at its highest that the Appellant's account was of a low-level
    activism encouraging people to attend demonstrations which were due  to
    be held after he left the country, and his claim that as  a  result  of
    his political profile his house was ransacked, his brother tortured  to
    death, and the house burnt to the ground with his wife being forced  to
    flee first to her  parents,  and  then  to  the  DRC,  are  discredited
    embellishments, expedient to obtaining an immigration benefit.

Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is not flawed by  any  material
    error  and  the  decision  dismissing  the  Appellant's   international
    protection appeal stands.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
