
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03653/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                  |Decision Promulgated            |
|On 14 November 2016             |On 3rd January 2017             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            BZHAR HAMADAMIN RAZA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Christopher of Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  P  J
    Holmes dated 2 August 2016 in which the appellants appeal  against  the
    refusal of his application for asylum or humanitarian protection and/or
    leave to remain on human rights grounds was dismissed.
 2. The Judge considered the evidence with the required degree  of  anxious
    scrutiny and sets out the relevant findings at [12-23] of the decision.
 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge D Taylor on  a
    renewed application on 29 September 2016 in the following terms:


         The grounds do not challenge the adverse credibility findings  made
         by the original judge and I find no merit in the argument that  the
         appellant would be at risk on return to  the  KRG  because  of  the
         judge's acceptance that he had committed adultery.   As  the  judge
         who refused permission to appeal stated,  here  is  no  reason  why
         persons in the Kurdish zone would know of  any  adultery  that  the
         appellant may have been committed.


         However, it is  arguable  that  the  judge's  assumption  that  the
         appellant would be granted admission to the KRG may  be  misplaced,
         and also arguable that even if he  were,  he  could  safely  travel
         there in the light of the deteriorating conditions in the  area  at
         the date of the hearing.


Error of law


 4. As noted in the decision under challenge it is not disputed  that  the
    appellant is single, a national of Iraq, of Kurdish  ethnicity,  and  a
    follower of the Muslim faith born in 1994.
 5. At [12] the Judge noted that the Presenting  Officer  relied  upon  the
    refusal letter which was  found  to  contain  an  acceptance  that  the
    appellant could not safely return to Mosul or any other  part  of  Iraq
    under the control of Daesh (Islamic State). The core of the  appellants
    claim for asylum related to a real risk in an area in the  vicinity  of
    Mosul, where he stated he and his family lived, from Daesh and others.
 6. Mrs Christopher referred in her submissions  to  the  country  guidance
    case of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)  in  which  it
    was found that a person was required to show some form of ID to be able
    to travel to the Kurdish controlled part of Iraq (the 'KRG'). The Judge
    considered this issue at [17] where it is noted:


         "It is not in dispute in this appeal that the appellant,  though  a
         Kurd, originates from outside the  formal  boundaries  of  the  KRG
         area, therefore I take into account that (as Mr  Shea  conceded  in
         his submissions) he would be returned to Baghdad. I accept that  he
         might be unable to settle permanently in Baghdad, as he has limited
         Arabic, is Kurdish and has no  established  family  connections  in
         that city.  In that event, as the guidance in AA shows, I  need  to
         consider whether he could safely make his way to the KRG area  from
         Baghdad.  Nine months ago  by  his  solicitor,  and  again  in  the
         grounds of appeal, it was submitted on the  appellants  behalf,  in
         substance, that the appellant might  encounter  difficulty  on  the
         journey such as to make this re-location unduly harsh,  because  of
         the danger of travel by road and because, having  no  passport,  he
         would be unable to travel on a plane.  I accept that the  roads  to
         the north-east of Baghdad are still dangerous (the British  Foreign
         Office currently advises against all travel  in  Diyala  province).
         However, the appellant already has an identity card issued  by  the
         Iraqi Ministry of the Interior; the grounds of  appeal  claim  that
         the respondent has disputed the genuineness of this document, but I
         find that to be a  misreading  of  paragraph  22  of  the  decision
         letter. In any event the Tribunal in HM and others (Article  15(c))
         Iraq [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC) accepted the existence  of  a  Central
         Archive  maintained  by  the  Iraqi  authorities  retaining   civil
         identity records on microfiche, which provides  a  further  way  in
         which a person can identify himself  to  the  authorities,  whether
         from abroad or within Iraq.  It was Mr Shea's submissions that,  if
         the appellant wished to be able to travel by air, and if it is  (as
         claimed) not possible  to  do  so  between  Baghdad  and  Erbil  or
         Sulaimaniyah without a passport (a  proposition  to  which  I  have
         received no supporting evidence), there is no apparent  reason  why
         he could not obtain an Iraqi  passport  upon  application  via  the
         embassy in London."


 7. I find no material error made out in  the  findings  of  the  Judge  in
    relation to the possession of an Iraqi ID card by the appellant  and/or
    his ability to obtain a passport based upon his accepted  identity  and
    the existence of the records identified in the earlier caselaw.
 8. Following further discussion with Mrs Christopher it was accepted  that
    the appellant will be admitted to the KRG but submitted by her that  he
    will only be able to remain there for a  limited  period  of  10+  days
    after which he will be removed. To be  able  to  extend  his  visa  the
    appellant will be required to find work. His ability to find  work  may
    be impacted upon by the influx of displaced persons in  the  KRG  which
    has stretched facilities and meant priority being given  to  women  and
    children. It was further submitted that if the appellant  was  required
    to leave he would have to go to the contested areas which are unsafe.
 9. At [17] the Judge refers to the point of return being Baghdad  and  the
    problems the appellant may face there. There is  discussion  in  AA  in
    relation to the importance of a Civil Status Identity  Document  (CSID)
    which the appellant has been found to possess. In AA it was found  that
    "A CSID is generally required in order for an Iraqi to access financial
    assistance from the authorities; employment;  education;  housing;  and
    medical treatment. If P shows there are  no  family  or  other  members
    likely to be able to provide means of support, P is in  general  likely
    to face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm,  if,  by
    the time any funds provided to P by  the  Secretary  of  State  or  her
    agents to assist P's return  have  been  exhausted,  it  is  reasonably
    likely that P will still have no CSID". The  ability  to  be  permitted
    entry to Baghdad is  not  challenged.  The  Judge's  comment  that  the
    appellant might not be able to settle permanently is speculation taking
    no account of the availability of support and other services. As  there
    is an unchallenged internal relocation option to Baghdad, which it  has
    not been shown to be unreasonable for the appellant  to  avail  himself
    of, no arguable material error arises even if relocation to the KRG  is
    not a viable long term option, as Mrs Christopher asserts.
10. In relation to the KRG, Mr Bates referred to the headnote of  AA  where
    it is stated "19. A Kurd (K) who does not originate from  the  IKR  can
    obtain entry for 10 days  as  a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
    permission for a further 10 days. If K finds employment, K  can  remain
    for longer, although K will need to register with the  authorities  and
    provide details of the employer. There is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
    authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the IKR whose  permits  have
    come to an end."
11. It is accepted that the appellant will be able to enter the KRG even if
    returned to Baghdad and that he will be granted  access  as  a  visitor
    under the stated policy of the Kurdish authorities. What  is  not  made
    out is that even of the appellant is unable to obtain  work  to  extend
    his visit visa, that he will be expelled.  At  this  time  the  Kurdish
    Peshmerga are fighting with the Iraqi army to dislodge Daesh from Mosul
    and it is implausible  that  they  would  eject  a  person  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity who presents no proven threat to the stability or security of
    the KRG into an area where their life may be at risk.
12. Whilst the situation in the KRG could become more overcrowded and  have
    a humanitarian impact upon those returning to or entering  the  region,
    it has not been made out that this is  foreseeable  to  the  extent  of
    entitling the appellant to a grant of international  protection  either
    now or in the foreseeable future on this basis.
13. In her reply Mrs Christopher accepted that Kurds are not being  removed
    from the KRG.
14. Having considered the submissions in detail, and having considered  the
    evidence as a whole, I find no legal error material to the decision  to
    dismiss the appeal made out. At [20] the Judge summarises the  position
    in the following terms:


         "I find that the appellant, on reaching the KRG area, would  be  at
         no risk of persecution or serious harm.  For  the  reasons  I  have
         previously given, I reject any suggestion that  the  appellant  was
         ever in fear for his life or personal safety in the  KRG  area.   I
         find  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to  demonstrate  that  the
         authorities in that region would be unable or  unwilling  to  offer
         sufficient protection. I find that as a Kurd, the appellant has  no
         reason to fear that he might  face  any  significant  ill-treatment
         there.  Furthermore, the appellant has been  consistent  in  saying
         that when Daesh took over Mosul, a number of  his  close  relatives
         including his mother fled  from  their  home  village.   Given  the
         political geography of Iraq at  that  time,  as  a  Kurdish  family
         fleeing from the eastern side of Mosul there  is  really  no  where
         they might credibly have sought refuge apart from the KRG area, and
         most likely Erbil.  Whilst I find no evidence to suggest  that  the
         appellant has maintained any contact with  any  such  relatives,  I
         consider that if he were in the KRG area himself, he would  have  a
         serious prospect of being able to find them and re-establish family
         ties.   The  CIG  report  indicates  there  is  a  high   rate   of
         unemployment in the KRG area but I  concur  with  the  respondent's
         assessment that the appellant  would  be  well  placed  to  compete
         strongly on the market for such employment as might  be  available.
         The country guidance does not speak of  any  requirement  that  the
         appellant should have a sponsor, unless  by  sponsor  is  meant  an
         employer, and point (19) in the headnote to AA indicates that, as a
         Kurd, having entered the KRG area with permission, he  is  unlikely
         to be removed even if he does not have a job within the  first  few
         weeks. I am  therefore  satisfied  that  re-location  within  Iraq,
         specifically  to  the  KRG  area,  is  a  viable  option  for  this
         appellant."


15. The decision is within the range of permissible decisions available  to
    the Judge on the evidence and shall stand.


Decision


16. There is no material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision. The determination shall stand.


  Anonymity.


17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I make no such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 28 December 2016

