
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03921/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 November 2016                       |On 06 December 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     MR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. MR (Appellant) appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-
        tier Tribunal Blake, promulgated on 03 October 2016, dismissing his
        asylum appeal against the Respondent's decision of  05  April  2016
        refusing his protection claim.




   Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, date of birth  01  July
        2001. He claimed to have left Afghanistan in July 2015 and used  an
        agent to travel through various countries by car until  he  arrived
        in France. He arrived in the UK on 22 August 2015.  The  Respondent
        however maintained that the Appellant was fingerprinted in  Hungary
        on 13 November 2014.


     3.  The  Appellant  claimed  that  his  father  worked  for  NATO   in
        transportation before leaving to work on  family  owned  land.  The
        Appellant's family and another family were involved in a feud  over
        farmland resulting in a number of fights over a period of around 14
        years. The Appellant's father and uncle were killed as a result  of
        this feud. Although unable to name the  other  feuding  family  the
        Appellant believed it had Taliban associations.


     4. The Appellant claimed to have no contact with his  mother  and  did
        not know if his family still lived in the same area. He feared  the
        feuding family and the Taliban and believed  the  group  wanted  to
        kill him to prevent him from exacting revenge.


     5. The Respondent did not believe the Appellant's account. One of  the
        reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account was an assertion that
        the Appellant was fingerprinted in Hungary  on  13  November  2014.
        This was said to  have  significantly  undermined  the  Appellant's
        claim because he maintained that his  father  was  killed  in  July
        2015. The Respondent  nevertheless  considered  the  claim  at  its
        highest and concluded that the  Afghan  authorities  were  able  to
        provide the Appellant with a sufficiency of protection and that  he
        could avail himself of the internal relocation option.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing

     6. As a preliminary issue the judge refused an adjournment application
        made by the Respondent, which appears likely to have been supported
        by the Appellant's representative, to enable her to obtain evidence
        in respect of the fingerprints believed to have been taken from the
        Appellant in Hungary. The judge stated that the  Respondent  failed
        to comply with a previous  direction  issued  to  that  effect  and
        failed to acknowledge requests from the Appellant's solicitors  for
        fingerprint evidence. The interests of justice required the  appeal
        to proceed as the judge could make reference to the 'Eurodac Search
        Result' document in the Appellant's bundle (at A16 and A17) and  he
        would accord that document what weight he considered appropriate in
        light of the other evidence  he  received  in  the  course  of  the
        hearing (at [16]).


     7. Having considered  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant  the  judge
        concluded that he was not credible. The judge  found,  despite  the
        Appellant's young age, that he was evasive and  that  his  evidence
        lacked detail. The Appellant's ignorance of the name of the feuding
        family was deemed incredible. There was said to be no  evidence  of
        any Taliban links to the family. Although  the  Appellant  believed
        the perpetrators of his father's murder had police connections  the
        family had contacted the police and  this  was  deemed  incredible.
        There was said to be an inconsistency as to  how  school  documents
        provided by the Appellant had been obtained.


     8. Between [78] and [81] the judge  considered  the  Eurodac  document
        contained at A16 and A17 of the Appellant's bundle.  This  document
        contained  a  photograph  of  the  Appellant  and,  although   some
        information was redacted, it  identified  the  Appellant  by  name,
        referred to his date of birth, and  indicated  under  the  headings
        'Eurodac Recording Events' and 'Matching Eurodac Data', that a male
        had been apprehended on 13 November 2014 in  Szeged  (in  Hungary).
        Whilst accepting that there were no fingerprints  produced  by  the
        Respondent the judge found that the Eurodac document did  undermine
        the Appellant's credibility (at [84] and [88]).


     9. The judge concluded that the Appellant was not  telling  the  truth
        and rejected his account of a land-related feud and the  deaths  of
        his uncle and father. The judge was  not  satisfied  the  Appellant
        would be at risk of persecution if removed to Afghanistan.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

    10. The grounds contend that the judge materially erred by  failing  to
        adjourn the hearing in light of the Respondent's failure to  comply
        with directions issued by Judge Wellesley-Cole on  22  August  2016
        requiring her to serve fingerprint evidence. It was submitted  that
        the Eurodac document  issued  by  the  Home  Office  had  not  been
        provided by the Hungarian authorities. It was  submitted  that  the
        photograph of the Appellant was likely to have been  taken  by  the
        Respondent since the document contained the Appellant's "Port/local
        reference  number".  The  fact  that  the  document  contained  the
        Appellant's photograph, name and date of birth was not a reflection
        of the likelihood that the  Appellant  had  been  fingerprinted  in
        Hungary. The judge failed to take into account a Tribunal  decision
        relating to Eurodac documents  (YI  (previous  claims,  Fingerprint
        match, EURODAC) Eritrea [2007] UKAIT  00054).  The  denial  of  any
        opportunity  to  make  a  forensic  rebuttal  of  the  Respondent's
        assertion by way of fingerprint analysis  was  said  to  amount  to
        procedural unfairness.


    11. In granting permission  the  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the
        Appellant's  solicitors  made  several  requests  to   obtain   the
        fingerprint evidence. It was noted that the  Eurodac  document  had
        certain information blotted out.  It  was  therefore  not  apparent
        where the Appellant was actually fingerprinted. As the judge placed
        weight on this document it was considered arguable that  there  may
        have been a procedural error of law in not granting the adjournment
        request, and possibly in the judge attaching weight to the document
        in the absence of full details about the fingerprint evidence.

The Upper Tribunal hearing

    12. Prior to the commencement of the hearing I provided to the  parties
        a copy of RZ (Eurodac  -  fingerprint  match  -admissible)  Eritrea
        [2008] UKAIT 00007. I put the matter back  and  gave  Mr  Fripp  an
        opportunity to adduce written submissions in light of RZ. Mr  Fripp
        provided a helpful skeleton argument and expanded upon his  written
        submissions at the hearing.


    13. Mr Fripp  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  refusal  to
        adjourn the hearing was not supported  by  adequate  reasoning  and
        deprived the Appellant of a fair hearing. The judge attached  undue
        weight to the  Eurodac  evidence  in  circumstances  where  it  was
        insufficiently clear whether the appropriate  procedures  had  been
        followed.  Although  the  Eurodac   Search   Result   indicated   a
        fingerprint match there was nothing to show  that  the  fingerprint
        match had been confirmed  by  the  Immigration  Fingerprint  Bureau
        (IFB). It was further submitted that  the  judge  misconstrued  the
        information contained in the Eurodac Search Result as  he  appeared
        to believe the photograph forming part of the document was taken by
        the Hungarian authorities when it was taken by the Home Office.  In
        so doing the judge attributed greater weight to the  document  than
        was lawfully appropriate. In RZ, a decision that was almost 9 years
        old, the Tribunal had been provided  with  IFB  confirmation  of  a
        fingerprint match and fingerprint evidence had  been  produced.  It
        was submitted that the refusal to adjourn without the exclusion  of
        the Eurodac document rendered the judge's decision unlawful as  the
        Eurodac Search Result document was insufficient evidence on its own
        to link the Appellant with Hungary. The judge acted  unlawfully  by
        not excluding the document or by  attaching  undue  weight  to  the
        document and this rendered the hearing unfair because the Appellant
        was denied the opportunity of examining the fingerprint evidence.


    14. Mr Wilding indicated that his  file  contained  no  record  of  any
        direction issued  by  Judge  Wellesley-Cole.  Mr  Wilding  drew  my
        attention to paragraph 26  of  RZ  which  indicated  that  once  an
        automatic  match  was  established  the  print  matches  were  then
        visually examined by a fingerprint expert at  IFB  to  confirm  the
        match before the Asylum Screening Unit (ASU) was  notified  of  the
        match result. Mr  Wilding  was  unable  to  say  whether,  in  this
        particular case, the IFB requirement was  met  and  he  was  unsure
        whether the same process was in existence given the vintage of  RZ.
        Mr Wilding's principal submission was that any failure by the judge
        to exclude the document or to adjourn the hearing made no  material
        difference to his ultimate conclusion as the judge gave a number of
        independent  reasons  for  finding  the  Appellant  incredible.  My
        attention was drawn to paragraphs 73 to  76  of  the  decision  and
        paragraph 85. None of these findings had  been  challenged  in  the
        grounds of appeal and they were made independently of  the  Eurodac
        match findings.


    15. In his brief reply Mr Fripp reminded me that the  Eurodac  evidence
        was highly material to the judge, who allocated 7 paragraphs to the
        issue, and submitted that  the  judge's  reliance  on  the  Eurodac
        document constituted a material  consideration  in  his  conclusion
        that the Appellant was not credible.

Discussion

    16. Mr Fripp's skeleton argument helpfully set out a chronology of core
        events. It was on 22 August  2015  that  the  Eurodac  enquiry  was
        conducted and a positive result obtained. It is not until 5  August
        2016  that  the  Respondent  refused   to   grant   the   Appellant
        international/humanitarian  protection.  On  26  August  2016   the
        Appellant's solicitors wrote to the Respondent requesting  evidence
        to prove that the Appellant had been fingerprinted in Hungary.  The
        Appellant's solicitors intended to instruct a  fingerprint  expert.
        On 4 May 2016 the Respondent responded  by  providing  the  Eurodac
        Search Result document. On 17 June 2016  the  Appellant  solicitors
        requested the Respondent's records relating to the Appellant  being
        fingerprinted in Hungary including any photographic and fingerprint
        evidence that was held on file.


    17. A fax on the Tribunal file dated  18  August  2016  issued  by  the
        Appellant's representative and addressed to the First-tier Tribunal
        indicating that they had been requesting further fingerprint and/or
        photographic evidence from the Respondent's Third Country Unit  but
        had received no response. The Appellant strongly disputed  that  he
        had been in Hungary or was fingerprinted on 13 November  2014.  The
        representatives asked for a direction to be issued  that  the  Home
        Office serve whatever further evidence they  have  of  the  Eurodac
        hit, preferably evidence from the  Hungarian  authorities.  A  Case
        Management record was completed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
        Wellesley-Cole who indicated, in manuscript, that  directions  were
        given for "evidence of fingerprint from Home Office". I can  locate
        no formal direction issued to this effect and none was contained on
        the Respondents file. I conclude that,  for  whatever  reason,  the
        direction made by Judge Wellesley-Cole was not formally issued.  It
        was accepted however by both representatives that this did not have
        any  significant  bearing  on  the  lawfulness  of  judge   Blake's
        decision.

    18. In RZ the Tribunal concluded (at [42])  that  fingerprint  evidence
        from the Eurodac system was admissible  in  evidence  not  only  in
        considering which Member State was  responsible  for  examining  an
        application under the Dublin Regulation but generally  as  part  of
        the examination of a claim to asylum. The Tribunal  heard  evidence
        from the Respondent to the effect  that  if  the  results  show  an
        automatic match with prints already  on  the  database,  the  print
        matches are then visually examined by a fingerprint expert  at  IFB
        to  confirm  the  match  before  ASU  is  notified  of  the   match
        result. The Tribunal held (at [45]) that if there was a dispute as
        to a match, that must be a question of fact to be determined on the
        available evidence but, in the light of the evidence  the  Tribunal
        heard about the Eurodac system and its accompanying safeguards,  in
        its judgment "... evidence of a match produced through the  Eurodac
        and confirmed by  [the  Immigration  Fingerprint  Bureau  in  Lunar
        House] should be regarded as  determinate  of  that  issue  in  the
        absence of cogent evidence to the contrary". The Tribunal (at [50])
        rejected  the  submission  that  there  was  any  requirement   for
        corroboration in respect of fingerprint evidence. There was  before
        the  Tribunal  in  RZ  both  a  Eurodac  Search  Result  Match  and
        confirmation from the IFB.


    19. Although the Respondent did not provide any evidence to support its
        assertion of a Eurodac match when she issued her decision, she  did
        provide a document entitled 'Eurodac Search Result Eurodac  Match'.
        This document is dated 22 August 2015.  Some  of  the  details  are
        redacted  but  I  received  no  submissions  in  relation  to  such
        redaction  or  any  possible  impact  on  the  reliability  of  the
        document.  A  large  headshot  photograph  of  the   Appellant   is
        prominently placed towards the top of the document. Under a heading
        'Search Data' the name, gender and date of birth of  the  Appellant
        are given, in addition to a Port/Local Reference number, a Personal
        Nationality     Code     (Afghanistan)      and      a      Eurodac
        Application/Apprehension Date and Biometric Recording Date, both of
        which are given as 22 August 2015.


    20. The next heading is 'Eurodac Recording Events', located towards the
        bottom of the 1st page of the two page document. A reference  in  a
        table headed 'Case ID' is redacted. The remaining references in the
        table relate to 'Place of  Apprehension'  (Szeged),  the  'Date  of
        Apprehension' (13/11/2014) and the 'Sex of the Person  Apprehended'
        (M). On the following page, under  the  heading  'Matching  Eurodac
        Data' is a UK (IABS) Eurodac Reference (redacted), a  reference  to
        Biometrics Recorded on 13 November 2014, a reference to the Eurodac
        Application/Apprehension Date as being 13/11/2014, a  reference  to
        the gender being male and the Apprehension Location being Szeged.


    21. The Eurodac Search Result makes no reference to the IFB. There  was
        no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal judge, or indeed  before
        me, that the IFB had considered the fingerprint match.  Mr  Wilding
        submitted  that  the  IFB  was  likely  to  have   considered   the
        fingerprint match before the ASU was notified of the  match  result
        but he  could  not  point  to  any  evidence  suggesting  this  had
        occurred. Confirmation of the fingerprint match by the  IFB  is  an
        important procedural safeguard. This procedural safeguard  was  not
        brought to the attention  of  the  judge  and  the  judge  did  not
        consider the likelihood of it being met. Had the judge  been  aware
        of  the  importance  of  the  IFB  confirmation  as  a   procedural
        safeguard, and the absence of any specific evidence  that  the  IFB
        considered the fingerprint match, the judge may  have  reduced  the
        weight he attached to the document.  If  an  adjournment  had  been
        granted there was a real possibility that  further  evidence  could
        have been obtained (either  in  terms  of  photographic/fingerprint
        evidence held by the Hungarian authorities,  or  confirmation  that
        IFB had considered the fingerprint match) that may have  materially
        altered the weight attached by the judge to the Eurodac document.


    22. I additionally see force in Mr  Fripp's  argument  that  the  judge
        believed the photograph on the Eurodac document had  been  obtained
        from the Hungarian authorities, which is likely to have  reinforced
        his belief that the asserted fingerprint  match  was  reliable.  At
        [78] the judge referred to the Eurodac  match  document  and  noted
        that it contained a photograph of the Appellant. The  relevance  to
        the judge of the photograph is seen at [80] and at [81]  where  the
        judge specifically referred to the Appellant's inability to  recall
        whether he had been photographed in Hungary. This does  support  Mr
        Fripp's submission that the judge believed the photograph  emanated
        from the Hungarian authorities. This view is reinforced at [84] and
        at [88]. It was not disputed by Mr Wilding that the photograph  was
        in fact taken by the Home Office  when  the  Appellant's  biometric
        details were obtained. To the extent that  the  judge  appeared  to
        have attached weight to the Eurodac document on the mistaken  basis
        that the photograph emanated from the  Hungarian  authorities,  the
        judge has  taken  account  of  an  irrelevant  consideration.  This
        constitutes an error of law.


    23. The judge did however rely on  a  number  of  other  findings  made
        independently of  the  Eurodac  document  in  concluding  that  the
        Appellant was not credible. Mr Wilding submitted  that  the  nature
        and number of these findings render  immaterial  any  inappropriate
        reliance that may have been placed by  the  judge  on  the  Eurodac
        document. The judge drew an adverse inference from the  Appellant's
        inability to name the other feuding family and found there  was  no
        basis for the Appellant's assertion that the other  feuding  family
        were associated with  the  Taliban.  The  judge  appeared  to  hold
        against the Appellant his claim that the perpetrators of the murder
        of his father and uncle had  police  connections  because  he  also
        claimed that his family had contacted the police. The  judge  found
        the Appellant's evidence as  to  the  source  of  school  documents
        provided by him to be inconsistent. The judge also held against the
        Appellant  his  inability  to  give  more  detail   regarding   his
        circumstances and Afghanistan, even taking full account of his age.


    24. Whilst there is some force in Mr Wilding's submissions, and  whilst
        the judge was undoubtedly  entitled  to  reach  his  other  adverse
        credibility findings, I am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge  would
        inevitably have reached the same conclusion absent any error in his
        approach to the Eurodac document. In  reaching  this  conclusion  I
        note Mr Fripp's observation  that  the  judge  did  allocate  seven
        paragraphs to the issue of the Eurodac document. It is  clear  from
        [84] and [89] that the judge  did  attach  weight  to  the  Eurodac
        document  and  that  this  is  likely  to  have  been  a   material
        consideration in his overall adverse credibility assessment.  Given
        that this is an asylum claim and has to be considered with  anxious
        scrutiny I am satisfied that the error  is  material  and  that  it
        renders the decision unsafe.


    25. In these circumstances I have decided to remit the appeal  back  to
        the First-tier Tribunal, to be considered by  a  judge  other  than
        judge of the First-tier Tribunal Blake. It will be  clear  from  my
        decision what issues the Respondent will be expected to address  in
        respect of the Eurodac document.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law.
The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  heard  by  a
judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Blake.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum               06 December 2016


