
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03449/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions and Reason Promulgated     |
|on 12 January 2017                   |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     S I
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms H Cosgrove, Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant sought asylum as a  Christian  convert  from  Iran.   The
    respondent found his claim incredible,  and  refused  it  for  detailed
    reasons set out in a letter dated 1 December 2015.

 2. FtT Judge Blair heard the appellant's appeal against that  decision  on
    24 August 2016.  In his decision, promulgated on 2 September 2016,  the
    judge records  at  paragraph  4  the  agreement  of  the  parties  that
    credibility was the issue; that if the appellant  was  a  convert,  and
    reasonably likely to evangelise, he would be at  risk  on  return;  and
    that illegal  departure  from  Iran  did  not  by  itself  qualify  the
    appellant for protection.  The judge held  at  paragraph  38  that  the
    appellant's conversion "from a nominal Islamic faith  to  Christianity"
    was not genuine, and dismissed the appeal.

 3. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  UT  on  grounds
    submitting that the credibility assessment was flawed in four respects:

      1) The issue covered at paragraph 37 was not material  to  the  claim,
         but mistakenly treated as such.

      2) The concerns at paragraphs 32 to 35 were "of insufficient weight to
         displace the  overwhelming  body  of  evidence  in  favour  of  the
         appellant".

      3) The lower standard of proof was "not  properly  applied  given  the
         evidence lodged in the appellant's favour."

      4) The judge "potentially fell into the trap identified in  SA  (Iran)
         [2012] EWHC 2575 at paragraph 24"; the point was "not only  whether
         the appellant is a genuine convert (to be considered  primarily  by
         reference to attendance at church) but that where a person has held
         themselves out to be Christian, that  may  also  lead  to  risk  on
         return, which the judge failed to consider.

 4. On 28 September 2016 FtT Judge Pooler refused permission to appeal,  on
    the view that there was nothing to indicate  that  the  judge  had  not
    applied the appropriate standard of proof; the weight to  be  given  to
    evidence was a matter  for  the  judge,  and  the  adverse  credibility
    findings were open to him; that as explained in AH (Sudan) [2007]  UKHL
    at paragraph 30, the specialist tribunal was the judge  of  the  facts,
    and its decision was to be respected unless "it  is  quite  clear  that
    they have misdirected themselves in law"; and that the issue of risk to
    the appellant, even if not a  genuine  convert,  had  not  been  raised
    before the judge, and so there could be no arguable error of failing to
    deal with it.

 5. The appellant renewed his application to the UT, relying upon the  same
    grounds and advancing an additional ground:

      5) The judge erred by failing to take [into account] a submission made
         on the appellant's behalf ...  2  witnesses  from  the  appellant's
         local church attended and a further letter of support from a member
         of the church was lodged ... it  was  submitted  that  in  total  3
         individuals spoke to the genuineness of his faith and therefore due
         weight should be given to this. The judge failed to consider this.

 6. On 7 November 2016 UT Judge Finch granted permission, on the view  that
    the application disclosed arguable errors of law.

 7. The submissions by Ms Cosgrove for the appellant were along  the  lines
    of the grounds, and as follows. The judge correctly stated the standard
    of proof, but failed to apply it. There were 2  main  points  to  make.
    Firstly, the judge made too  much  of  the  fact  that  Arman  had  not
    disclosed to the  appellant  how  he  came  to  convert.   Essentially,
    paragraphs 29-35 constituted not a number of reasons but variations  on
    that one theme. The  second  point  was  that  the  appellant  produced
    evidence from 3 witnesses who were persuaded of the genuineness of  his
    conversion, two giving evidence  in  person  and  one  in  writing.  Ms
    Cosgrove fairly conceded that ground 4 was not the  strongest,  because
    the case cited had not been referred to in the first-tier tribunal, nor
    had an argument been made of risk on return even to an  ostensible  but
    not genuine convert. The point had been introduced by her colleague who
    was not the representative at the first-tier tribunal hearing  and  who
    drafted the grounds in the absence of Ms Cosgrove.

 8. Mr Matthews submitted thus. Ground 4  is  even  weaker  than  had  been
    conceded, because although it states that it is based on  an  authority
    of the Court of Appeal it is in fact only  the  decision  of  a  deputy
    judge of the High Court, and on reference to full  report  the  passage
    quoted is obiter, not decisive. The case does not establish  any  legal
    principle of general application to Christian conversion cases.  Ground
    3 is of no substance, because the  judge  plainly  stated  the  correct
    standard of proof and there is nothing in the  decision  which  suggest
    that anything else was applied. The other complaints are no  more  than
    disagreement with the weight given by the judge to various  aspects  of
    the evidence, which short of perversity was a matter for him,  and  the
    grounds stopped short of that allegation. The criticism of paragraph 37
    acknowledges that there was an inconsistency.  The weight to  be  given
    to it was for the judge. Even if not at the heart  of  the  claim,  the
    fact that an appellant was an unreliable witness  in  one  respect  was
    relevant to the valuation of his overall evidence. The  judge  did  not
    simply base himself on Arman's lack of disclosure about his conversion,
    but gave a number of other  reasons.  The  judge  had  the  benefit  of
    hearing the evidence, including the testing of the appellant's evidence
    during cross-examination. As to the additional ground,  ground  5,  the
    judge at paragraphs 19 to 21 took full  account  of  the  evidence  and
    accepted the witnesses as sincere, with no doubt  in  their  own  minds
    about the appellant's conversion. That gave the evidence all the weight
    it could possibly bear in favour of the appellant, but it was not bound
    to decide the case in his favour. The judge's  assessment  was  rounded
    and far from one-sided, the evidence of the witnesses and other  points
    being taken in his favour. The grounds disclosed no legal  error,  only
    disagreement.

 9. Ms Cosgrove in response said that she had not submitted that the  point
    about Arman's non-disclosure was irrelevant. Her argument had been that
    the appellant made it clear that his own conversion was a  gradual  not
    an instantaneous process, and that he had not at  first  accepted  what
    Arman told him. It took some months before this developed into a  full-
    blown interest in Christianity.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. The case on the facts for the appellant has been pressed as strongly as
    it properly could be, both in the first-tier tribunal and in the  upper
    tribunal, but there is nothing in the  grounds  and  submissions  which
    discloses that the first-tier tribunal made any error  on  a  point  of
    law.

12. There is nothing in grounds 3 or 4.

13. It would be an extraordinary error for a judge  highly  experienced  in
    this jurisdiction to go wrong on one of its most  basic  features,  the
    lower standard of proof in protection claims.  The  decision  correctly
    sets it out, and there is nothing to suggest  that  anything  else  was
    applied.

14. The authority relied upon at  ground  4  is  not  upon  examination  an
    authority at all; it is a passing statement  (although  a  very  strong
    one) of the difficulty  of  examining  the  genuineness  of  a  claimed
    religious conversion.  Further, there was no argument and  no  evidence
    before the first-tier tribunal by which it might have found a risk to a
    "non-genuine" convert.

15. Grounds 1, 2 and 5 resolve into no more than disagreement on the facts.

16. The determination of the first-tier tribunal  has  not  been  shown  to
    error on any point of law, and it shall stand.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            12 January 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




