
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03639/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th December 2016                 |On 29th December 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     W H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge R G Walters,  promulgated  on  22  September  2016,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent to  refuse
    his protection claim and to remove him from the United Kingdom made  on
    27 November 2015.

 2. The appellant's case is that his father was killed in March  2015  and,
    although he did not know it at the time, it later transpired  that  his
    father had been a drug smuggler.  Following  his  father's  death  drug
    smugglers came on several occasions  to  the  appellant's  family  home
    seeking to recruit him into the smuggling business but they were chased
    off by his mother.  The police also came to the appellant's family home
    asking about the father's activities and after several visits,  it  was
    decided that the appellant  should  flee  the  country  and,  with  the
    assistance of agents, he was smuggled from  Iran  to  Calais  where  he
    remained for about a month before entering the United Kingdom concealed
    in a lorry, claiming asylum on 24 July 2015.

 3. The respondent does not accept the appellant's claim  that  his  father
    had been killed, or that he was  a  drug  smuggler  or  that  he  faced
    pressure to join a group of drug smugglers.   The  respondent  did  not
    find the appellant to be credible  given  a  number  of  contradictions
    within his evidence.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the appellant.  He also had before him  a
    bundle of material prepared by the appellant's solicitors including  an
    expert report by Ms Roya Kashefi.  The appellant was, at  the  hearing,
    represented by Ms J Anderson of Counsel; the respondent  was  also,  on
    this occasion, represented by Counsel.

 5. In his decision the judge noted [16] that the  appellant  was  aged  17
    when he arrived in the United Kingdom but had turned 18  on  1  January
    2016.

 6. He had had regard to the respondent's  guidance  on  processing  asylum
    claims for a child and UNHCR's guidance on child  asylum  claims  [17];
    and, that he had  taken  into  account  Ms  Kashefi's  report  whom  he
    accepted as an expert, noting that she had found the appellant's  story
    consistent with the country evidence.

 7. The judge found that: -

      i) the appellant had given inconsistent evidence  as  to  whether  his
         father had had a gun [18]-[24];

     ii) the appellant had been given inconsistent evidence as to whether he
         had seen his father's body [25]-[27]; and, the  appellant  had  not
         given a valid reason  or  not  knowing  whether  he  had  seen  his
         father's body [28]-[29];

    iii) the appellant had been inconsistent in his explanations as  to  why
         he had decided to mention smuggling contrary to his uncle's  advice
         [30]-[33];

     iv) the appellant had been inconsistent as to whether  or  not  he  had
         left his village before [34]-[38], the evidence  being  discrepant;
         and, had been inconsistent with the background evidence as  to  the
         colour of the uniform worn by  the  police  who  had  attended  the
         family home [39];

      v) the evidence given even allowing for possible errors with regard to
         interpretation [45]- [48] the evidence with regard  to  whether  or
         not his father had had a gun was inconsistent;

     vi) bearing in mind that the appellant  was  17  when  interviewed  but
         giving him all possible credibility he did not find  him  to  be  a
         credible  witness  given  the   number   of   inconsistencies   and
         contradictions  in  the  evidence,  there  being  an   attempt   to
         strengthen and embellish his case as time went on [54];

    vii) the appellant had not given truthful evidence  about  his  father's
         death and any involvement he may have had in smuggling [55], he did
         not accept that the appellant had left Iran illegally [56].

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the following grounds:-

      i) that the judge had failed to have proper  regard  to  the  relevant
         policies  and  guidance  in  assessing  the  appellant's  age   and
         credibility and that although referring to the guidance at [17] the
         judge had not applied this in his reasoning nor did he engage  with
         the  provisions  in  assessing  the  appellant's  credibility  more
         specifically;

     ii) that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  rejecting
         Roya Kashefi's report with specific regard to the  police  uniform,
         the absence of a footnote or source  not  being  of  sufficient  or
         proper reason to reject the  evidence;  and,  that  the  judge  had
         failed to take into account properly Ms Kashefi's evidence that his
         account was plausible and consistent;

    iii) that the judge had carried out an  extensive  cross-examination  of
         the appellant during the oral hearing both during cross-examination
         and re-examination; that this did not amount to clarifying evidence
         and, this was contrary to the relevant guidance given in  the  case
         law; the judge's extensive cross-examination on the subject of  the
         appellant's father's gun formed part of the judge's  reasoning  for
         rejecting credibility; and,that the judge  had  entered  the  arena
         thus giving rise to an impression of an unfair hearing.

 9. On 7 November 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan granted  permission
    on all grounds noting:

         "I grant permission to appeal, primarily on the  basis  that  there
         may well have been a procedural unfairness during  the  proceedings
         and therefore an error of law.  If the judge did  indeed  undertake
         extensive questioning of the appellant in respect of  events  which
         took place when  he  was  a  minor,  then  that  issue  has  to  be
         explored."

The Hearing on 5 December 2016

10. The appellant provided the following for the hearing:-

      i) Bundle 2 - supplementary bundle containing a witness statement from
         Ms J Anderson of Counsel exhibiting her record of  the  proceedings
         before the First-tier Tribunal.

11. I heard submissions from both representatives and reserved my decision.



Did the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making of  an  error
of law?

12. For the reasons set out below, dealing with the grounds in turn,  I  am
    satisfied that it did.  I turn first to ground 3.

Ground 3

13. It is evident from the Record of Proceedings attached to Ms  Anderson's
    witness statement, with which Mr Jarvis did not  take  issue,  that  at
    several  points  during  cross-examination  and   indeed   during   re-
    examination the judge asked a number of questions  which  later  formed
    the basis for findings of credibility adverse to the  appellant.   Much
    of the questioning in the appeal related  to  whether  the  appellant's
    father had had a gun; whether the appellant had seen this or  was  sure
    about this; and, the type of gun.  It is  evidence  that  a  number  of
    questions on this issue were  asked  in  interview  and  the  issue  is
    referred to also in the appellant's statement.  It is also  clear  that
    there are differences between  what  the  appellant  has  said  in  his
    statement, in his interview and in his oral evidence.  The judge  dealt
    with this issue at significant length in his decision at [18]- [24] and
    again at [49]-[53].  A number of the points taken against the appellant
    in these passages arise out of questions put by the  judge  during  the
    hearing.  A number of these questions were, as Mr  Sellwood  submitted,
    closed  questions  and  leading  questions  in  the  sense  that   they
    encouraged a yes or no answer.  Mr Jarvis submitted that in reality the
    questions were only seeking further clarification and the judge seeking
    to know why the appellant had departed  from  what  he  had  said.   He
    submitted also that it was significant that there had in this case been
    no objection to the line of questioning made by  Ms  Anderson  who  had
    represented the appellant.

14. Mr Jarvis submitted that the questioning had not been unfair nor had it
    given rise to a perception of bias.  He submitted  that  it  could  not
    have been considered by a person observing the proceedings, noting that
    there had been an objection, that the proceedings gave  the  impression
    of unfairness or bias on the part of the judge.  Mr Sellwood  submitted
    that on the contrary, there appears to have been no difference  in  the
    form and type of questioning  between  the  judge  and  the  Presenting
    Officer such that a reasonable person would not be able to discern  the
    difference in roles giving rise to an appearance of bias and that  thus
    the hearing was procedurally unfair.

15. Turning to the decision is IS (fair hearing - natural justice)  Belarus
    [2004] UKIAT 00114 (which in return refers to the earlier  decision  in
    Oyono [2002] UKIAT 02034) which is summarised at [26].  In summary, the
    advice is that in general judges should remain silent  where  there  is
    representation on both sides and the issue of matters  arising  out  of
    evidence and the time  for  that  is  after  re-examination  and  allow
    further questions arising to be put by  the  parties.   It  states,  "a
    judge who intervenes during the course of evidence is running the  risk
    that he will be seen to be taking the side of one party or the other".

16. The panel did, however consider that the guidelines were to  be  looked
    at in the context of the primary duty to manage the hearing  to  ensure
    that both parties have a fair hearing.  It is stated [27] that:

         "It is  entirely  appropriate  for  a  judge  to  intervene  during
         examination of a witness to ensure that  the  witness  answers  the
         question asked rather than takes the question as an opportunity  to
         add matters which are either irrelevant or would be covered in  any
         event in a proper examination or cross-examination."

17. As Mr Jarvis submitted this case is different from  that  in  IS  given
    that the hearing was considerably longer there  [see  29].   It  is,  I
    consider with footing assessing at the opinion of the Court  of  Appeal
    in Maheshwaran [2002]  EWCA  Civ  173  [note  to  self  -  insert  from
    paragraph 32 of IS].

18. Returning to SW (Adjudicator's questions) Somalia [2005] UKIAT 00037 it
    is noted, the issue was to fairness of the questioning of the appellant
    by the judge.  Again I bear in mind that the issues  are  fact-specific
    and in this case the issue was the late reference to the death  of  the
    grandmother.  It should also be borne in mind that there was no  cross-
    examination in this case,  there  being  no  Presenting  Officer.   The
    appellant noted that this was very different [21] in a situation  where
    the Home Office is represented.

19. Again it is noted that there was  no  objection  from  the  appellant's
    Counsel at this point and it was noted that the grandmother's death was
    an entirely new issue which arose out of the blue [31].   The  Tribunal
    also observed that the questions put in SW did not appear to have  been
    asked as in cross-examination, are directly  and  openly  pertinent  to
    what was clearly an important point.  [paragraph 28 from SW]

20. In this appeale the  judge's  questions  began  not  long  into  cross-
    examination.  The first question is: -

         "Why did you decide to change your mind to tell  people  about  the
         smugglers"? to which the appellant replied that his uncle had asked
         him not to say anything about the smuggling.

21. In the next question for the judge, it is put to the appellant that his
    uncle had told him not to tell anybody about the smuggling that he  had
    done, and did not explain why he had  decided  to  ignore  the  uncle's
    advice.  The question is then repeated and then again the  question  is
    asked why did he change his mind.  There appears to be no  good  reason
    why these questions could not  have  been  asked  by  the  respondent's
    representative nor at the conclusion of re-examination.

22. Further questions are put, including leading questions at page 7 of the
    transcript.  The questioning resumes  at  page  10  when  a  number  of
    questions are asked about the nature of the gun in which the  appellant
    was asked how to describe his brother's gun and  questions  then  asked
    about the nature of the word used as to whether it would  be  a  pistol
    and what the appellant meant by that.

23. Whilst those questions are clarificatory and are  unobjectionable,  the
    following the question about what prevented him from seeing the gun and
    it had been good put to him that his father had let him handle  it  and
    asking if he was quite convinced that he had seen his father with a gun
    could not be described in this way.  There is also clearly interruption
    in re-examination in that the judge took over re-examination  including
    at  one  point   stopping   the   appellant   from   giving   evidence.
    Specifically, he was asked about his response about question 97 in  the
    interview, the appellant saying that he had not in fact said  what  was
    answered there.

24. The issue  here  is  whether  the  questions  could  either  constitute
    unfairness in themselves or, as Mr Sellwood has sought to  characterise
    the case, give rise to a situation where  a  fair-minded  and  informed
    observer, having considered the facts, would consider there is  a  real
    possibility that the Tribunal was biased. It is thus important at  this
    stage to consider the decision in Singh v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  492
    albeit in somewhat different circumstances arose in that case.

25. It should be borne in mind that it unfairness which  is  the  focus  in
    this appeal; it is under that rubric and in that context which ground 3
    is framed.  Much of the observations in Singh  are  of  less  relevance
    here not least that there is no dispute as to what was said so, rather,
    the issue is whether that was capable of giving rise to  an  impression
    of unfairness.

26. The principles to be applied relevant to the fair-minded  observer  are
    summarised in Resolution Chemicals v H Lundbeck [2013] EWCA Civ 1515 at
    [35]: -

    35.  The following principles relevant to this application  are  clear.
         First, the test of apparent bias is  whether  the  fair-minded  and
         informed observer, having considered the facts, would conclude that
         there is a real possibility that the tribunal was biased: Porter  v
         Magill [2001] UKHL 67, [2002] AC 357 at [103] (Lord Hope). There is
         no  difference  between  the  common  law  test  of  bias  and  the
         requirements of an independent and impartial tribunal under Article
         6(1) of the European Convention of Human Rights ("the Convention"):
         Lawal at [14] (Lord Steyn). Secondly, underlying both Article 6  of
         the Convention and the common law  principles  is  the  fundamental
         consideration that justice should  not  only  be  done  but  should
         manifestly and undoubtedly be seen  to  be  done:  R  (McCarthy)  v
         Sussex Justices [1924] 1 KB 256, 259. Thirdly, the fair-minded  and
         informed observer  is  not  unduly  sensitive  or  suspicious,  but
         neither is he or she complacent: Helow v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2008] UKHL 62, [2008] 1 WLR  2416,  at  [2]  (Lord
         Hope). Fourthly, the facts and  context  are  critical.  Each  case
         turns on an intense focus on the essential facts of the  case:  Man
         O' War Station Ltd v Auckland City Council [2002] UKPC 28  at  [11]
         (Lord Steyn). Fifthly, if the  fair-minded  and  informed  observer
         would conclude that there is a real possibility that  the  tribunal
         will be  biased,  the  judge  is  automatically  disqualified  from
         hearing the case. The decision to recuse in those circumstances  is
         not a discretionary case management decision  reached  by  weighing
         various  relevant  factors  in  the  balance.   Considerations   of
         inconvenience, cost and delay are irrelevant: AWG Group Ltd at  [6]
         (Mummery LJ).

27. To these observations, it is noted also that in National  Assembly  for
    Wales v Condron [2006] EWCA Civ 1573 it was  observed  that  the  court
    must look at all the circumstances  as  they  appear  from  the  appeal
    before it, not just the facts known to the objectors  or  available  to
    the hypothetical observer at the time of decision - see also  Turner  v
    Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government [2015] EWCA Civ
    582.

28. Applying those principles to the facts of this case,  I  consider  that
    there was an appearance of bias from the form in which the judge  asked
    questions  during  cross-examination  and,  perhaps  more  importantly,
    during re-examination. Some of these  questions  were  clearly  in  the
    nature of cross-examination, and were closed  questions.  As  is  noted
    above, on viewing the transcript, it is difficult to discern which were
    questions put in cross-examination and which were questions put by  the
    judge.

29. Given that the answers to those questions formed the basis of a  number
    of the adverse findings of credibility, the  number  of  the  questions
    asked and their nature, I consider that a  fair-minded  observer  would
    have concluded  that  there  was  a  possibility  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was biased, given that in an adversarial  process,  the  judge
    appeared to have taken on the role of the respondent.

    Grounds 1 and 2

30. As I have found that ground 3 is made out, and that the hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was procedurally unfair, on that basis alone it
    is necessary to set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  It
    is therefore unnecessary to consider these grounds.

    Conclusion

31. For the reasons set out above, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    did involve the making of an error of law, and I set it aside.  As  the
    error identified resulted in there not being a fair hearing, it must be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.



    SUMMARY OF DECISION

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
         on all issues. None of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  are
         preserved.

      3. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date:  23 December 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
