
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03466/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2016                 |On 24 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    M A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Hoshi, Counsel, instructed by Brighton Housing
Trust
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He arrived in  the  UK  on
    11 May 2015 and claimed asylum on  the  basis  that  he  feared  forced
    recruitment by the Taliban.  The respondent  did  not  find  his  claim
    credible and on 22 November 2015 she refused to  grant  him  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection but, because the appellant  was  under  18  and
    there were  inadequate  reception  arrangements  in  his  country,  she
    granted him DL.  The appellant appealed.  The thrust of the appeal made
    on his behalf was that he faced a real risk of  persecution  on  return
    from the Taliban and independently of this he had a  well-founded  fear
    of  persecution  as  a  vulnerable  unaccompanied  minor.   Among   the
    materials submitted in support of his appeal was a psychological report
    from Alice Rogers dated 29 May  2016  and  an  expert  report  from  Dr
    Giustozzi.  In a decision sent on  22  June  2016  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) Judge E B Grant dismissed his appeal.  She did not find  credible
    the appellant's account of being at risk from the Taliban for much  the
    same reasons as the respondent.  In relation to Ms Rogers'  report  she
    did not accept its finding that the appellant was severely  cognitively
    impaired, but did accept he was depressed and clearly  traumatised  and
    distressed by the separation from his mother and that  "[t]here  is  no
    solution to this depression other than to reunite him with  his  mother
    and brother if they can be found".  She added:

         "In time he may adapt to being separated but at present it is clear
         he is hugely affected by the loss of his family by having been sent
         to the UK where he has leave to remain until he is 17."

2.   At [20] the judge then addressed Dr Giustozzi's evidence:

         "20. Dr Giustozzi's report makes it clear there are safe  areas  in
             Kabul.  He also makes it clear the Afghan government has asked
             that there are no more returns  at  the  present  time.   That
             cannot found a claim for  asylum.   Country  Guidance  caselaw
             indicates the appellant can be returned to Kabul  and  I  find
             that he can be returned.  There is nothing  exceptional  about
             his case.  He is a young man missing his mother and he is very
             distressed but that does not found a claim for asylum.  I hope
             for the appellant's sake his mother can be found and  that  he
             is soon returned to her.  He is obviously not  coping  at  all
             well without her.  In the meantime his  best  interests  under
             s55 are safeguarded through placement with a foster family."

3.   The grounds of appeal were that the judge: (i) failed  to  provide  any
    rational basis for attaching no weight to the  psychological  evidence;
    (ii) omitted to assess the appellant's protection claim on the basis of
    the accepted facts; (iii) failed to take into account  the  appellant's
    minority or apply the legal principles applicable to children's  asylum
    claims; (iv) and failed in general  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for
    dismissing the appellant's appeal.

4.   It is unnecessary to analyse these  grounds  in  detail  because  I  am
    entirely persuaded that the judge fell into material legal error.   The
    judge stated at [20] that country  guidance  case  law  "indicates  the
    appellant can be returned to Kabul.  There is nothing exceptional about
    his case."  That was simply incorrect.  The respondent accepted  -  and
    the judge did not find otherwise - that in Afghanistan there were there
    adequate reception arrangements for the  appellant.   Even  though  not
    accepting that the appellant was  severely  cognitively  impaired,  the
    judge clearly considered the appellant a vulnerable young man  who  was
    still a minor: see [16], [17].  Even if at [16]  the  judge  seemed  to
    regard the appellant's vulnerability as due simply to his calendar age,
    her acceptance at 17 that he was depressed and traumatised should  have
    led her to conclude there  was  vulnerability  in  the  broader  sense.
    Contrary to what the judge asserts at [20], existing  country  guidance
    continues to consider that vulnerable  young  adults  without  adequate
    reception facilities are capable  of  succeeding  in  their  asylum  or
    humanitarian  protection  claim:  see  e.g.  AA  (unattended  children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  16  (IAC).   Furthermore,  the  background
    country information included a very recent report  from  Dr  Giustozzi,
    which clearly considered that vulnerable young men  would  be  at  real
    risk of serious harm on return to Afghanistan.  It would have been open
    to the judge to take a different view, on the basis of the evidence  as
    a whole, but she simply left the matter to one side by  virtue  of  her
    unreserved finding at [20] that being a very distressed minor "does not
    found a claim for asylum". Even if that had not been a  fatal  mistake,
    it was still incumbent on the judge to consider whether  the  appellant
    was eligible for humanitarian protection.

5.   Whilst taken in isolation I have  doubts  that  the  challenge  to  the
    judge's treatment of the psychologist's  evidence  is  made  out  I  am
    equally unpersuaded (having found a material  error  of  law  on  other
    counts) that I can preserve any of her findings  of  fact.   Whilst  it
    does seem to me (as it seemed to the judge)  that  the  respondent  had
    cogent reasons for rejecting the appellant's account of difficulties in
    his home area with the Taliban,  her  approach  to  assessment  of  the
    appellant's evidence also suffers from a failure to show that she  took
    proper account of the need for a modified approach to assessment of the
    asylum  claim  of  a  minor,  as  required  by  paragraph  351  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Accordingly the  appellant's  appeal  needs  to  be
    considered afresh without preservation of any of the  judge's  findings
    of fact and that is most appropriately achieved by remitting  the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.



6.   To summarise:

    The FtT Judge materially erred in law.

    The case is remitted to be heard by a FtT Judge other than E B Grant.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed        [pic]                          Date

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

