

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/03439/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |       Decision & Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|on 26 May 2017                           |       on 15 June 2017            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                             ARIVAN RAMZI-SALEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr H Samra of Harbans Singh and Co.
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Hussain ('the Judge'), promulgated on 16 November  2016,  in  which
        the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection  of  human
        rights grounds against the respondent's  decision  dated  29  March
        2016.



Background


     2. The appellant, born on 25 February 1987, is a citizen of Iraq.  The
        appellant arrived in the UK illegally from France  on  20  November
        2015, claiming to have left Irbil in Iraq  and  to  have  travelled
        through several countries before arriving in the UK.
     3. The Judge noted the appellant is  a  Sunni  Muslim  who  previously
        lived in Baghdad but who moved to Mosul in 2004 because of  tension
        between Sunni and Shia Muslims. Following the arrival of IS  forces
        the appellant and  his  family  moved  to  Irbil  where  they  were
        permitted entry as a result of his wife's Kurdish ethnicity.
     4. The Judge considered the evidence provided before setting  out  the
        findings of fact from [15] of the decision on  the  challenge.  The
        findings relating to the core of the claim may be summarised in the
        following terms:


   i. The appellant met his wife in 2007 and  they  married  on  17  October
      2007. The appellant's wife moved to live with him in Mosul [16].
  ii. The Judge noted the appellant's claim that his  wife's  father  agreed
      with his brothers that she would marry his brother's son although  the
      appellant's wife's  father  died  in  2004  before  any  marriage  was
      arranged [15].
 iii. The appellant claimed the family lived without threats  or  harassment
      from the appellant's wife's uncle or cousin until an incident in Irbil
      in 2015 [16].
  iv. The Judge noted "in other  words,  despite  their  claimed  anger  and
      positions of influence and  power  that  they  held,  the  appellant's
      wife's uncle and cousin were either unable to locate them or  did  not
      bother to do so" [16].
   v. The appellant's claim that the reason he and his wife were left  alone
      for eight years between 2007 and 2015 was because the wife's uncle and
      cousin, as Kurds, had no power or influence in  Mosul  was  not  found
      plausible as they were said to be men of power and  position  and  had
      the means to locate the appellant and his wife,  which  they  did  not
      need to do personally. Any action subsequently taken was said to  have
      been taken through third parties [17].
  vi. The Judge found it implausible that despite's the wife's father having
      died in 2004 no marriage took place in the intervening years when, had
      the wife's cousin intended to marry her, there would have  been  ample
      opportunity to do so [18].
 vii. The failure of  the  cousin  to  marry  the  person  who  is  now  the
      appellant's wife did not support either the appellant's assertion that
      his wife was betrothed to her cousin or that the cousin or  the  uncle
      harboured such anger towards them because the appellant  married  her,
      that they now want to kill the appellant [18].
viii. There is every possibility appellant's wife's  uncle  and  cousin  had
      moved on in the last eight years and it is unlikely the wife's  cousin
      will have remained unmarried, possibly founded  a  family,  making  it
      questionable whether he wished to put that at  risk  by  pursuing  the
      alleged vendetta against his cousin or the man she married [19].  Lack
      of risk is  said  to  be  indicated  by  the  failure  to  pursue  the
      appellant's wife for the preceding eight years.   The  Judge  was  not
      satisfied that this failure was because of the uncle and cousins  lack
      of ability to find them [19].
  ix. The Judge was not satisfied that the appellant's wife was betrothed to
      her cousin and, even if this was the case, that the uncle  and  cousin
      sent men to attack the appellant in Irbil as claimed, or at all [20].
   x. The failure of the appellant to claim asylum in the first safe country
      he came to, namely  Germany,  damages  his  credibility.  No  credible
      reason was put forward as to why the appellant did not claim asylum in
      Germany [21].


     5. The Judge, having dismissed the asylum claim, thereafter considered
        the appellant's  humanitarian  protection  claim  by  reference  to
        Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. The Judge notes  that
        as the appellant's wife is a Kurd and as  they  were  permitted  to
        enter the IKR previously, this is a viable option especially as the
        appellant does not argue he would not be allowed to  return  there.
        The appellant's objection to relocating to the IKR was said  to  be
        the fear of the appellant's wife's uncle and cousin which the Judge
        did not find to be credible.  The Judge  found  a  viable  internal
        flight alternative to the IKR [25].
     6. The Judge also found the appellant remains in constant contact with
        his wife in Iraq enabling appropriate arrangements to be made.
     7. In relation to relocation to Baghdad, the appellant claims the only
        reason he cannot return to Baghdad is because he is a Sunni  Muslim
        but no real risk to the appellant if relocating to Baghdad was made
        out on this basis [28].




Grounds and submissions



     8. Permission to appeal was granted to the appellant by another  judge
        of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis it  is  arguable  that  the
        Judge has speculated  on  evidential  matters  upon  for  which  an
        explanation could have been given by the appellant if asked.
     9. In his oral submissions, Mr  Samra  confirmed  this  is  a  reasons
        challenge asserting the Judge failed to give adequate  reasons  for
        the findings made. It was asserted this  case  involves  an  honour
        issue.
    10. In relation to relocation, it was asserted  the  Judges  failed  to
        give adequate reasons as to why  relocating  would  not  be  unduly
        harsh.
    11. On behalf  of  the  Secretary  State  Mrs  Aboni  referred  to  the
        respondents Rule 24 response and asserted that even  if  the  Judge
        had made an error it was not material to the  decision  to  dismiss
        the appeal.




Error of law


    12. In VV (grounds of appeal) Lithuania [2016] UKUT 00053 (IAC) it  was
        held that (i) An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the
        grounds of inadequacy of reasoning in the decision  of  the  First-
        tier Tribunal  must  generally  demonstrate  by  reference  to  the
        material and arguments placed before that  Tribunal  that  (a)  the
        matter involved a substantial issue between the  parties  at  first
        instance and (b) that the Tribunal either failed to deal with  that
        matter at all, or gave reasons on that point which are  so  unclear
        that they may well conceal an error of law. (ii) Given that parties
        are under a duty to help further the overriding objective and to co-
        operate with the Upper Tribunal, those drafting grounds  of  appeal
        (a) should proceed on the basis that decisions  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal are to be read fairly and as a whole and without excessive
        legalism;  (b)  should  not  seek  to  argue  that   a   particular
        consideration was not taken into account by the  Tribunal  when  it
        can be seen from the decision read fairly and as a  whole  that  it
        was (and the real disagreement is with the Tribunal's assessment of
        the evidence or the merits);  and  (c)  should  not  challenge  the
        adequacy of the reasons given by the  First-tier  Tribunal  without
        demonstrating how the principles in (i) above have  been  breached,
        by reference to the materials placed before that Tribunal  and  the
        important or substantial issues which it was asked to determine  in
        that particular case.
    13. It has not been made out that the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
        evidence  made  available  with  the  required  degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny.
    14. The appellant asserts in his grounds that the Judge has speculated.
        It is accepted that in certain circumstances speculation can amount
        to arguable legal error, an example being the decision in HA v SSHD
        [2007] CSIH 65 where the Court  of  Sessions  said  that  basing  a
        finding on conjecture may amount to an error of law.
    15. The findings of the Judge have not been shown to  be  based  solely
        upon speculation or conjecture. Mr Samra asserted that the core  of
        this case was that of the alleged marriage and an issue of  honour,
        as a result of the marriage involving the appellant. It is accepted
        that in some parts of the world, such as in Iraq, the family  is  a
        very important institution with parties expected to found their own
        families through marriage to enable  them  to  have  children.  The
        appellant was asserting that as a result of his wife  not  marrying
        her cousin there was a  real  risk  as  a  result  of  the  alleged
        threats.
    16. Against this, the Judge noted that there had been no attempt by the
        cousin  to  marry  the  appellant's  wife.  The  Judge  noted   the
        appellant's wife's father died in  2004  with  no  marriage  taking
        place between 2004 and the date the appellant married his  wife  on
        17 October 2007. It is stated in the grounds that it was not  until
        18 May 2007 that the appellant's wife turned 18.  The  point  being
        made in the grounds is that the Judge erred in commenting upon  the
        period when  no  effort  was  made  by  her  cousin  to  marry  the
        appellant's wife as she could not marry until she attained the  age
        of 18.
    17. In Iraq, the legal age of marriage is 18 for both girls  and  boys,
        but a girl can marry at the age of 15 with parental  consent.  When
        the appellant's wife's father  died,  she  was  15.  There  was  no
        evidence before the Judge of any approach being made to the  person
        who would then have been the appellant's  wife's  guardian  seeking
        her hand in marriage. The fact appellant only attained  18  in  May
        2017 is therefore  not  an  absolute  bar  to  her  having  married
        earlier, and does not undermine the Judge's comments that there was
        no evidence of the cousin attempting to marry the appellant's  wife
        when he could have done so.
    18. According to UNICEF (UNICEF, State of the World's Children,  2016),
        approximately 1 in 5 girls are married before  the  age  of  18  in
        Iraq. Poverty, conflict and strict religious and social  traditions
        are drivers of child  marriage  in  Iraq  and  increased  financial
        hardship in Iraq has meant that the  number  of  child  brides  has
        increased. According to the  Iraqi  government,  in  1997,  15%  of
        marriages involved women under 18. This number jumped to more  than
        20% in 2012, with almost 5% married by the age of 15.
    19. The  comment  by  the  Judge  regarding  the  availability  of  the
        appellant's  wife  for  marriage  to  the  cousin,  if  the  cousin
        genuinely wished to marry her, has therefore not been shown to be a
        finding based upon speculation. The conclusion drawn  from  such  a
        finding that the Judge erred in suggesting the cousin was no longer
        interested  in  marrying   the   appellant's   wife,   based   upon
        consideration is the evidence as a whole, has  therefore  not  been
        shown to be a finding not reasonably open to the Judge.
    20. The appellant  challenges  the  Judges  conclusions  regarding  the
        ability of the appellant's cousin and wife to use  their  influence
        to find the appellant and his wife during the eight years prior  to
        leaving Iraq on the basis  the  appellant's  wife's  cousin  was  a
        lieutenant in the police and her uncle had a position in  the  PUK.
        Whilst it is accepted these are positions  that  exist  within  the
        IKR/KRG the assertion in the grounds that the  respondent  did  not
        provide evidence  that  members  of  these  groups  have  influence
        outside the KRG does not admit arguable legal error.
    21. The Judge found that the appellant moved to Mosul in 2004 where  he
        remained until June 2014 after which they moved  to  Irbil  in  the
        IKR. The evidence shows that individuals  arriving  are  documented
        within an administrative system to which those in authority in  the
        IKR may have had access. Mosul to Irbil is approximately  60  miles
        which is not a great distance away. The appellant  must  also  have
        felt Mosul was a safe area if he claimed  to  have  relocated  from
        Baghdad to this area earlier.  Family  must  also  have  felt  safe
        relocating to Irbil in 2014 and to have lived openly in  that  city
        as evidenced by the  appellant  working  for  15  months  prior  to
        leaving,  where  he  lived  with  his  wife,  without  experiencing
        difficulties. It has not been made out  that  the  finding  by  the
        Judge was not available to him or is infected by speculation  based
        upon the Judges analysis of the facts of this case.
    22. The  grounds  refer  to  the  issue  of  honour  arising  from  the
        appellant's wife being promised to her cousin but marrying somebody
        else, but the Judge did not find  that  the  appellant's  wife  was
        betrothed to her cousin [20] and therefore the basis the claim  for
        honour was not made out.
    23. The Judge found that the  family  could  return  to  Iraq  for  the
        reasons set out in the decision under  challenge  by  returning  to
        either the IKR or Baghdad which the Judge  arguably  considered  in
        light of the country guidance case of AA. The appellant's  wife  is
        Kurdish and it was not made out the  Judges  conclusions  that  the
        appellant would be permitted to re-enter Irbil to join his wife  is
        infected by arguable legal error. The appellant  worked  previously
        and it has not been made out that with his skill as a  mechanic  he
        would not be able to obtain employment as he did in the past.
    24. The Judge noted the appellant remains in constant contact with  his
        wife and that arrangements could be made between them [26]. This is
        not a finding infected by arguable legal error and,  as  the  Judge
        finds, would enable arrangements to be made which must include  the
        provision of appropriate documentation together with the  necessary
        arrangements with the authorities to facilitate the appellant's re-
        entry. It is also not made out the appellant could not  obtain  the
        required documents to gain  entry  or  obtain  appropriate  support
        through his CSID. The Judge  at  [28]  found  the  appellant  could
        relocated to Baghdad, even as a Sunni Muslim, on the  basis  return
        becomes feasible on the obtaining of the appropriate  documentation
        including a CSID.
    25. The Secretary of State raised the issue of internal  relocation  in
        the refusal letter. The  applicant  failed  to  produce  sufficient
        evidence to show internal location was unreasonable or unduly harsh
        on the facts of this case.
    26. Having considered the evidence, I find the Judge has given adequate
        reasons for findings made. The grounds are, in effect, a repeat  of
        the claim and disagreement with the core findings which  does  not,
        of itself, establish arguable legal error material to the  decision
        to dismiss the appeal.


Decision

    27. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    28. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13 June 2017












