
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03915/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Civil Justice Centre, Manchester     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2018                          |On 9 January 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    [m b]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Draycott, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, [MB], was born on [~] 1988 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Ethiopia.  The appellant claims to have entered the United  Kingdom  on
    13 October 2017 and claimed asylum.  By a decision dated 12 March 2018,
    the Secretary of State refused the appellant international  protection.
    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Alis)  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 2 May  2018  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the appeal should be allowed.  My reasons for reaching that
    decision are as follows.  First, I find that the judge erred in law  by
    allowing evidence to be given by the court interpreter as  regards  the
    Ethiopian calendar.  At [62] and [63] Judge Alis wrote:

         "62. This takes me to what I view as a core issue in his  claim  as
             to what happened in Ethiopia namely the  circumstances  around
             his detention and the 'summons' produced by the  appellant  in
             support of his appeal.

         63.  I spent some time  at  the  hearing  trying  to  identify  the
             correct dates and I was not helped by an erroneous translation
             of the summons.  Dates in the summons were incorrect and  they
             referred to English dates - they referred to the months of May
             and July and not the dates from the Ethiopian  calendar.   The
             court interpreter helpfully assisted us  and  identified  from
             the original document that the relevant  dates  were  18  July
             2017 for the date of the summons and 22 June 2017 the date  of
             the arrest and 16 July 2017 for the date of [the  appellant's]
             release."

 3. The judge notes [64] that the appellant claimed in  his  interview  and
    statement and in oral evidence that he had been arrested on 7 June 2017
    and that "until today there has been no suggestion that that  date  was
    incorrect."  In consequence, the judge found that the appellant had not
    been arrested or that the appellant is a  person  of  interest  to  the
    authorities  on  account  of  his  involvement  with  Oromo  opposition
    politics.

 4. In his grounds of appeal, Mr Draycott, who appeared for the  appellant,
    refers to the interpreter having converted the dates "to the  Gregorian
    calendar using an App of uncertain provenance on his phone."

 5. The Secretary of State has served a Rule 24 notice  on  15  July  2018.
    This notice accepts that the judge  erred  in  law  "in  requiring  the
    Tribunal interpreter to give evidence in respect of dates  recorded  on
    the summons that the appellant contended had it been issued for him  by
    the  Ethiopian  authorities  following  his  escape  from  custody  and
    attaching adverse weight to this evidence."  However, the  letter  goes
    on to submit that the error was not "material" to the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  The Secretary of State argues that "it is submitted that  when
    the rest of the judge's findings are considered between  paragraphs  52
    and 69 it is very difficult to see how this area alone would cause  the
    appeal to be allowed to the extent of a remittal  or  reversal  of  the
    decision."

 6. I agree with Mr Draycott that there are, in essence, only  two  reasons
    which the judge gives for having disbelieved the  appellant's  account.
    The first concerned the inconsistencies of the dates  (see  above)  and
    the second the appellant's failure to  refer  to  a  summons  which  he
    claims was served on him when he gave an  account  of  past  events  in
    Ethiopia at his asylum interview.  Paragraphs referred to in  the  Rule
    24 letter do not consist in the  main  of  firm  findings  against  the
    appellant.  The judge refers to there being "very little  evidence"  of
    the appellant's activities in  Ethiopia  and  the  judge  considers  it
    "strange"  the  appellant  had  not  relied  upon  evidence  of   other
    individuals who he claims are connected with the OLF (Oromo  Liberation
    Front).  I agree with Mr Draycott that inconsistencies  concerning  the
    dates on the summons document were significant in leading the judge  to
    reject the appellant's account.  I also agree with him that it  is  not
    satisfactory to allow the court interpreter to  provide  conversion  of
    dates from one calendar to another without  identifying  the  means  by
    which such a conversion is undertaken.  The Secretary of State does not
    challenge the statement that the  court  interpreter  used  a  "App  of
    uncertain provenance" and I accept it was not fair to the appellant for
    such a conversion method to be used without the appellant knowing  what
    it was or being able to verify the  converted  dates  produced  by  the
    application.  To that extent, I find that the appellant did not have  a
    fair hearing of his appeal.

 7. Mr Draycott submitted that I should allow the appeal outright.  I  have
    considered doing so but have decided that I should not.  Mr  Draycott's
    grounds of appeal provide  a  different  conversion  of  the  Ethiopian
    calendar (and make reference to a website) which, Mr Draycott  submits,
    produces a result which is consistent with  the  appellant's  evidence.
    That may well be the case but I do not consider  that  simply  adopting
    another online conversion method will put right the injustice to  which
    the appellant has been subjected.  I also consider  that  some  of  the
    observations made by the judge regarding  the  appellant's  failure  to
    refer to the summons at interview may have some weight; the  difficulty
    is in knowing to what extent the  judge  found  against  the  appellant
    because of the problems over the conversion of the dates in the summons
    or for other reasons.  I consider the only safe course of action is for
    there to be a hearing de novo.  Prior to that hearing, the  appellant's
    representatives must take steps to address the question of the dates in
    the summons and, at least 10 days prior to any new hearing, provide the
    Secretary of State with particulars of the method of conversion of  any
    dates so that the respondent may counter-check these.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 2  May
    2018 is set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The
    appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Alis) for that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
