
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03417/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2019                    |On 14 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     E C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Quee, Solicitor, Morgan Has Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss R Bassi, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Beg ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 22 July 2019 by which
    the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse
    to grant him international protection was dismissed.

 2.  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Macdonald   granted
    permission on all grounds.



Anonymity

 3. The Judge did not issue an anonymity order. This is a matter  in  which
    the appellant has sought asylum. I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No.
    1 concerned with anonymity orders and I observe that the starting point
    for consideration of anonymity orders in  this  Chamber  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal as in all courts and Tribunals is  open  justice.  However,  I
    note paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is
    present practice of both the First-tier Tribunal and this Tribunal that
    an anonymity order is made in  all  appeals  raising  asylum  or  other
    international protection claims.

 4. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an anonymity order:

         "Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise  no  report
         of these proceedings or  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or indirectly  identify  the  appellant.   This  direction
         applies to amongst others the appellant  and  the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid the  likelihood  of
         serious harm arising to the appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
         protection claim being known to the public and also information  as
         to his mental health being publicised."



Background

 5. The appellant is  a  Turkish  national  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  who  is
    presently aged 45. He hails from the Manisa Province of Turkey and  has
    a wife and four children who remain in Turkey.

 6. He states that he is illiterate and worked as a painter  and  decorator
    in Turkey. Along with a friend he redecorated the HADEP building in his
    locality and this led to him  being  threatened  and  harassed  by  the
    police. He subsequently  became  a  member  of  a  Kurdish  nationalist
    political party in Turkey, the PDP. In 2012 he was asked by a friend if
    a third person who was unknown to him could stay at his house  for  two
    days. The appellant agreed and permitted this person to  stay,  without
    establishing either his name or his business. A few days later  he  was
    taken from his home to the police station where he was interrogated and
    tortured. He was detained for two  nights.  Upon  his  return  home  he
    required two weeks in bed so as to recover from his injuries.

 7. He was refused leave to enter the United Kingdom on 14 June 2012 as the
    visa he sought to rely  upon  was  identified  as  a  forgery.  Removal
    directions were set for the same day but were  subsequently  cancelled.
    The appellant was eventually granted temporary admission having claimed
    asylum on 25 June 2012. His  asylum  application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on 5 July 2012 and his appeal was dismissed by JFtT Plumptre
    by way of a decision dated 10 September 2012. JFtT Plumptre  found  the
    appellant to be  an  incredible  witness  even  after  giving  him  due
    allowance for his memory problems  and  observing  that  such  problems
    could in part be attributed to  learning  difficulties.  JFtT  Plumptre
    decided, inter alia, that she disbelieved the  appellant's  account  of
    having been arrested and tortured by the police because he  had  failed
    to mention having been tortured at any point during his four interviews
    with Immigration Officers  and  during  his  screening  interview.  She
    further noted that his initial asylum  application  was  based  upon  a
    purported blood feud which he  accepted  in  his  interview  no  longer
    existed. The Upper Tribunal refused the appellant's appeal by way of  a
    decision dated 4 April 2013.

 8. The appellant submitted further representations in October  2013  which
    were accepted by the respondent in a decision dated 28 February 2018 to
    constitute a fresh claim for  the  purpose  of  paragraph  353  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The fresh claim was refused with the appellant being
    granted an attendant right of appeal.



Hearing Before the FTT

 9. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at  Taylor  House  on  9  July
    2019. Reliance was placed upon a medical report authored by Dr  Zapata-
    Bravo dated 21 July 2015. This report post-dated the appellant's appeal
    before JFtT Plumptre. The respondent accepted that Dr  Zapata-Bravo  is
    able to give expert medical opinion upon the issue of scarring. The FtT
    also had before it a report dated 18 March 2019 authored by Dr Egnal, a
    consultant clinical psychologist. These reports  were  to  be  read  in
    conjunction with a report from Dr Wozniak  dated  30  July  2012  which
    diagnosed  the  appellant  as  suffering  from  post-traumatic   stress
    disorder (PTSD), a report from Dr Carla Levi  a  clinical  psychologist
    working for Barnet, Enfield and Haringey  Mental  Health  Trust  and  a
    report from Jane Hunt, a GP working  on  behalf  of  the  Helen  Bamber
    Foundation, dated 13 May 2013.

10. I observe that Dr  Egnal  states  at  [9.1]  of  his  report  that  the
    appellant has borderline intellectual  functioning.  Such  persons  who
    fall within this group are identified by Dr. Egnal  as  being  able  to
    manage their lives and maintain lower  levels  of  employment  but  are
    unable to engage in more difficult tasks such as  engaging  in  complex
    financial transactions. Dr Egnal also opines  that  the  appellant  has
    mild neuro-cognitive disorder.

11. The Judge dismissed the appeal, concluding at [47] and [48]:

         'In conclusion, I find for the reasons already  set  out  in  Judge
         Plumptre's determination, that the appellant does not have a  well-
         founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason. For  the  same
         reasons I find that there is no credible evidence  before  me  that
         the appellant is at risk of suffering serious harm  on  return.  He
         does not therefore qualify for  humanitarian  protection.  For  the
         same reasons I find that the appellant's rights  under  articles  2
         and 3 will not be breached. In respect of the medical evidence, for
         the reasons I have  already  set  out,  I  do  not  find  that  the
         appellant was arrested and tortured in detention. I find  that  the
         appellant can return to Turkey and he will have the support of  his
         wife and children with whom he is in regular contact. Their support
         will provide a great deal of comfort to him which will  enable  him
         to make progress.

         I find that there are mental health facilities in Turkey. Mr.  Pipe
         said that he does not argue that the appellant will not be able  to
         receive appropriate treatment in Turkey. For the reasons set out in
         the respondent's refusal letter I find that the appellant does  not
         meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.
         In considering the matter outside the Rules I  taken  into  account
         Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  where  the  House  of  Lords  held   that
         proportionality must always involve striking a fair balance between
         the rights of the individual and the  interests  of  the  community
         which is inherent in the whole of the Convention.'



Grounds of Appeal

12. The grounds of appeal were carefully and succinctly drafted by Mr  Pipe
    who attended the hearing before the Judge. Five grounds of  appeal  are
    identified and overall they can fairly be identified as asserting  that
    the Judge made material misdirections of law, made irrational findings,
    and failed to consider relevant medical evidence.

13. In granting permission to appeal on 27  August  2019,  DJFtT  Macdonald
    reasoned:

         'While the Judge indicated that she did not find  the  evidence  of
         the appellant's brothers to be credible (paragraphs 45 and  46)  it
         is arguable that she erred in  law  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
         grounds. In particular it is arguable  that  the  medical  evidence
         before the Judge demonstrated that the appellant was not fit to  be
         interviewed  and  provided  an  explanation  for   the   discrepant
         accounts. In addition, it is arguable that the Judge did not  fully
         consider the report from Dr Egnal. Permission to appeal is  granted
         on all grounds.'

14. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.



Decision on Error of Law

15. The second ground of appeal was the primary focus of  the  Tribunal  at
    the hearing, namely that the Judge made a material misdirection of  law
    by not considering the guidance given by the Supreme Court in  KV  (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] UKSC 10 when
    assessing Dr Zapata-Bravo's medical opinion as to the scars to be found
    on the  appellant's  body.  I  observe  that  it  was  expert  evidence
    presented by Dr. Zapata-Bravo that  was  expressly  considered  by  the
    Justices of the Supreme Court. This ground further details:

         'Notwithstanding  the  aforesaid  Judge  Beg  relies   heavily   at
         paragraphs 40 to 42 on the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  KV
         (Sri Lanka) which was overturned by the Supreme Court.  The Judge's
         error has led her to approach the medical evidence in an  erroneous
         manner.  The medical evidence in this  appeal  is  central  to  the
         question of credibility and risks/obstacles to integration.'

16. At its heart  this  ground  challenges  the  consideration  of  law  as
    identified at [40] to [42] of the Judge's decision and reasons:

         '[In HE (DRC - credibility  and  psychiatric  reports)  DRC  [2004]
         UKIAT 00321] Mr Justice Ouseley went on to state  at  paragraph  19
         that the part which a psychiatric report can play in assisting  the
         assessment of credibility  is  usually  very  limited  indeed.  The
         Supreme Court considered the correct approach to the assessment  of
         medical evidence in asylum claims  alleging  torture.  In  KV  (Sri
         Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 119, the court held that the decision in  KV
         (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 230  (IAC)  was
         justified to the extent that the Upper Tribunal (UT) rejected a Sri
         Lankan  asylum-seeker's  account  that  five  scars  on  his   back
         inflicted  by  a  hot  metal  rod  had  been  caused   by   torture
         administered by the Sri Lankan authorities and in inferring that it
         was  self-inflicted.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Court  of  Appeal
         clarified that the guidance given by the UT on how medical evidence
         should be presented in  "self-infliction  by  proxy"  (SIBP)  cases
         needs to be treated as having no effect SIBP means  that  KV  might
         have arranged to have these burn  scars  inflicted  on  himself  by
         someone else whilst undertake general anaesthetic.

         After considering the medical evidence provided  by  KV's  experts,
         the UT issued guidelines for medical experts to take  into  account
         regarding the issue of SIBP when preparing expert evidence for  use
         in asylum cases. Giving the main judgment, Sales LJ held  that  any
         further guidance was unnecessary because the  correct  approach  to
         instructing experts is found  in  the  Practice  Direction  of  the
         Immigration  and  Asylum  Chambers  of  the  First-tier  and  Upper
         Tribunal 2004.  KV  claimed  to  have  been  detained,  beaten  and
         tortured between 2009 and 2011 by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  for
         links to the LTTE.

         The court also considered  the  effect  of  the  Istanbul  Protocol
         issued in 2004 by the OHCHR on a medical expert's function  on  the
         approach to be adopted by the Home Office or the FtT  in  assessing
         whether an asylum-seeker would face a real  risk  or  serious  ill-
         treatment on return  to  his  country.  Sales  LJ  noted  that  the
         Protocol focuses on the question of the likely immediate cause of a
         lesion or wound on the body of the complainant which  is  a  proper
         subject for expert medical evidence.  Moreover, it was the  court's
         view that experts should adhere to the tribunal procedure rules and
         practice directions and not stray from  the  core  areas  requiring
         their input by digressing into areas of evidence and facts  outside
         their expertise, terrain  which  is  properly  for  the  tribunal's
         assessment.'

17. These paragraphs flow from  a  detailed  consideration  of  Dr  Zapata-
    Bravo's evidence which commences from [29] of the decision and runs  to
    [38]. In these paragraphs the Judge sets out the nature of the scarring
    and Dr Zapata-Bravo's professional opinion. At [38] the Judge notes  Dr
    Zapata-Bravo's evidence that the late disclosure of arrest and  torture
    is typical behaviour of  a  traumatised  person  who  feels  shame  and
    difficulty in recounting their experiences.  She  then  identifies  the
    judgment of Mr Justice Ouseley sitting as the President in  HE  (DRC  -
    credibility and psychiatric reports) DRC at [39].  What is striking  is
    that having set out  the  evidence  of  Dr  Zapata-Bravo  and  reminded
    herself at [40] that the approach to be taken to the assessment of such
    medical evidence in asylum claims has been identified  by  the  Supreme
    Court in KV (Sri Lanka) the Judge then proceeded for  three  paragraphs
    to  detail  the  Court  of  Appeal  judgment,  and  in  particular  the
    observations of Sales LJ which were not approved by the Supreme  Court.
    There is no reference to the substance of the Supreme Court's  guidance
    either before or after [40]  to  [42].  Miss  Bassi  was  unwilling  to
    identify that this was  a  material  error  of  law  but  she  candidly
    accepted that the reliance upon the Court of Appeal judgment in KV (Sri
    Lanka) was a misdirection and she accepted on behalf of the  respondent
    that there  were  difficulties  in  this  decision  where  the  leading
    authority was not expressly referred  to.  I  appreciate  Miss  Bassi's
    difficulties in  conceding  this  matter  without  instructions  and  I
    further note the Judge's efforts to  consider  the  matter  before  her
    fairly and with care. However, it can only be a  material  misdirection
    of law in an asylum appeal in which the issue  of  scarring  arises  to
    rely upon the Court of  Appeal  judgment  of  KV  (Sri  Lanka)  and  in
    particular to rely upon the majority  judgment  authored  by  Sales  LJ
    which was not approved by the Supreme Court, who instead preferred  the
    observations of Elias LJ in his minority judgment.  The  Supreme  Court
    gave clear guidance to the  courts  and  to  practitioners  as  to  the
    approach to be adopted as to medical expert and scarring and it is this
    guidance that is to be followed.

18. In such circumstances the only appropriate course available is for this
    decision to be set aside. I  am  therefore  not  required  to  consider
    grounds 1, 3, 4 and 5.



Remittal

19. As to remaking the decision given the fundamental nature of  the  error
    of law that has been identified I accept the submissions made  by  both
    Miss Bassi and Mr Quee that clear findings of fact have yet to be  made
    in this matter and to date there  has  been  no  careful  consideration
    given  to  the  medical  evidence  presented  to  the  Tribunal.   Both
    representatives submitted that the appeal should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I have given careful consideration  to  the  Joint
    Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal
    concerning the disposal of appeals  in  this  Tribunal  that  reads  as
    follows at [7.2]:

         'The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. I have reached the conclusion that it  is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision in all  matters.
    The appellant has not yet enjoyed  an  adequate  consideration  of  his
    asylum claim to date and has not had a fair hearing.



Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
    22 July 2019 pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

22. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before any Judge other than Judges of the First-tier Tribunal  Plumptre
    and Beg.

23. No findings of fact are preserved.

24. An anonymity order is made.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan



Dated: 10 October 2019

