
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03895/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019                    |On 17 October 2019                   |
|Extempore decision                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     bk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 10  March  2000.   He
    appeals against a decision of Judge Colvin of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated  on  28  June  2019  dismissing  his  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision dated 29 March 2019 to refuse his  asylum  claim,
    but allowing his appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

 2. The basis of the appeal is that Judge Colvin erroneously concluded that
    the appellant's Counsel, Ms E Griffiths, had conceded that  the  asylum
    element of the appellant's case was no longer in issue.  That was  said
    to have been an error and Ms Griffiths, who did not appear  before  me,
    has provided a witness statement to that effect.

Factual Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2014 as an unaccompanied
    child.  Although his claim for asylum was refused, at the time  he  was
    granted leave as an unaccompanied minor valid until September 2017.

 4. On 4 April 2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andonian  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal of the  Secretary  of  State  to
    recognise him as a refugee.  On 6 September 2017,  the  appellant  made
    further submissions which were treated as a fresh claim under paragraph
    353 of the Immigration Rules.  The fresh claim was refused on 29  March
    2019, and it was that refusal  decision  which  was  challenged  before
    Judge Colvin.

 5. In Judge Colvin's decision, there is a record of what was said to  have
    been a preliminary discussion at the outset of the hearing.  At [3] the
    judge said:

         "As  a  preliminary  matter  (and  after  taking  instructions)  Ms
         Griffiths for the appellant confirmed that the appeal is  based  on
         risk on humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.   I  have
         before me the bundles from both the appellant and the respondent."

 6. The appellant submits that the  judge  erroneously  misunderstood  what
    Counsel had submitted to her.  The basis of the disagreement is set out
    in a witness statement dated 12  July  2019  from  Eleri  Griffiths,  a
    barrister at One Pump Court Chambers, who appeared  for  the  appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Griffiths writes:

         "My contemporaneous note of  the  hearing  includes  the  following
         record of the discussion.  I have  corrected  typographical  errors
         and put in brackets the speaker or context to assist.

         [FtTJ] ... I understand it's much more about what happened here and
         question of whether or not to go back  or  relocating  to  Kabul  -
         (they) send to Kabul anyway.  As I  understand  that  is  the  case
         before I read submission.  Will (otherwise) have to read the asylum
         interview.  My own view is it's about what's happened here and what
         his position is now ... we can do the first - not sure what benefit
         will give because medical evidence is there now and  most  relevant
         to the position ongoing.  Take instructions on that.  Then  let  us
         know what we are doing.  Meanwhile - will do that check.

         Explained we don't agree with the determination but put his case on
         the basis of his circumstances now.

         [FtTJ] Am I ok to say that it is risk on return in relation to  his
         present position now is what we are deciding today.  Yes.

         Want to put the case as it is now." [sic throughout]

 7. It is clear from the verbatim  note  taken  by  Ms  Griffiths  -  which
    necessarily is in a shorthand format - that  there  was  some  form  of
    misunderstanding in relation to what was agreed  to  be  a  preliminary
    issue.  Before me, the appellant  submits  that  he  had  not  formally
    conceded that the asylum limb of the claim was no longer in issue,  but
    rather that the  focus  was  merely  one  of  humanitarian  protection.
    Realistically, however, Mr Hodson recognises that the materials in  the
    appellant's bundle upon which an asylum appeal could realistically have
    succeeded were minimal.

 8. The question for my consideration is whether the judge misunderstood Ms
    Griffiths, or whether  Ms  Griffiths  misunderstood  the  way  she  was
    putting the case to the judge on the other?  Secondly, if there  was  a
    misunderstanding which was the fault of the judge, is that material  to
    the outcome?

 9. It is clear that there is a degree of ambiguity inherent to the  phrase
    "focus on what is happening now".  The judge's  Record  of  Proceedings
    records the discussion in similar terms, noting that the focus  of  the
    proceedings was the contemporary position of the appellant.

10. By way of preliminary observation, it is  hardly  surprising  that  the
    judge considered that the consequence of focusing on "what is happening
    now" was that the asylum elements of the  appeal  were  no  longer  the
    focus of the proceedings.   The  appellant's  asylum  appeal  had  been
    dismissed relatively recently, and - as set out below  -  that  finding
    would form the starting point of any  future  judicial  findings.   The
    focus of the asylum appeal had been events  which  were  said  to  have
    taken place in Afghanistan.  In that context, by stating that the focus
    would be "what is happening now", the submissions of Ms Griffiths would
    naturally have had the effect of leading the judge  to  concentrate  on
    the country conditions in Afghanistan  and  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's return, with no attempt to displace  the  earlier  judicial
    findings that the appellant was not at risk on the basis of  a  Refugee
    Convention ground.

11. In order to ascertain whether the judge fell into error in the approach
    that she adopted,  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  what  was  actually
    submitted, in addition to what Ms Griffiths  retrospectively  considers
    that she meant when making those submissions.

12. Turning to the skeleton argument which Ms Griffiths relied upon in  her
    closing submissions, it  does  state  at  [3(i)]  that,  "[b]y  way  of
    summary" the appellant contends that:

         "the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  would  breach  the   United
         Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.  The  Appellant
         has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on  grounds  of  imputed
         political opinion (perceived Pro-Taliban (Son of perceived  Taliban
         member), perceived pro-Allied/Forces supporter, and membership of a
         particular  social  group,  individual  perceived  as  Westernised,
         individual at risk of recruitment;)" (sic throughout).

13. In light of [3] of the skeleton argument, there is superficial force in
    the grounds of appeal upon which the appellant obtained  permission  to
    appeal.  However, when Ms Griffiths' skeleton argument is  examined  in
    further depth, it is clear that there was minimal, if any  reliance  on
    the Convention grounds  which  she  now  claims  the  judge  failed  to
    consider.  At [11] Ms  Griffiths  listed  what  she  described  as  the
    "issues" in the appeal:

         "a)  Devaseelan:  whether  the  Tribunal  should  depart  from  the
             conclusions of the previous determination of FtTJ Andonian  in
             the present case.

         b)   Credibility  -  whether  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the
             Appellant is telling the truth.

         c)    Whether  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  on  return   to
             Afghanistan.

         d)   Whether, for the same  reasons  the  Appellant  qualifies  for
             humanitarian protection on  account  of  facing  serious  harm
             under Article 15(a) or (b) of the Qualification Directive.

         e)   Whether, for the same reasons the  Appellant's  removal  would
             breach Articles 2-3 of the ECHR.

         f)   Whether, the Appellant qualifies for  humanitarian  protection
             on account of facing serious harm under Article 15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive.

         g)   Whether the Appellant should be granted leave  on  account  of
             his medical conditions/mental health.

         h)   Article 8 - inside and outside the Rules."

    Mr Hodson highlights that at [11(c)] there is a  generic  reference  to
    whether the appellant would be "at risk" on return to Afghanistan.  The
    difficulty with that submission is that the skeleton argument does  not
    specify the nature of the risk which the  appellant  is  said  to  face
    under  that  sub-paragraph,  nor  does  the  necessary  presence  of  a
    Convention nexus appear to be demonstrated by Ms Griffiths' summary  of
    that issue.  Although when one reads paragraphs (d) and (e) of [11]  of
    the skeleton argument it is possible, on one view, to deduce  that  the
    author of sub-paragraph (c) may have been addressing the issue of  risk
    arising on a Convention ground, that is not stated in terms.  Taken  at
    its highest, therefore, the  submission  that  the  judge  misread  the
    skeleton argument is a submission that the judge failed to  infer  that
    the generic reference to "risk" in [11(c)] was a reference to a risk of
    being persecuted on a Convention ground.

14. Looking to the  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings  as  retained  on  the
    Tribunal's file, it is clear that the basis  upon  which  Ms  Griffiths
    made her closing submissions orally did not seek to raise a  Convention
    ground.  At the outset of the hearing before me I outlined to both  the
    appellant and respondent's representatives  how  the  submissions  were
    recorded in the Record of  Proceedings.   I  adjourned  over  lunch  to
    enable both advocates to reflect on the position, in recognition of the
    fact they understandably would not have had  sight  of  the  Tribunal's
    Record of Proceedings.

15. The issues upon which Ms Griffiths addressed the judge  orally  at  the
    conclusion of the appeal were as follows:

       . sufficiency of protection;

       . the general safety situation and humanitarian situation in Kabul;

       . whether the appellant would be perceived as westernised;

       . the appellant's mental health;

       . AS (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00118  (IAC)
         distinguished;

       . the European Asylum  Support  Offices  guidance  on  conditions  in
         Kabul;

       . Article 8 and proportionality; and

       . the positive impact that a grant  of  leave  would  have  upon  the
         appellant.

16. It is  plain  from  the  skeleton  argument,  and  the  submissions  as
    outlined, that there was no attempt to engage with,  let  alone  depart
    from the previous findings of Judge Andonian.  In that decision,  Judge
    Andonian made the following  operative  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim that he was at risk from the Taliban  on  account  of
    his father being allegedly murdered by them:

         "16. I have made  allowances  for  the  appellant's  age  and  have
             considered his evidence from the point of view of a minor  but
             nevertheless notwithstanding  viewing  his  evidence  in  that
             light I still am convinced that he was intentionally making up
             stores [sic] as he was going along  and  that  he  was  not  a
             credible person.  It was clear to me that he had  no  fear  of
             persecution in his country.   It  is  not  credible  that  the
             Taliban covered their  faces  at  all  times  to  avoid  being
             recognised  but  then  suddenly  uncovered  their  faces  when
             killing his father.  That is a nonsense as by  covering  their
             faces the Taliban would be identified by the appellant and his
             family members and that is not what they would want to happen.

         17.  I cannot see what interest the  Taliban  would  have  in  this
             appellant.  ...".

17. Those findings represent the starting point for  any  consideration  of
    the appellant's protection appeal.  Plainly,  in  the  absence  of  any
    attempt to engage with them, it cannot realistically be said  that  the
    asylum question remained a live issue before the  judge,  or  that  the
    judge erred by failing to make findings on that issue.

18. At [41] to [47] of her skeleton argument, Ms Griffiths  considered  the
    issue of the appellant's claimed "westernisation".  This, the  skeleton
    argument appeared to contend, amounted to a Convention ground  for  the
    appellant to be recognised as a refugee.  At [47] the skeleton argument
    states the following:

         "The Appellant not only visibly and audibly westernised [sic],  but
         identifies personally as westernised.  In particular he speak [sic]
         of the changed [sic] in  his  approach  to  customs,  religion  and
         values, including equality.  It is submitted that such  views  will
         plainly place him at risk on  return  having  regard  also  to  the
         objective country material on identification on return."

    That assertion, with respect, appears to be aspirational when  compared
    to the evidence given by the appellant as recorded by the judge.  It is
    worth quoting [7] and [8] extensively:

         "7.  He [the  appellant]  has  lost  contact  with  his  family  in
             Afghanistan after losing his phone in France.   The  situation
             in his home area of Kunduz is said to be bad  and  he  has  no
             relatives in Kabul.  He left  the  village  with  his  younger
             brother, [G], leaving his mother and two other brothers there.
              He got separated  from  [G]  in  Turkey  and  has  not  heard
             anything about him since.  He misses his family every day.  He
             has tried to locate his family through the Red Cross but  this
             has failed.  He tries not  to  even  think  about  what  might
             happen if he is sent back to Afghanistan.  He finds it hard to
             imagine as his life is here now and he would be returning as a
             different person.  He also would not be  able  to  cope  in  a
             place like Kabul without all the support that  he  has  around
             him now.  While he can speak Pashtu and  reads  a  little  his
             writing in  the  language  is  not  food  [sic].   He  has  no
             education that will help him there and no  skills  that  would
             enable him to support himself.  Mentally he would be in a high
             state of fear and anxiety.

         8.   In cross-examination he said that he  has  some  friends  from
             Afghanistan in the UK but none from his area.   He  has  tried
             everything to contact his family including asking  his  foster
             family to help him.  He had three younger brothers and has  no
             contact with the brother that left with him.  He is trying  to
             find an apprenticeship to finish his  carpentry  qualification
             together with attending  college.   He  has  educated  himself
             since being in the UK but does not know  if  carpentry  skills
             will help him in Afghanistan.  He has tried  to  stop  reading
             the news about Afghanistan as  it  affects  his  mental  state
             particularly when he fears for his family.   The  Taliban  are
             still in control in his home area.  He cannot return  to  live
             in any part of Afghanistan as he will have no support."

    There has been no challenge to the accuracy of the  judge's  record  of
    the appellant's evidence.

19. As may be seen from the oral evidence the appellant gave,  he  made  no
    reference to his newly found claimed "westernised" status.  Having read
    through his witness statement dated 10 May 2019, there is no account in
    that document of his newly found claimed westernised status, or of  his
    "identification" in that way.  To the extent that there  is  any  issue
    arising from the appellant's claim to be perceived or likely to  be  at
    risk as a westernised person,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  had  no
    materials before her which would have enabled  her  to  find  that  the
    appellant  had  acquired  an  immutable  characteristic  of   being   a
    westernised person, assuming that it would be possible to  make  out  a
    Convention ground based on such an immutable characteristic.  There  is
    simply no support in the evidence that was before  the  judge  for  the
    contention that the appellant was a member of a particular social group
    on account of being a westernised male.

20. Accordingly, therefore,  the  preliminary  discussion  that  the  judge
    engaged in at the outset of the hearing must be viewed in  the  context
    of the submissions that were eventually advanced before her.  There was
    no attempt to provide a  factual  basis  upon  which  the  judge  could
    properly depart from the starting  point  concerning  the  core  asylum
    claim previously advanced by the appellant as dismissed in the decision
    of Judge Andonian.  Secondly, to the extent that the skeleton  argument
    sought to raise the issue  of  his  westernisation,  the  evidence  the
    appellant gave was at odds with that contention and revealed  only  the
    sort of difficulties which a person who has resided in this country for
    a considerable period  is  likely  to  face  upon  their  return.   The
    analysis the judge conducted of that issue reveals that there can be no
    suggestion that the appellant enjoys particular social group membership
    on account of his perceived westernisation.  However, as  reflected  in
    the appeal  being  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds,  the
    appellant's likely reception in Kabul  was  a  matter  which  would  be
    affected by his lack of experience of the city, and  by  his  age,  his
    vulnerability and his mental health difficulties.

21. In conclusion, therefore, the judge was invited to consider the  appeal
    on the basis which was primarily related to the issues she would  later
    find in favour of the appellant upon, namely  humanitarian  protection.
    There does appear to have been a misunderstanding, but from the judge's
    perspective she considered the case on the basis  she  was  invited  to
    consider it, and indeed did so in a way which has not been impugned  by
    the respondent.  As such, I find there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.  Any misunderstanding at the outset  of  the  hearing
    was not attributable to the fault of the judge and the  judge  resolved
    the case in accordance with the way it had been presented  to  her  and
    there can  be  no  criticism,  with  the  greatest  of  respect  to  Ms
    Griffiths, that she misunderstood the issues that she was  supposed  to
    consider.

22. In any event, had the judge misunderstood the nature of the concession,
    there was no material before her which could realistically have enabled
    the appeal to succeed on  asylum  grounds,  as  Mr  Hodson  recognised.
    Although the judge did not err, had she done so, the  error  would  not
    have been material and the decision would not need to be set aside.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.  The decision of Judge Colvin stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 10 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
