
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: PA/03126/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10th August 2016                       |On 31st August 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE T KAMARA
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  PETER [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on  15th  January  1986.   The
    Appellant  has  an  extensive  immigration  history.   He   was   first
    encountered on 12th June 2006 by the Metropolitan Police and questioned
    as to his identity.  The Appellant could not confirm how he had entered
    the UK or how he had supported himself for the previous six  years  but
    claimed to have arrived in the UK  in  2000  and  had  never  made  any
    attempt to regularise his stay.  He was served with form IS151A  notice
    as an illegal entrant.

 2. On 8th October 2008 the Appellant was convicted  of  using  threatening
    and abusive behaviour with intent  to  cause  fear  or  provocation  of
    violence and was given a caution.  He received  a  further  caution  in
    November 2013 after a conviction of possession of a class B  controlled
    drug.  On 25th June 2014 he was convicted of  burglary  and  theft  and
    sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment suspended for 24 months.

 3. On 11th September 2014 the Appellant was served with notices  requiring
    him to submit any reason why he believed he should remain in the UK and
    he submitted his daughter's birth certificate.  There was  no  evidence
    that the Appellant was living with,  or  supporting,  the  child.   His
    claim was refused with an  in-country  right  of  appeal,  however  the
    Appellant did not take the opportunity to appeal.

 4. On 9th July 2015 he was detained on reporting pending removal from  the
    UK and on 14th July confirmation was received of family separation.  On
    23rd July 2015 the Appellant formally claimed asylum on the basis  that
    the Appellant asked to be recognised as a refugee with  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Ghana on the basis of the fact that he  did  not
    have any family members in Ghana.  That application was refused by  the
    Secretary of State on 11th November 2015.

 5. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Cary sitting at Taylor House on 18th March  2016.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 29th  April  2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

 6. On 29th April 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those  grounds  contended  that  by  allowing  the
    appeal under paragraph 117B(6) following Treebhawon [2015]  UKUT  00674
    the Tribunal had erred in law.

 7. On 25th May 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge  refused  permission
    to appeal.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were submitted by  the  Secretary
    of State on 14th June 2016.  Those  grounds  re-asserted  the  original
    grounds, but also made  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to follow the decision of PD and Others [2016] UKUT
    00108.

 8. On 27th June 2016 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Keki?  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Those grounds noted that the Appellant was an illegal  entrant
    with a criminal conviction but that no deportation order had been made.
     They noted  that  the  judge  had  given  weight  to  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his daughter and took guidance  from  Treebhawon  but
    that it was arguable that  the  relationship  was  insufficient  for  a
    successful Article 8 claim and that the judge arguably  had  failed  to
    consider all the other factors in Section 117B which he was required to
    do and had failed to consider the decision of PD [2016] UKUT 00108.

 9. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  us  to  determine
    initially whether there is a material error of law in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears  in  person.   He
    advises that  he  can  no  longer  afford  legal  representation.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Jarvis.  We note that this is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  but
    for the purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the  appeal  process,  the
    Secretary of State is referred to herein as the Respondent and  Mr  [P]
    as the Appellant.

10. It is noted that the issues before the  Tribunal  are  matters  of  law
    rather than matters of fact.  The historical basis of  this  appeal  is
    not in dispute.  Mr [P] is a litigant in person.  We explained  to  him
    the process that would be followed and he indicated his  understanding.
    We advised that following submissions  made  by  Mr  Jarvis,  we  would
    listen to anything he had to say without interruption and take it  into
    account.

The Law

11. It is useful herein to set out the relevant law that we  are  asked  to
    consider.  The statutory authority is to be found in  Section  117B  of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.    Whilst   the
    predominant Section is  paragraph  117B(6)  the  whole  Section  is  of
    relevance:-

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
             cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom".



The Grounds of Appeal

12. The submission of the Secretary of State is that the Tribunal erred  in
    law in allowing the appeal under paragraph 117B(6) following Treebhawon
    [2015] UKUT 00674.  That case analysed Section 117B(6) and  found  that
    it was a reflection of the distinction which Parliament has  chosen  to
    make between persons who are, and who are not, liable  to  deportation.
    In any case where the conditions enshrined in Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are satisfied, the Section
    117B(6) public interest prevails over the public  interests  identified
    in Section 117B(1) - (3).

13. That approach was subsequently disapproved of in PD and  Others  [2016]
    UKUT 00108.  The Tribunal found:-

         "If and insofar as the application of  117B(6),  where  it  arises,
         requires a more elaborate and  comprehensive  exercise  in  certain
         cases than that which was considered sufficient in  the  particular
         context of Treebhawon, we refer to our  analysis  of  the  Part  5A
         regime above and, having done so,  conclude  that  Section  117B(6)
         should prevail, on the  grounds  and  for  the  reasons  elaborated
         extensively".

14. Therefore, the argument put by the Secretary of State as  a  matter  of
    law is that Section 117B is not a  self-contained,  discrete  provision
    that is determinative of the public interest question,  let  alone  the
    broader question of whether there has been a disproportionate,  and  so
    unlawful, interference with rights protected by  Article  8(1)  of  the
    ECHR.  It is one of the considerations to which regard must be  had  in
    making that assessment, and certainly it is a  powerful  consideration,
    but not one that excludes considerations of any matter  that  indicates
    that the public interest does require the Appellant's removal,  despite
    that not being required simply on account of the absence  of  leave  to
    remain.

Submissions/Discussion

15. Mr Jarvis  acknowledges  that  the  Appellant  has  a  British  citizen
    daughter born on 5th August 2012.  However, he submits  that  following
    the current  case  law  the  correct  approach  when  carrying  out  an
    assessment under Section 117B(6) is a  proportionality  assessment  and
    not one solely centred on the  rights  of  the  qualifying  child.   He
    refers us to the recent authority of MA (Pakistan) and  Others,  R  (on
    the application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)
    and Another [2016] EWCA Civ  705.   He  consequently  submits  that  by
    following Treebhawon at paragraphs 37 to 40 the Tribunal is  wrong  and
    that the judge has materially erred in his assessment.

16. We invited comment from the Appellant.   He  indicated  that  he  would
    uphold his leave to remain and that he wanted to  support  his  partner
    and child.  He produced a letter from the Social Services which related
    to the adoption of his son but we acknowledge that whilst  this  letter
    was produced it does not add anything to the Appellant's appeal.



Findings of Error of Law

17. The judge erred in his  approach  to  Section  117B  as  a  whole.   He
    followed the guidance given in Treebhawon which has now been superseded
    by the approach adopted in PD and MA  (Pakistan).   Proportionality  is
    not a discrete item and the approach that should be adopted on  Article
    8 ECHR claims involving multiple family member decision  makers  is  to
    apply the Immigration Rules  to  each  individual  applicant  and  then
    consider  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   All  material  facts   and
    considerations must be taken into account and it  is  inappropriate  to
    look at the position solely restricted to the position of the  relevant
    child.  In such circumstances the judge materially erred in law and  we
    set aside the decision.

Re-making the Decision

18. Despite the representations of Mr Jarvis who relies on the  substantive
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  his  skeleton  argument,
    having given full and due  further  consideration  to  this  matter  we
    preserve the findings of the relationship that the Appellant  has  with
    his partner and daughter and now  re-apply  the  considerations  taking
    into account all the up-to-date relevant case law.

19. Having carried out such considerations and due analysis  we  remain  of
    the view that the factual conclusions made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge at paragraph 40 remain correct and that the public interest  does
    not require the Appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom  and  that
    such removal would be disproportionate.  In reaching that  decision  we
    take into account the  Appellant's  failure  to  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules, his poor immigration history and time spent  as  an  overstayer,
    the factual detail of his offending history and all the  considerations
    required in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  In such circumstances, we re-
    make the decision allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 25th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 25th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

