
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/03905/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12 April 2019                        |On 08 May 2019                 |
|                                        |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                                MR T M O (TO)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Fitzsimon of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Kiss, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who is assumed to  have  been
    born on the 1st January 1997.

 2. He appeals to the Upper Tribunal (UT) with the permission of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Saffer on 12 February 2019.

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK on 25 December  2017  having  travelled
    through Iran, Turkey, Bulgaria, Germany and France. He claimed to  have
    been threatened by the Taliban whilst serving as a prison  guard  at  a
    detention centre  in  Kabul  and  to  fear  them  on  return,  but  the
    respondent did not accept his account It was not accepted that  he  was
    either a police or prison officer  or  that  he  would  not  have  been
    targeted by the Taliban, as he claimed. His account was found  to  have
    been incredible for several reasons more fully set out in  the  refusal
    letter dated 2nd March 2018. In addition, protection  would  have  been
    available to him from the authorities in Afghanistan, if  he  chose  to
    avail himself of it. Finally, if the appellant had been  a  refugee  he
    would have been able to avail himself of an internal flight alternative
    to seeking international protection  by  moving  a  different  part  of
    Kabul, which was generally safe, or, if not, to  a  different  part  of
    Afghanistan. Accordingly, the respondent refused his asylum claim on  2
    March 2018.

 4. The appellant appealed that refusal to the First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT).
    However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese (the judge)  dismissed  his
    appeal. His decision was promulgated on 27 December 2018.

 5. The appellant appealed to the UT on 10 January  2019  because  he  said
    that there  was  no/no  adequate,  evidence  to  support  some  of  the
    findings, the adverse credibility finding in relation to the failure to
    claim asylum en route was flawed because several of the countries  were
    not "safe countries" and the judge had failed to make adequate findings
    on the appellant's age, which had been a material matter. Additionally,
    the judge was said to have made  other  findings  without  there  being
    evidence to support them.

The UT hearing

 6. At the hearing I heard oral submissions by both representatives and  at
    the end of the hearing reserved my decision.

 7. Miss Fitzsimon outlined her grounds as follows:

      i) There is no reason why the Taliban would  be  any  less  likely  to
         target a prison guard than a police officer;

     ii) The judge had mistakenly referred to Iran and Turkey as being "safe
         countries" within  the  meaning  of  section  8(7)  of  the  Asylum
         (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004 (2004 Act),  when  in  fact  they
         were not and there were problems with claiming asylum  in  Bulgaria
         where the authorities took a tough line on would-be refugees;

    iii) The judge had found the appellant to have been 15 at  the  date  of
         his alleged application for/admission into, the police, which  made
         his account incredible, rejecting a document known as  a  "Taskira"
         which suggested that he was in fact 26 at that date. Therefore, the
         judge concluded, the appellant could not have been  old  enough  to
         join the police when he said he had.  The  judge's  findings  would
         result, Ms Fitzsimon said, in the appellant being aged  22  at  the
         date of the hearing in 2018 when in fact he was then in fact 33  at
         that point in his life;

     iv) The judge had not given adequate reasons for not being of  interest
         to the Taliban. The judge had  been  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
         Taliban did not have the capability of pursuing the appellant.

      v) The conclusion that the appellant could seek  protection  in  Kabul
         was contentious according to Ms  Fitzsimons  and  was  inconsistent
         with the case of CG. She accepted that  ground  6  overlapped  with
         ground 5 as the issue of the safety of  relocating  to  Kabul  also
         arose on the issue of internal relocation.

     vi) Finally, the judge was criticised for failing to deal adequately or
         fully with the prevalence of indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan
         including Kabul.

 8. On the other hand, Miss Kiss submitted that the judge had been entitled
    to accept the evidence of the appellant established that the  appellant
    had been perfectly safe whilst in  Germany  and  France.  Although  the
    appellant had claimed to have  a  cousin  in  UK,  this  had  not  been
    established. The appellant to reasons for coming to  the  UK  therefore
    could not be established either the appellant has been no less  than  a
    month in France wished to come to the UK at all costs stop she referred
    to paragraph 29 of the decision where the judge preferred  in  full  to
    the appellant's failure to claim asylum en route  UK  and  gave  cogent
    reasons  rejecting  the  explanation  given,  for  example,  that   the
    appellant had been "quite scared"  that  the  German  authorities  were
    "deporting quote. The judge made reference to the appellant's interview
    and in particular the screening interview. Ms  kiss  also  pointed  out
    that the appellant had not given a consistent account when he left  his
    own country, stating that it was "two years ago" in answer to  question
    42 in his asylum interview. He left 2015, the interview taking place on
    28 November 2017 stop the appellant confirmed in question 43,000 so. It
    was pointed out that this contradicted his  screening  interview  which
    took place on 25 December 2016. In that  interview  the  appellant  has
    stated that he left Afghanistan "three months prior  to  the  screening
    interview". This would mean he left in 2016. Even making allowance  for
    the appellant's young age and cultural differences, Miss Kiss submitted
    these were adverse credibility points  that  the  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled, and did, take account of in paragraph  29  of  his  decision.
    Although the appellant was put forward  as  an  illiterate  individual,
    these matters did not really relate to his literacy. Also  relevant  to
    take account of the long period of time that the  appellant  apparently
    had spent working in Turkey and the fact that  the  appellant  actually
    made a claim in Germany.

 9. The respondent also submitted that credibility went to the heart of the
    claim and the judge was also entitled to reject the appellant's case as
    to his alleged date of birth the copy of the  Taskira  provided,  which
    suggested that he was in fact 26 from 15 when  he  entered  the  police
    force, was rejected by the by the judge. It was a copy,  the  appellant
    claimed, provided to him by his brother through a friend. There was  no
    witness statement or other  confirmation  as  to  the  source  of  this
    document. The  judge's  approach  was  generally  consistent  with  the
    leading case of Tanveer  Ahmed,  therefore.  The  judge's  analysis  at
    paragraph 30 cannot be faulted, the respondent submitted. There was  no
    proper explanation as to how the document had come into the appellant's
    possession and the lack of corroborating  material  was  something  the
    judge could take into account, even though formal corroboration is  not
    required before an asylum claim can be accepted. The judge having taken
    account of the appellant's explanation was entitled to  reject  it.  As
    this was an appellate jurisdiction, it was for the tribunal which heard
    the evidence to reach conclusions about the matters summarised above.

10. Next I was referred to paragraph 32 where the judge rejected a key part
    appellant's account. This was the  contention  by  the  appellant  that
    certain people were killed based on  information  from  people  in  the
    village. When the appellant  had  been  asked  about  the  perpetrators
    whether there  was  a  reason  for  killing  of  certain  officers  the
    appellant had  been  "non-responsive".  The  judge  had  not  found  it
    credible that the perpetrators would have known that the appellant  was
    on leave at the time and  that  he  had  changed  shifts  with  another
    colleague. The judge did not accept that the appellant had  gained  the
    information from "people in  the  village".  Ms  Kiss  considered  this
    finding was not speculative to an unacceptable degree but in any  event
    was consistent with other adverse credibility findings.

11. As far as the appellant's family were concerned, the majority  were  in
    Afghanistan and there were  no  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant returning there where he had his mother, three  children  and
    siblings.

12. Next I was referred to the leading case of Ortega, which  I  understood
    to be a reference by Ms Kiss to the case  of  Ortega  (remittal:  bias:
    parental relationship) [2018] UKUT 298 (IAC). I  understand  that  case
    was referred to as it was said to indicate the broad range  of  reasons
    the judge can a case of  this  type  and  the  degree  that  an  appeal
    tribunal will not interfere provided it was  not  manifestly  wrong  in
    law.

13. Miss Fitzsimons made no further submissions in reply.

14. At the end of the hearing I  decided  to  reserve  my  decision  as  to
    whether an error of  law  had  been  established  and  as  to  ultimate
    disposal.



Discussion

15. The key questions are:

      i) Whether it was speculative for the judge to distinguish between the
         treatment by the Taliban of police intelligence officers and prison
         guards?

     ii)  Whether  the  judge  was  entitled  to  dismiss  the   appellant's
         credibility and was this informed to an  excessive  degree  by  his
         failure to claim asylum in certain third countries en route for the
         UK?

    iii) Whether the judge was entitled to find that the  appellant  was  in
         fact younger than he claimed and  therefore  could  not  have  been
         admitted to the police on the date when he said he was so admitted?

     iv) Whether the judge was entitled to find the appellant would be  able
         to claim sufficient protection from the  authorities  in  Kabul  or
         relocate to a different area in Afghanistan away from his home area
         where he would be reasonably safe?

16. The appellant claims to be at risk of  indiscriminate  violence/serious
    harm to the from the Taliban on his return to Afghanistan in  his  home
    area, alternatively, that there is no safe  alternative  part  of  that
    country to which he could be returned where he would not be at risk, so
    that he requires international humanitarian protection.

17. Judge Saffer, when  he  gave  permission,  thought  it  may  have  been
    speculative for the judge to consider the Taliban's modus  operandi  in
    the way that he had.

18. The second ground on which Judge Saffer gave  permission  was:  whether
    the judge had erred in finding that the appellant had failed  to  claim
    asylum in a safe country en route for the UK?

19.  However,  neither  ground  on  which  Judge  Saffer   expressly   gave
    permission, were  necessarily  material,  given  that  the  appellant's
    evidence  was  largely  rejected  as  being  incredible  and  he   had,
    indisputably, passed through several safe countries.

20. Mrs Fitzsimons's drew my attention in her grounds of appeal to the CPIN
    report on Afghanistan:  Security  and  Humanitarian  Protection  (April
    2018) which states that the number of civilian  casualties  and  deaths
    had also increased to their highest level for some years  and  that  in
    the worst areas, for example, the southern provinces, the  Taliban  had
    increased activities.  The  Taliban  were  also  active  in  north-east
    Afghanistan including the capital. This had affected both the  risk  on
    return to the appellant's home area and  the  possibility  of  internal
    relocation. The safety en route to those places had to  be  considered.
    In order for an internal relocation option to be  reasonably  available
    it must be possible to get to that place. I was referred to the case of
    HH (Somalia).

Conclusions

21. It is important to note that, like the respondent,  the  judge  largely
    rejected the credibility of the appellant's account noting a number  of
    adverse credibility features, for example, in paragraph 28  et  seq  of
    his decision.  The  judge  identified  a  number  of  discrepancies  in
    relation to the appellant's a journey to the UK and these justified the
    conclusion that he had not given a credible  account.  Any  distinction
    between intelligence officers and prison guards, which I do not find to
    be central to the judge's conclusions, had to be seen in that context.

22. In relation to the appellant's alleged failure to  claim  asylum  in  a
    safe third country, I bear in mind appellant's relatively young age  at
    the date of the hearing, the fact that he was illiterate, and the  fact
    claimed  not  to  understand  numbers  or   the   concept   of   dates.
    Nevertheless, the judge was entitled to attach  weight  the  fact  that
    appellant had passed through a number of safe countries. Two  of  those
    countries, Turkey and  Serbia,  were  not  safe  countries  within  the
    meaning of section 8 (7) and schedule 3 part 2 of the 2004 Act, but the
    other countries were. The fact that not all the countries through which
    the appellant passed were "safe countries" did  not  detract  from  the
    fact that a number of them, including Germany and France, were.

23. The decision that the appellant had not claimed  asylum  at  the  first
    opportunity was plainly open to the  judge  given  that  the  appellant
    passed through the safe countries identified above,  especially  France
    and Germany. The fact that he did not await the processing of his claim
    in Germany suggests that he had no wish to claim asylum in Germany  and
    simply wished to come to the UK at all costs. The  erroneous  reference
    to Turkey and Serbia as being "safe countries" was plainly not material
    to the decision.

24. It was also open  to  the  judge  to  take  into  account  the  overall
    credibility of the appellant's claim.  Even  taking  into  account  the
    appellant's young age and lack of education, the judge was entitled  to
    take account of inconsistencies as to  the  dates  when  the  appellant
    claims to have departed from Afghanistan and as to his age.

25. It was open to the judge  to  find  that  the  appellant  was  in  fact
    significantly younger than he had claimed. The Taskira was not evidence
    the judge was bound to accept, particularly given the manner  in  which
    he came by it. Indeed, in the light of the other  evidence,  the  judge
    was entitled to reject it. Applying the principle  established  in  the
    Tanveer Ahmed, that the weight to be given to documentary evidence  was
    as much a matter for the judge as the oral evidence. He had  considered
    that evidence but decided to reject it.

26. The safety of Afghanistan generally, and  Kabul  in  particular,  is  a
    contentious issue at the present time. The judge had regard  to  recent
    country guidance but concluded the appellant would be safe in his  home
    area. He noted that there were a number of family members in the  area.
    He referred to the latest COIS  report  which  made  reference  to  the
    limited protection provided by the police in Afghanistan, a  continuing
    state of violence  and  the  fact  that  police  corruption  remains  a
    problem.

27. As far as internal relocation was concerned, the judge was referred  to
    the latest case law on the subject at the time of the hearing  although
    he appears not to have referred to it  expressly  (see  AS  (Safety  in
    Kabul) Afghanistan [2018] UKUT 00118). I was referred to that  case  by
    Miss Fitzsimon. There is some lack  of  clarity  at  present,  however.
    Since the FTT hearing (in November 2018) AS has gone to  the  Court  of
    Appeal. An initial procedural issue is reported at [2019] EWCA Civ 208.
    However, until that case is substantively considered by  the  Court  of
    Appeal, a young adult male in reasonable physical  and  mental  health,
    particularly who has a  supportive  family  in  Afghanistan,  will  not
    generally  be  regarded  as  being  at  risk  on   return   to   Kabul.
    Unfortunately, a small number of people are affected  by  the  security
    situation but there is a dispute as to the actual figures. That  matter
    will be considered by the higher court. The  key  question  to  ask  in
    every case is: whether  the  degree  of  protection  available  to  the
    appellant in his own country is sufficient? The Secretary of State  has
    only to establish the primary facts giving rise to an  internal  flight
    alternative for it to be potentially available. The question is whether
    the court or tribunal took account of all material factors in  reaching
    its decision?

28. I have concluded that the judge considered this issue in, for  example,
    paragraph 33 of his decision and was entitled to conclude that  it  was
    not reasonably likely that the  appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return. There was an internal flight alternative of  relocating  within
    Afghanistan either to a different part of the country or to a different
    part of Kabul. Given the lapse of  time  since  he  was  last  in  that
    country and, based on the judge's findings, the family support  network
    he had there, the judge was entitled to reach  these  conclusions.  The
    submission that an appellant cannot go to any part of his own  country,
    however  large,  is  often  made  but  it  must  be  based  on   proper
    foundations. The appellant must submit proper evidence to show this  is
    so.

29. Here there was no adequate evidence  to  suggest  that  the  judge  had
    misdirected himself. Essentially, the  judge  concluded  the  appellant
    could return safely home to his home area or in default  of  that,  the
    appellant had an internal flight alternative available to him.

30. There is no separate article 8 challenge to the FTT's decision.

31. Accordingly, the judge's decision does not contain a material error  of
    law.


Notice of Decision

The appeal against  the  FTT's  decision  is  dismissed  and  that  decision
stands.

An anonymity direction was made by the FTT and  I  continue  that  anonymity
direction as follows.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                       Date 2nd May 2019

W.E. Hanbury
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date 2 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
