

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03569/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 17 January 2017                        |on 24 January 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                KAMYAR ADHAMI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr K H Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Me M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gillespie, promulgated on 9 September 2016.

 2. At paragraph 48 the judge said:

      Having considered the totality of the evidence, I am not persuaded the
      appellant has rebutted the conclusions by the  SSHD,  particularly  in
      light of the background evidence.  According to his  account,  he  was
      coerced into a very amateurish smuggling of political materials and  I
      am not persuaded his evidence is reliable on the point.

 3. The first ground of appeal is that the judge erred on the claim related
    to political opinion by giving no reasons, or inadequate  reasons,  for
    not accepting the appellant's account; having  summarised  both  sides,
    the judge preferred the respondent's at paragraph 48, but did  not  say
    why.

 4. The second ground  is  error  on  the  claim  based  on  conversion  to
    Christianity; if the judge's reasoning was that  an  untruthful  person
    cannot be a Christian, and the appellant is an untruthful person on the
    first aspect of the claim, and so not a convert, that finding must fail
    if the first one fails.

 5. Mr Forrest accepted that it is not necessarily an error for a judge  to
    adopt the reasoning of one of the parties, but argued that was not what
    the judge did.  He said that the judge had not tested  the  appellant's
    evidence about how he was coerced into assisting PJAK,  other  than  by
    brief reference to the background evidence.   He  accepted  that  there
    were other reasons stated for the finding on conversion, but  submitted
    that the falsity of the first claim  remained  central,  and  that  the
    judge had not explained why the evidence of witnesses from  the  Church
    to the genuine nature of the conversion was not accepted;  it  was  not
    open to the judge, on a finding that the  witnesses  were  genuine,  to
    "reduce" their evidence.  The first finding being bereft of  reasoning,
    the case as a whole should be remitted to the FtT.

 6. Mr Matthews submitted that paragraph 48 had to be read  fairly  and  in
    context.  It came after setting  out  both  the  respondent's  detailed
    examination of the claim and the appellant's responses, point by point.
     The respondent's analysis and the background evidence were  powerfully
    against the appellant, and the judge's  conclusions  soundly  based  on
    those materials.  The appellant chose to set out his statement  in  the
    form of a series of rebuttals, which on examination were no  more  than
    repetition and denial, not engaging in any  substantive  way  with  the
    points at issue.  On their own evidence, PJAK did not operate  in  Iraq
    and did not operate in the way the appellant alleged.  Reference to the
    evidence put paragraph 48 into context and showed that it was brief but
    sufficient.  As to conversion, the arbiter was not any witness but  the
    judge.  The sincerity of witnesses did not compel a finding  about  the
    appellant's state of mind.  The judge was entitled to take the  falsity
    of the first claim as a point against the appellant on  the  conversion
    claim.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. It is usually less than ideal simply to endorse the case  of  a  party,
    but there are instances where it is justified to adopt the reasoning of
    one side.

 9. Where, as here, the respondent issued a detailed and  cogent  decision,
    and the appellant replied in effect with a corresponding list of  bland
    denials and disagreements, there was no need to go into each, point  by
    point.

10. Sensibly and in context, the judge decides at  paragraph  48  that  the
    likelihood of events claimed is  simply  not  supported  by  background
    materials, including those sourced from PJAK, and  that  the  appellant
    has refuted none of the analysis of the respondent.

11. It is of course relevant and supportive for a claimed Christian convert
    to produce witnesses from the church who believe him to have  become  a
    genuine Christian. Contrary to the submission on his  behalf,  however,
    such evidence does not, if accepted, become conclusive. Difficult as it
    may be, the judge has to make up his own mind on that, based on all the
    evidence. That is what the judge did in this  instance.  He  reached  a
    conclusion within his lawful scope, for which he gave legally  adequate
    reasons.

12. The decision makes it very clear to the appellant why his  claims  have
    failed.  He continues to insist on both aspects of  his  case,  but  no
    error of law is disclosed in either branch.

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            23 January 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




