
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03010/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                            |On 29 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                      SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 9 February 2018 refusing his claim for international protection.




      Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 19 January  1992.   He
    first came to the UK in March 2010 with leave to enter  as  a  student.
    He then returned to Sri Lanka in early August 2011 to visit his  mother
    and returned to the UK on 17  August  2011  when  he  was  detained  on
    arrival.  He was released from detention the following day and  claimed
    asylum on 21 September 2011.  He claimed that he had been detained on a
    number of occasions in  2007  and  2008  and  detained  again  when  he
    returned to visit his mother  in  August  2011.   His  application  was
    refused on 7 November 2011 and his appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was dismissed on 3 January 2012.  The judge did not find the  appellant
    to be credible about being detained and ill-treated  in  Sri  Lanka  or
    that he would be at real risk of serious harm on return. He was granted
    permission to appeal the Upper Tribunal, but his appeal  was  dismissed
    and an application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal  was
    refused.


3.    The appellant made further submissions to  the  respondent  about  his
    asylum claim on  3  August  2015  supported  with  further  documentary
    evidence including a police report  about  his  arrest,  detention  and
    grant of bail, a medical report, photographs of  his  scars,  a  letter
    from a lawyer in Sri Lanka and police documents relating to the  arrest
    of his mother and aunt when they were attempting  to  obtain  certified
    copies of documents relating to the appellant.  His claim  was  refused
    for the reasons set out in annex A of the decision letter of 9 February
    2018.

    The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


4.    The judge heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant  who  adopted  his
    witness  statements.   He  gave  oral  evidence   about   attending   a
    demonstration outside the Commonwealth Heads of Government  meeting  in
    London and produced photographs showing him there.  He also referred to
    the photographs of the scars on his body.  He claimed that he would  be
    at risk of persecution at the  hands  of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    because of his actual or imputed political  opinion  evidenced  by  the
    fact that he had been tortured in the past  when  previously  detained.
    When he returned to Sri Lanka in 2011, he had been detained  and  after
    being released he was required to report to  the  police,  but  he  had
    returned to the UK before his reporting date.  He would also be at risk
    as someone who had taken part in demonstrations in London.


5.    The judge took the previous tribunal decision as  the  starting  point
    for her consideration of the appeal in  accordance  with  Devaseelan  v
    Secretary of State [2002] UKIAT 282.  She noted  that  the  appellant's
    current claim was based on the same factual matrix  considered  by  the
    previous Tribunal but there was key additional evidence not  previously
    considered, in particular, a medical report about his  scarring  and  a
    psychiatric report.  When considering the  medical  report,  the  judge
    commented that the doctor had not directly referred to  the  fact  that
    the appellant's claim had been refused, although he was aware  of  this
    fact as he had been provided with a copy of the refusal letter.  He had
    assessed the appellant on 4 March 2012 but there  was  nothing  in  the
    report to suggest that he was aware that  the  appellant's  appeal  had
    been dismissed or that  he  had  been  provided  with  a  copy  of  the
    decision.

6.    The judge  said  that  this  was  a  significant  omission  given  the
    appellant's credibility with respect to his claimed detention and  ill-
    treatment which was clearly an issue.   The  appellant  had  said  that
    during his detention in 2007 and 2008 he was beaten with wooden  sticks
    and by hand, that he was kicked with  heavy  army  boots  and  kept  in
    unhygienic conditions and that in 2011, he was beaten with  hands,  cut
    on his upper left inner thigh with a bayonet while sitting, beaten with
    a wooden stick and kicked with heavy boots.


7.    The doctor had found that the  scar  on  the  appellant's  upper  left
    thigh was consistent with trauma from a sharp object.  In  the  refusal
    letter there was a reference to the appellant's evidence in his  asylum
    interview where he said that he was hit on his  private  parts  with  a
    gun, a bit of flesh came off and he  was  in  great  pain.   The  judge
    commented that it was not entirely clear if this was the same injury to
    which the doctor referred but if so, his evidence about how the  injury
    was sustained was inconsistent as there was no mention in the interview
    record of an injury caused by a bayonet.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    other scars on the appellant's legs and left  arm  were  stated  to  be
    typical of trauma from blunt objects which meant they had an appearance
    usually found with this kind of trauma but there  were  other  possible
    causes.

8.    The doctor had said that the age of the scars was compatible with  the
    appellant's account but gave no reasons for this statement, he did  not
    consider alternative causes for the scars and there was no evidence  in
    his report that he explored the  appellant's  background  to  determine
    whether, for example, he had been beaten in the past  or  suffered  any
    other injuries which might have been the cause of the scars.

9.    The judge then considered the report of the  consultant  psychiatrist.
    He had observed the appellant's scars and found they were  evidence  of
    torture and consistent with his history and mental  state  examination.
    However, the psychiatrist had not assessed scars with reference to  the
    Istanbul Protocol and there was no evidence that he had considered them
    individually or given them any  detailed  consideration.   He  appeared
    simply to have adopted the doctor's report.  It was the  psychiatrist's
    conclusion that  the  appellant  suffered  from  PTSD.  The  diagnostic
    criteria were appended to that report, but he had made no reference  to
    them or how they were satisfied in the body of his report.   There  was
    no indication that the psychiatrist was provided  with  copies  of  the
    refusal letter, the immigration judge's decision or the decision  under
    challenge.

10    The judge accepted that it was not the role  of  the  psychiatrist  to
    comment on the credibility  of  an  account,  but  it  was  within  his
    expertise to comment on  or  make  findings  in  relation  to  possible
    psychiatric causes for issues with the appellant's evidence such as his
    failure to disclose aspects of his ill-treatment at an earlier date and
    his  difficulties  in  remembering  detail  and  providing  a  coherent
    account.   She  commented  that   numerous   inconsistencies   in   the
    appellant's  evidence  were  identified  in  the  previous  immigration
    judge's decision and in the  refusal  letter  but  there  had  been  no
    attempt to address any of them.  The judge said that she had identified
    a number of deficiencies in both the scarring  report  and  psychiatric
    report and for those reasons placed limited weight on them.

11.   She took into account the  appellant's  young  age  at  the  time  the
    events occurred which initially led him to  leave  Sri  Lanka  and  the
    impact that may have had on his evidence.  She commented  that  he  had
    not dealt with his failure to claim asylum at the earliest  opportunity
    adequately.  Having arrived as a student, he may not have considered it
    necessary to claim asylum, but he had not dealt  with  the  fact  that,
    having allegedly been detained in  August  2011  when  he  visited  his
    mother and then realizing the danger he was in, he did not claim asylum
    on arrival back in the UK.  She said  that,  having  been  detained  on
    arrival while checks were made, he must have understood that there  was
    a risk he would be returned to Sri Lanka but notwithstanding  this,  he
    did not claim asylum and provided no explanation for his failure to  do
    so.  She did not accept to the lower standard that he had been detained
    as claimed or that he was ill-treated in the manner he described.   She
    accepted that he suffered from some symptoms  of  PTSD  but  not  as  a
    result of being detained in Sri Lanka.  She did not find the  appellant
    to be a credible witness.


12.   The judge went on to  consider  whether,  nonetheless,  the  appellant
    might still be at risk on return because of the  authorities'  interest
    in his mother, the presence of scars on his body or as  result  of  his
    activities in the UK. She did not accept the documents relating to  the
    claimed police case against the appellant's mother were genuine or that
    there would be any risk to the  appellant  by  reason  of  attending  a
    number of demonstrations in the UK.  She concluded that he was not  and
    would not be perceived as a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as  a
    single state on return and she did not accept that he had or  would  be
    perceived to have a significant role in post-conflict Tamil  separatism
    and it was not likely that he would be on the stop list  or  watchlist.
    He been able to leave Sri Lanka unchallenged  particularly  the  second
    time in 2011 and that was evidence that the authorities would  have  no
    interest in him.  His scars were typical of or consistent with injuries
    caused by blunt trauma, but they could have been sustained a result  of
    being beaten or in a variety of other ways.  She did  not  accept  that
    his scars were reasonably likely to lead to him being identified  as  a
    person who was or was suspected of being  involved  with  the  LTTE  on
    return to Sri Lanka.  Accordingly, she dismissed his appeal


      The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions.

13.   There are five grounds of appeal,  all  alleging  perversity,  in  the
    substance of ground 1 and in the sub-headings of grounds 2-5. In ground
    1 it is argued that the judge erred by making an unlawful assessment of
    the scarring evidence.  It was not open, so it is argued, to require an
    expert  medical  witness  to  reference  prior   assessments   of   the
    appellant's credibility and then to treat this omission as significant.
     The role of  the  expert  medical  witness  was  to  say  whether  the
    appellant's injuries were consistent with the  history  he  gave.   The
    ground argues that the judge misdirected herself  on  the  role  of  an
    expert witness as including going behind the  appellant's  history  and
    embarking  on  a  fishing  exercise  for  evidence  to  contradict  the
    attribution of the injuries examined.  Ground 2 argues that the judge's
    assessment of the scarring evidence was perverse in that was  not  open
    to her to conclude that  the  appellant  was  being  inconsistent  when
    describing an injury caused by being hit by a gun as opposed  to  being
    hit by a bayonet, which is an integral part  of  some  modern  guns  as
    evidenced  by   publications   such   as   Jane's   Infantry   Weapons.
    Accordingly, there was nothing inconsistent with being hit by a gun and
    sustaining a wound caused by a bayonet.

14.   Ground 3  argues  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  psychiatric
    evidence  was  perverse  because  she  was  wrong  to  state  that  the
    psychiatrist did not comment on possible psychiatric  causes  when  the
    psychiatrist had commented that the appellant was trying to  push  away
    his painful memories and felt shame when he remembered sexual violence.
     It was also not open to the judge to conclude that the report did  not
    show how the appellant satisfied the criteria for PTSD  when  this  was
    clear from the report as identified in ground 3(ii).


15.   Ground 4 asserts that the  credibility  assessment  was  perverse  and
    that it was wrong to say that the appellant had  failed  to  deal  with
    many of the significant challenges to his credibility when  he  had  in
    fact done so in his statement of 28 June 2018.   The  judge  failed  to
    explain why those responses did not deal with  these  challenges.   She
    had accepted that the appellant may not have considered it necessary to
    claim asylum previously when he had a student visa and she  should  not
    have  found  that  that  explanation  would  not  still  suffice   when
    successfully re-entering  the  country  lawfully  notwithstanding  that
    checks were made.  Ground 5 argues that the judge's assessment of  risk
    on return was perverse arguing that there was cogent evidence that  Sri
    Lankan High Commission officials filmed protesters and would be  likely
    to have done so in respect of the appellant and there was  evidence  of
    hostility by way of a "throat slitting" gesture from a  member  of  the
    High Commission staff to  protesters.   This  demonstrated,  so  it  is
    argued, a reasonable likelihood of adverse interest in the appellant as
    a protester.


16.   Mr Wahid adopted his grounds in his submissions.  He  emphasised  that
    the judge appeared to have erred by requiring the  medical  experts  to
    assess credibility, submitting that whether the appellant had told  the
    truth or not on a previous occasion was not a matter  for  the  expert.
    It would be wrong for the experts to give  an  opinion  on  credibility
    when that was a matter for the judge.   In  respect  of  ground  2,  he
    referred to the evidence about modern rifles having an integral bayonet
    which was folded back.  There was no inconsistency in someone receiving
    an injury from the bayonet when they were hit by a gun.  On ground 3 he
    submitted that the judge's criticism of the  psychiatric  evidence  was
    not made out as the expert had addressed and indicated how the criteria
    for PTSD applied in the appellant's case.


17.   On ground 4 he submitted that the judge had failed to  deal  with  the
    fact that the appellant had specifically addressed issues  relating  to
    his credibility in his witness statement.  So far the  risk  on  return
    was concerned (ground 5), the judge had not taken proper account of the
    evidence and, in particular, the fact  that  there  was  evidence  that
    those attending demonstrations outside the Sri Lankan  High  Commission
    were videoed and the hostility of the Sri  Lankan  officials  was  also
    made clear by the "throat slitting" gesture.


18.   Mr Kandola dealt with grounds 1 and 3  together  submitting  that  the
    judge was entitled to comment on the fact that expert witnesses had not
    had regard to the previous history of the appeal.  It was not suggested
    that the doctor was entitled to form his own views on  credibility  but
    that he should take all relevant matters into account as  part  of  the
    background to the report.  He argued that the judge had  been  entitled
    to assess the report as she had and had not erred in law.   In  respect
    of ground 2 relating to the bayonet as part of a gun, he submitted that
    it was difficult to sustain an argument that the  judge  had  erred  in
    law.   There  was  no  reason  to  believe  the  judge  was  under  any
    misapprehension about whether modern guns would also have a bayonet but
    in any event, alternative causes of how a scar may have  been  obtained
    should have been considered.  The judge  had  identified  at  [51]  the
    points which had not  been  adequately  dealt  with  by  the  appellant
    (ground 4).  On ground 5, the judge's findings on the  risk  of  return
    had been properly open to her and she  had  properly  considered  these
    issues and reached findings open to her.


Consideration of whether the Judge Erred in Law.

19.   I am not satisfied  that  the  grounds  disclose  any  errors  of  law
    requiring the decision to be set aside.  In respect of ground 1,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge was entitled to comment on the fact that there
    was an omission in the report to the extent that the judge did not take
    into account all the evidence about the appellant's background. This is
    not a case where the judge was asking or expecting the expert  to  give
    an opinion about credibility still less embark on a  fishing  exercise,
    but to take into account credibility assessments which  had  been  made
    when considering his opinion  in  relation  to  the  scarring:  see  JL
    (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 at [30].

20.   The judge rightly commented that injuries which  were  typical  of  or
    consistent with trauma from a sharp object were non-specific and  there
    may be other causes which were not highlighted in the  medical  report.
    The scars on the appellant's legs and left arm were said to be  typical
    of trauma from blunt objects but again there were  other  causes.   She
    was entitled to comment that there was no evidence in the  report  that
    the doctor had explored the appellant's background to  see  whether  he
    had been beaten in the past or suffered any other  injuries  and,  also
    when considering the evidence in the round, to take account of  whether
    there were other potential causes of the scars. I am not satisfied that
    the judge erred in law in her assessment of the medical report

21.   So far as the ground 2 is concerned, I am not satisfied that there  is
    any reason to believe the judge was  unaware  of  the  fact  that  some
    modern guns have an integral bayonet.  She was  entitled  to  make  the
    point that the medical expert found that there was an injury consistent
    with trauma from a sharp object and then to  look  at  the  appellant's
    evidence about how he had described the wound.   She  was  entitled  to
    comment that there was no record of an injury caused by a  bayonet  and
    to make the point that this injury was  described  as  consistent  with
    trauma from a sharp object and that  there  were  many  other  possible
    causes. This ground is seeking in substance to  re-argue  an  issue  of
    fact where the judge has reached a decision properly open to her.

22.   So far as the psychological  evidence  is  concerned  (ground  3)  the
    judge was entitled to comment that if the psychiatrist was not aware of
    background information from documents such as the  refusal  letter  and
    previous decision, it would impede his ability to comment on the  cause
    of a psychiatric condition.  He could also reasonably  be  expected  to
    take into account any inconsistencies in the evidence when reaching his
    opinion.  The judge's comment at [46]  that  there  is  no  attempt  to
    address any of these issues was properly open to her.  It was also  for
    the judge to assess whether and to what  extent  the  psychiatrist  had
    identified how the diagnostic criteria applied to the appellant but, in
    any event, even if this comment was not justified, it does not  detract
    from the other comments the judge made about the evidence. The  judge's
    findings  on  or  approach  to  the  psychiatric  evidence  cannot   be
    categorised as perverse.

23.   I am also not satisfied that the judge failed to deal  with  the  fact
    that the appellant had given explanations in his most recent  affidavit
    on some issues relating to his credibility (ground  4).   In  [50]  the
    judge noted that the appellant had provided evidence to address some of
    the issues with his previous evidence, for example, the  fact  that  he
    had an elder brother but that he had failed to deal with  many  of  the
    significant challenges to his credibility giving as an example in  [51]
    the failure  to  deal  with  not  claiming  asylum  that  the  earliest
    opportunity particularly in relation to his later  return  to  the  UK.
    This ground is again an attempt to re-open issues of fact.

24.   In respect of whether the appellant would be at risk  in  relation  to
    attending demonstrations in the UK (ground 5), I am satisfied that  the
    judge dealt properly with these issues.  While photographs  might  have
    been taken of demonstrators and one official might  at  one  time  have
    made a "throat slitting" gesture, the issue for the judge  was  whether
    there was a real risk of harm  on  return  for  the  appellant  in  his
    particular circumstances.  It is clear from her decision that she  took
    into account the current risk categories in GJ and  others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 319.  She found that he  was  not
    and would not be perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka
    nor would be perceived to have  a  significant  role  in  post-conflict
    Tamil separatism nor was he  a  journalist  or  human  rights  activist
    criticising the Sri Lankan government.

25.   In summary, I am satisfied that the judge reached a decision  properly
    open to her for the reasons she gave having reviewed all  the  evidence
    and taken into account  the  country  guidance.   The  grounds  do  not
    satisfy me  that  the  judge  was  perverse  in  her  approach  to  the
    assessment of the evidence or in her  findings  of  fact  or  that  the
    grounds reveal any other error of law such that the decision should  be
    set aside.  Rather, they are in substance an attempt to re-argue issues
    of fact where the judge reach findings properly open to her.

      Decision


26.   The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and it  follows  that  this
    decision stands and the appeal is dismissed.



Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 19 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
