
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03738/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2019                   |On 24 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     M D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Janjua, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt born in 1997.  He arrived in the UK
    on 12 March 2017 and claimed asylum on the same  day.   His  claim  was
    rejected in a decision dated 3 April 2019.

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Row ("the FtJ") at a hearing on 20 June  2019
    which resulted in his appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds  being
    dismissed.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he has been a supporter, but
    not a member,  of the Muslim Brotherhood since about 2013. He  attended
    demonstrations and distributed leaflets.  During a demonstration he was
    hit on the head by the police and needed hospital  treatment.   In  his
    asylum interview he said he became  known  to  the  police  because  he
    attended many demonstrations.  However, he was never  arrested  by  the
    police.

 4. Nevertheless, a warrant was issued for  his  arrest  in  June  2015  in
    relation to a false accusation of damaging  government  property.   The
    police came looking for him but he was not at home. There was  a  court
    case involving him and six other people although the appellant and  one
    other had already escaped by then.  He was  sentenced  to  five  years'
    imprisonment in his absence.

 5. After leaving Egypt he went to Italy  where  he  made  an  unsuccessful
    claim for asylum.  He then went to Switzerland where  he  also  claimed
    asylum but again that claim was refused.  He  then  returned  to  Italy
    before going to France where he stayed for two months, and then Belgium
    where he stayed for five months.  He came from Belgium  to  the  United
    Kingdom and claimed asylum.

 6. Whilst in Italy he was informed by his family of the sentence  of  five
    years' imprisonment in his absence.

    The FtJ's decision

 7. In his findings the FtJ resolved in favour of the appellant a number of
    adverse credibility issues relied on by the respondent in the  decision
    letter.

 8. At [13] the FtJ directed  himself  that  the  appellant  was  under  no
    obligation to corroborate any part of his  account.   Nevertheless,  he
    noted that the main part  of  his  account,  of  being  sought  by  the
    Egyptian authorities and sentenced to five years' imprisonment  in  his
    absence, was not supported by documentary or other evidence.  Thus, the
    FtJ said  that  he  would  consider  that  matter  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules.  In the next paragraph the FtJ
    said this:

         "I am satisfied that the appellant has made  a  genuine  effort  to
         substantiate his asylum claim.  He claimed asylum.  He attended for
         interview.  He has cooperated in the appeal process."

 9. There were three matters which the FtJ identified as being  adverse  to
    the appellant's credibility.  First, at [21]  there  was  inconsistency
    between the appellant's account of being subject to an  arrest  warrant
    and sentenced to imprisonment,  and  what  he  said  in  his  screening
    interview.  In the screening interview which took  place  on  13  March
    2017 the appellant answered in the negative to the question of  whether
    he had ever been accused  of  any  offence  or  been  involved  in  any
    political organisation.  As to  his  reasons  given  in  the  screening
    interview for claiming asylum, he said that there was no peace  in  the
    country and sometimes the government arrested people.  The FtJ accepted
    that the screening interview was not meant to be a detailed account  of
    the appellant's claim but concluded that it would be expected that such
    important matters (as the basis of his claim) would have been mentioned
    at that time.

10. Next, the FtJ referred to the appellant having claimed asylum in  Italy
    and Switzerland.  However, he concluded that section 8  of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  ("the  2004
    Act") applied, in that the appellant was in France and  Belgium  for  a
    total of seven months but did  not  claim  asylum  despite  having  the
    opportunity to do so.  He thus found that his failure to make  a  claim
    whilst in France and Belgium damaged his credibility  under  s.8(4)  of
    the 2004 Act.

11. Third, in relation to the arrest warrant, he said at [24] that  he  was
    not satisfied that the appellant had "produced all material factors" at
    his disposal or given a satisfactory explanation as  to  why  not.   He
    found that although the appellant  could  not  have  been  expected  to
    produce the arrest warrants, and it would not  be  expected  that  they
    would have been left with his family by  the  police,  there  would  be
    records  of  such  a  judicial  sentence  which  "would  presumably  be
    obtainable".  He found that the records would  prove  one  way  or  the
    other whether or not the appellant had been sentenced  to  imprisonment
    in his absence.

12. He went on to find at  [25]  that  although  the  appellant  could  not
    himself have been expected to  approach  the  Egyptian  authorities  to
    obtain the information, he was represented by solicitors and  it  would
    have been possible either for those solicitors to approach the Egyptian
    courts to obtain a copy of a memorandum of conviction and sentence  or,
    alternatively, to instruct a lawyer in Egypt to do this on his  behalf.
    He found that none of that would compromise the appellant and the court
    would "presumably" either confirm the appellant's version or  say  that
    there were no records of any such sentence.  He  reasoned  that  either
    way, it would have clarified the issue.  He went on to  state  that  it
    might not have been possible to obtain this information but it would be
    reasonable to have attempted to do so and that had not been done.

13. The FtJ then referred to background evidence in the form  of  the  Home
    Office country information report dated July  2017  and  other  reports
    from Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International in terms of those who
    were likely to be at risk on return.

14. Then, at [29], the  FtJ  concluded  that  the  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's account, his failure to obtain evidence  which  might  have
    been  readily  obtained  and  his  failure  to  claim  asylum  in  safe
    countries, all damaged his credibility.

15. Whilst he concluded that the appellant was a supporter  of  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood, that was at a low level and he was never a member  of  the
    organisation.  He found that the appellant had not established  that  a
    warrant was issued for his arrest or that  he  was  prosecuted  in  his
    absence  for  unspecified  offences  or  sentenced   to   five   years'
    imprisonment.  He concluded that all that was fabrication and that  the
    appellant had never come to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  Egyptian
    authorities because of his political views.  He found that  as  a  low-
    level supporter of the aims of the Muslim Brotherhood, he would not  be
    at risk on return.




    The grounds and submissions

16. The grounds contend that the FtJ did not consider the evidence  in  the
    round and placed "undue weight" on the fact that the appellant did  not
    claim asylum at the earliest opportunity.   He  had,  however,  claimed
    asylum both in Italy and Switzerland, as well as on  entering  the  UK.
    It is asserted in the grounds that the appellant's account was  broadly
    consistent with the background evidence.

17. The grounds continue in asserting that the FtJ failed to conclude  that
    all  the  relevant  elements  at  the  appellant's  disposal  had  been
    submitted, and otherwise make general submissions about credibility and
    the need for anxious scrutiny.

18. In his submissions, Mr Janjua contended that the FtJ's conclusion  that
    the appellant could  enlist  the  help  of  his  solicitors  to  obtain
    documents from Egypt  (the  arrest  warrant  or  other  documents),  or
    through lawyers,  was  speculative.   In  addition,  the  inconsistency
    identified by the FtJ in the screening interview was  not  put  to  the
    appellant, nor was the suggestion that he  could  in  some  way  obtain
    confirmation of the arrest warrant or sentence of imprisonment.

19. Ms Isherwood argued that the  appellant's  witness  statement  in  fact
    deals with the issues of the arrest warrant  and  screening  interview,
    the appellant having said at [13] of  his  witness  statement  that  he
    could not get his hands on the arrest warrant as it was  not  given  to
    his family.  At [6] of his witness statement the appellant responded to
    [32] of the decision letter which mentioned what he  had  said  in  his
    screening interview to the effect that if he returned to Egypt he would
    be arrested and no  one  would  know  about  him.   It  was  submitted,
    therefore, that in the circumstances the FtJ was entitled  to  conclude
    as he did at [21] of his decision.

20. It was further submitted that given that the appellant's  own  case  at
    its highest was that he was a low-level supporter, that  profile  would
    not put him at risk, as the FtJ found at [30].

21. In relation to the s.8 point, although he had claimed asylum  in  Italy
    and Switzerland and been refused, he did not claim asylum in France and
    Belgium.  Thus, the FtJ was entitled to conclude that that damaged  his
    credibility.

    Assessment

22. The argument advanced before me in terms of issues not having been  put
    to the appellant are not specifically raised in the grounds  of  appeal
    which, it must be said, leave something to be desired in the  drafting.
    For example, on page 2 of the grounds it refers to the FtJ  failing  to
    apply the benefit of the doubt "to the Appellant's claim  of  being  in
    relationship outside marriage".  That was never part of the appellant's
    claim and it seems obvious that whoever drafted  the  grounds  did  not
    check them before they were lodged.

23. Nevertheless, in general terms the FtJ's assessment of the  appellant's
    credibility is raised and in those circumstances I  consider  that  the
    argument about  matters  not  having  been  put  to  the  appellant  is
    legitimately before me.

24. In relation to the screening interview,  the  appellant  was  asked  at
    question 4.1 to explain briefly all the reasons why he could not return
    to his home country.  The appellant said this:

         "There is no peace in my country.  Sometimes the government  arrest
         you and put you in prison.  There is no peace.

         If I return back the government will arrest  me  and  no  one  know
         about me."

25. The point that the FtJ made in this respect was, on the face of  it,  a
    valid one.  However, there is nothing to indicate  that  the  appellant
    was asked to comment on that apparent inconsistency between his account
    and what he said in the screening interview.   The  FtJ  very  properly
    referred to the fact that the screening interview is not meant to be  a
    detailed account of an appellant's claim.  I do consider, however, that
    if that was  a  matter  that  was  to  feature  in  the  FtJ's  adverse
    credibility assessment, the appellant ought to have been asked for  his
    explanation of it.  Although the screening interview is referred to  in
    the respondent's decision letter, it is not referred  to  in  terms  of
    inconsistency, such that the appellant could have been expected to have
    dealt with it in his comments on the refusal letter.  I do  not  accept
    the submission made on behalf of the respondent to the effect that  the
    appellant dealt with the matter in his witness statement.

26. Of greater significance, it seems to me, is  the  FtJ's  conclusion  at
    [25] to the effect that the appellant could have been expected, through
    his solicitors, or through a lawyer instructed in  Egypt,  to  approach
    the Egyptian courts to obtain a copy of a memorandum of conviction  and
    sentence.  The FtJ stated that  the  court  would  "presumably"  either
    confirm the appellant's version or say that there were  no  records  of
    any sentence of imprisonment.  Although the FtJ said that it might  not
    have been possible to obtain this information, he found that  it  would
    be reasonable to have attempted to do so and that had  not  been  done.
    However, again, this is not a matter that was  put  to  the  appellant.
    Whilst I accept that a judge is entitled to make an adverse credibility
    finding against an appellant in circumstances where evidence of a  fact
    could reasonably have been expected to have been provided, there was no
    evidence before the FtJ as to the extent to which it  would  have  been
    possible to obtain those documents or why the appellant did not do  so.



27. As regards the FtJ's conclusion that the appellant's failure to make  a
    claim for asylum whilst in France and Belgium damaged his  credibility,
    the FtJ was applying s.8(4) of the 2004 Act.  It was not argued  before
    me that, in fact, the FtJ had gone  too  far  in  concluding  that  the
    failure to claim asylum in France  and  Belgium  actually  damaged  his
    credibility, rather than potentially  doing  so,  as  explained  in  JT
    (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ
    878.  But, putting that aside, the s.8 point could not, on the facts of
    this case, on its own, found a sufficient basis from which to  conclude
    that the appellant's claim was not credible.

28. I am satisfied that the two matters to which I have referred which were
    not put to the appellant for his explanation  or  comment,  namely  the
    inconsistency in the screening interview and the lack  of  attempts  to
    obtain, or failure to obtain, documents about the case against him, are
    such as to found an error of law in the FtJ's decision.  The contention
    on behalf of the respondent to the effect that the appellant was in any
    event only a low-profile supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood  and  thus
    would not be at risk, is an  unsustainable  argument  in  circumstances
    where there has been a flawed assessment of the claim  that  a  warrant
    has been issued for his arrest and that he has been sentenced  to  five
    years' imprisonment.

29. The error of law is such as to require the FtJ's  decision  to  be  set
    aside because it is fundamental to the appellant's credibility.

30. Further, given that there  needs  to  be  a  fresh  assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility, and taking into account paragraph 7.2  of  the
    Senior President's practice statement, the appropriate  course  is  for
    the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de
    novo before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Row,  with  no
    findings of fact preserved.

    Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Row,  with  no  findings  of
    fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper                Tribunal                Judge                 Kopieczek
    20/12/19
