
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03615/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25th May 2017                      |On 12th June 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     H J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty (instructed by Luqmani Thompson &
                  Partners, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. Although not previously considered necessary I find it appropriate  to
      make an anonymity direction in this case.

   2. This is the resumed hearing following a hearing on 23rd November  2016
      when I found as follows:-

      1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  in
         relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         (Judge Obhi)  promulgated  on  5th  September  2016  by  which  she
         dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  his
         protection claim.

      2. The appellant claimed to be an Iranian citizen born in August  1999
         and therefore a minor. He claimed to be a Kurd who had  worked  for
         the Komola Party, a banned group,  fleeing  the  country  when  the
         authorities were looking for him.

      3. When he initially claimed asylum the Secretary of State treated him
         as a minor but then on  30th  June  2015  a  Merton  compliant  age
         assessment  was  carried  out  by  Croydon  social  services  which
         assessed him to be over the age of 18.

      4. In the  Decision  and  Reasons  it  is  clear  that  the  Appellant
         disagreed with that age assessment  and  the  Judge  was  asked  to
         decide the issue of his age as a preliminary matter. That the Judge
         did at paragraph 16 of her Decision. The Judge  accepted  that  the
         two social workers who carried out the assessment were qualified to
         do so and that the assessment was undertaken  in  the  presence  of
         adult observers from the Refugee Council and  with  the  aid  of  a
         Kurdish Sorani interpreter. The document  provided  indicated  that
         they had considered the Appellant to be evasive  and  unwilling  to
         provide the information they needed  to  complete  the  assessment.
         They had reached their conclusion based on such information  as  he
         had provided and his appearance. The Judge concluded that  she  had
         no reason to assume that the contents of the  age  assessment  were
         incorrect given the number of independent persons present and  none
         from the Home Office. She found that the assessment was carried out
         with the  appropriate  safeguards.  She  also  found  that  if  the
         Appellant had wanted to challenge that assessment then he could and
         should have done so.  There  was  no  rebuttal  evidence  save  the
         Appellant's assertions as to his age and the Judge determined  that
         he was 19 years of age rather than 16 years of age as he claimed.

      5. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted argue  that
         the Judge fell into error when dealing with the issue  of  the  age
         assessment and in particular in determining age  without  the  full
         age assessment before her. I was informed at the beginning  of  the
         hearing that neither Miss Chapman nor Mr Singh have  the  full  age
         assessment and nor was it on the court file.

      6. I do not find that the Judge erred in the way she  dealt  with  the
         age assessment.

      7. The history of this case is that the age assessment took  place  on
         30th June 2015. The Appellant's solicitors, then  as  now,  Luqmani
         Thompson and Partners lodged a Notice of Appeal on  his  behalf  to
         the First-tier Tribunal on 9th July  2015.  The  matter  was  first
         listed for hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 8th July 2016.
         On that occasion the Home Office Presenting  Officer  indicated  to
         the Judge that age was in dispute and the age  assessment  document
         was not on the Home Office file. The representative indicated  that
         he  had  not  seen  it.  Upon  making  enquiries  the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer indicated that he could not produce the document
         on that day. As a result the hearing was  adjourned  and  the  Home
         Office directed to file and serve the age assessment carried out by
         social services. The matter was  then  listed  for  hearing  before
         Judge Obhi. By that time a summary of the age assessment  had  been
         provided by the Home Office and was  appended  to  the  Appellant's
         supplementary bundle together with a statement from  the  Appellant
         disagreeing with it.

      8. It is of note that the Appellant's representatives have represented
         him throughout these proceedings. They would have been  aware  that
         the Appellant claimed to be a minor and they would have been  aware
         that he had been assessed to be an adult. At no time did they  seek
         to obtain any independent age assessment. The absence  of  the  age
         assessment was not raised until  the  first  hearing.  The  summary
         document was then produced by the Home Office and appears  in  both
         the Home Office bundle and the  Appellant's  supplementary  bundle.
         When the matter came before Judge Obhi on 25th August  2016  (there
         is a typed record of proceedings on file) no point was taken as  to
         that document being incomplete. There was  no  application  for  an
         adjournment for the complete document to be obtained.

      9. It is clear that the Appellant raised  his  objection  to  the  age
         assessment very late in the day. The age assessment  document  that
         is on the file makes clear that the Appellant was informed, through
         an interpreter,  that  he  had  the  right  to  challenge  the  age
         assessment and how he should go about doing so.  He  did  not  take
         those steps and neither  did  solicitors  take  any  steps  on  his
         behalf. Not  only  were  no  steps  taken  to  challenge  that  age
         assessment  but  there  was  no  effort  to  obtain   any   further
         independent evidence to corroborate his claim to have been born  in
         1999.

     10. On the basis of the way the case was put to her  and  the  evidence
         before the Judge she cannot have be  said  to  have  erred  in  her
         approach to assessing the Appellant's age.

     11. The  Judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  in  relation  to  the
         Appellant are also reasoned, open  to  her  on  the  basis  of  the
         evidence and the considerable  inconsistencies  and  contradictions
         and contain no error of law.

     12. However, the Appellant's representative before  the  Judge  in  his
         skeleton argument and in the grounds for permission to appeal  made
         a submission that the Appellant, if an adult, would be perceived as
         a draft evader upon return to Iran. The country  guidance  case  of
         SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT
         00308 (IAC) makes clear that Iranian males returned to Iran without
         a passport return on a Laissez Passer and will be  questioned  upon
         return. The submission made is that he  will  upon  questioning  be
         revealed as someone of draft age who has left the country. He  will
         then be viewed as a draft evader  and  be  detained  in  conditions
         which would breach Article 3 of  the  ECHR.  That  matter  was  not
         addressed by the Judge  and  for  that  reason  that  part  of  the
         Decision and Reasons is flawed.

     13. Having so found both  parties  agreed  that  the  appropriate  step
         forward for this appeal is to preserve the findings of fact made by
         the Judge but to find a material error of law in failing to  engage
         with the evidence with regard to draft evasion (which  included  an
         experts report). Having found that error of law the  matter  should
         be adjourned for a resumed hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  to  deal
         purely with the issue of whether this Appellant, with no  political
         profile, as a young male adult would be at risk on the  basis  that
         we would be considered to be a draft evader upon return.

     14. Notice of Decision

     15. The appeal is allowed to the extent that the conclusion on risk  on
         return as a perceived draft evader is to be decided  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal


    No anonymity direction is made.



   3. There then followed discussions as to whether this was a suitable case
      to be a country guidance case and it initially was  to  be  listed  as
      such. However, at a  directions  hearing  it  became  clear  that  the
      appellant's representatives wished to add the fact  that  he  was  not
      just returning as an adult male but as a Kurd and it was then  decided
      that it would not be listed as  a  country  guidance  case.  Thus  the
      matter came before me on 25th May 2017. Mr Moriarty wished to add  the
      issue of the conditions within military service for  Kurds.  Mr  Kotas
      objected to that. It had not  been  identified  as  an  issue  at  the
      directions hearing and I refused to deal  with  it.  However,  it  was
      agreed that I should deal with how the  Appellant  would  behave  upon
      return to Iran.


   4.  I  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  through  a  Kurdish  Sorani
      interpreter. He confirmed the contents of his witness statement  which
      indicated that prior to coming to the UK he had not  appreciated  that
      military service is compulsory for all adult males in Iran and that he
      would not be prepared to perform military service. In  response  to  a
      question from Mr Moriarty he also  confirmed  that  he  would  not  be
      prepared to swear the oath of loyalty required of all conscripts.


   5. In cross-examination he was asked about his knowledge of the draft. He
      was asked if his father had ever been called up to serve and  he  said
      he did not know and that his mother had never said anything about  it.
      He was asked whether the friend he had in Iran had never mentioned  it
      and he said that he had not and that he was not aware  of  anybody  in
      the neighbourhood going into the Army. The Appellant also said that he
      only became aware of the oppression of  the  Kurdish  people  in  Iran
      after he came to the UK and had not seen anything of it  himself  when
      in Iran. He was asked whether he had personally  witnessed,  in  Iran,
      any problems faced by the Kurdish people and, other than the  incident
      which he had claimed before the First-tier Tribunal and about which he
      had been disbelieved, he had not.


   6. He was then asked if he returned to Iran  and  told  he  must  perform
      military service what he would do and he said that as a Kurd he  would
      was not prepared to join the army.


   7. At this point I set out my findings in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
      evidence before me and his credibility. For a man who  grew  up  in  a
      Kurdish area of Iran to have no  knowledge  whatsoever  that  military
      service is compulsory for  all  adult  males  I  find  is  simply  not
      credible. Even if adult males in the area in which  he  lived  avoided
      the draft, it still incredible that the matter would not be  known  to
      him and generally by others in the area.


   8. I also find it not credible that  a  person  who  based  his  original
      asylum claim on the oppression of Kurdish people in Iran and  who  now
      says that he will not perform military service because Kurdish  people
      are oppressed, would not have known anything about this  or  witnessed
      any ill-treatment in Iran. That being the case I attach little  weight
      to the Appellant's claim that he  would  refuse  to  perform  military
      service. I do not accept that he has a  genuinely  held  conscientious
      objection to military service.


   9. Having so found I need to determine what is likely to  happen  to  him
      upon return.


  10. He is now aged, on the basis of the age assessment, 20.


  11. I then heard oral evidence from the author of the experts report


  12. The Appellant relied on an expert report prepared by Ms  Roya  Kashefi
      dated 10th April 2017 and she attended and gave oral  evidence  before
      me. Without repeating her experience as detailed in her report in this
      decision, I have no doubt that she has the necessary expertise to give
      an opinion and I note that she has previously done so before the Upper
      Tribunal.


  13. Ms Kashefi had sight of an earlier  expert  report  prepared  for  the
      First-tier Tribunal by Dr Mohammed Kakhki dated 4th July 2016. Towards
      the end of his report he opined that even though  being  a  Kurd  does
      not, in itself, result in persecution,  when  this  is  combined  with
      other criminal suspicions, such  persecution  is  likely  to  surface.
      Furthermore, consideration of the general discriminatory situation  in
      Iran and its likely impact on the Appellant's  treatment  upon  return
      is, in his opinion, relevant to assessing the risks in this  case.  As
      he is a Kurd, the general discriminatory situation mentioned above  is
      relevant to his personal circumstances and  experiences;  particularly
      having a potential effect on any investigatory or judicial proceedings
      that may take place against him. Dr Kakhki goes on to say that  it  is
      certainly not suggested that being a Kurd, in isolation, would lead to
      legal prosecution or persecution; however, the level of  scrutiny  and
      treatment would, both, in his  opinion,  and  as  illustrated  by  the
      background  evidence  highlighted  throughout  the  report,   increase
      substantially;  his  involvement  in  the  dissemination  of   illegal
      political materials along with, or in  the  alternative,  his  illegal
      departure from Iran and subsequent asylum application abroad, would in
      his opinion, attract the  attention  of  officials  and  result  in  a
      thorough investigation to uncover his criminal activities. I pause  at
      this point to point out that the increased risks Dr Kakhki  refers  to
      were based on the Appellant's claims as to what had occurred  in  Iran
      and which have been found to be not credible. Absent that, Dr Kakhki's
      view was that his ethnicity alone would not  lead  to  persecution  on
      return


  14. Earlier in his report Dr Kakhki  looked  at  the  situation  of  draft
      evaders and noted at paragraph 33  of  his  report  that  due  to  the
      closeness  of  Iranian  society,  detailed   information   about   the
      punishment of draft evaders and deserters is difficult to  obtain.  He
      said that according to one source, draft  evaders  and  deserters  are
      particularly susceptible to face punishment if they have deserted  for
      political reasons, if they have been politically active in the past or
      if they have deserted previously during the war  with  Iraq.  None  of
      applies to this Appellant.  He then opined that  in  his  opinion  the
      Appellant would be required to complete his military service with  the
      risk of facing extra service or  being  imprisoned  due  to  the  late
      commencement of his service.


  15. In her report Ms Kashefi concurred largely  with  Dr  Kakhki  but  her
      report had been commissioned on the basis of what would be  likely  to
      happen to the Appellant as a Kurd and whether he would be  seen  as  a
      draft evader. One  of  the  factors  that  she  relied  upon  was  the
      Appellant's inability to speak Farsi. That however, goes to the  issue
      of the treatment of Kurds in the army which is  beyond  the  scope  of
      this  appeal.  She  detailed  the  penalties  for  draft  evasion  and
      indicated that because draft evasion is such a  significant  issue  in
      Iran, the authorities are reducing the penalties  for  draft  evasion.
      She indicated that for a person who had evaded  the  draft  for  eight
      years or more they could avoid further punishment or military  service
      by paying a fine. Those who had evaded for a shorter  period  of  time
      were taken before a military court and could either be  imprisoned  or
      their military service period extended by a period of 3 to 6 months.


  16. In addition to providing her  report  Ms  Kashefi  also  responded  to
      questions put to her by the  Home  Office  in  writing  prior  to  the
      hearing. One of the points she made in response to those questions was
      that up was that as at July 2015  the  number  of  missing  conscripts
      throughout Iran was estimated to be 1.5 million but she was unable  to
      say where they were; whether they were principally Kurds or  from  the
      Kurdish areas.


  17. In her oral evidence Miss Kashefi was asked how  likely  it  would  be
      that the Appellant would be sent to prison as a draft evader  and  she
      said that the law was very clear that the punishment for draft evasion
      was either an extra period of service or prison and  she  opined  that
      Kurds are more likely to receive harsher punishment and more likely to
      receive a custodial sentence.  She opined that this  was  particularly
      so for this Appellant because he had exited Iran illegally and claimed
      asylum.


  18. She was asked how likely it was that his father had not been  required
      to perform military service and she indicated that living a rural life
      in  a  Kurdish  area  would  make  it  more   difficult   to   enforce
      conscription.


  19. It was Ms Kashefi's firm view that as a failed Kurdish  asylum  seeker
      the Appellant would be at risk and that he is a draft evader purely by
      reason of his age. Persons who are of that age and lawfully outside of
      Iran, for example as  students,  can  apply  to  the  Embassy  for  an
      exemption. That is not something  that  would  be  available  to  this
      Appellant.


  20. Mr Kotas asked Miss Kashefi about the source  of  her  information  in
      regard to what life was like within the army.  She said that  she  had
      spoken to individuals who had performed  military  service.  She  said
      however that she had not spoken to anyone who had evaded the draft and
      been punished for it. She had not spoken to anyone outside of Iran who
      had avoided the draft and been punished and it was put to her that  it
      was extraordinary that no one had fled abroad who  had  been  in  that
      position and she could only comment that she had not come across  such
      a person.   She also agreed that it was unusual that a person in Iran,
      such as this Appellant, would have no knowledge of conscription.


  21.  Whilst  Miss  Kashefi  gave  her  report  and  her  evidence   in   a
      straightforward manner and did not seek to exaggerate the evidence, it
      remains the case that there was no actual evidence of any person being
      punished for draft evasion on return to Iran from the UK  or  anywhere
      else having made a failed asylum claim. She  relied  very  heavily  on
      what the law provides as a punishment for draft evasion without  being
      able to refer to actual examples.


  22. I have to place her opinion, unsupported by actual evidence as it  is,
      against the country guidance case of SSH and HR (illegal exit:  failed
      asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC). The head note of  that
      case states as follows:-


                  "(a)  An Iranian male whom it  is  sought  to  return  to
         Iran, who does    not possess a passport, will be returnable  on  a
         laissez passer, which he can obtain from  the  Iranian  Embassy  on
         proof of identity and nationality.


         (b)  An Iranian male in respect of whom  no  adverse  interest  has
         previously been manifested by the Iranian state  does  not  face  a
         real risk of persecution/breach of his article 3 rights  on  return
         to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or  being  a
         failed  asylum  seeker.  No  such  risk  exists  at  the  time   of
         questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
         exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have  been  established.  In
         particular, there is not a real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
         imprisonment.


  23. Dr Kakhki provided  expert  evidence  before  that  Tribunal  and  had
      previously given evidence in the  earlier  country  guidance  case  SP
      (risk on return-illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] AIT 00053


  24. While SSH & HR does not specifically deal with whether such persons on
      return would be viewed as draft evaders and punished  accordingly,  it
      seems to me highly significant that  the  Tribunal  indicated  that  a
      failed asylum seeker with no political profile returning from  the  UK
      on a Laissez Passer would not be at risk either during questioning  on
      return or thereafter. A very considerable number of those persons will
      have been outside of Iran while of draft age and  it  is  in  my  view
      inconceivable that if there was a risk on that basis it would not have
      been identified by either Dr Kakhki or the Tribunal. It is a fact that
      a great many Iranian asylum seekers are of Kurdish ethnicity and it is
      a fact that a great many of them are young men of draft age.


  25. If young men who left illegally and claimed asylum in the  UK  are  at
      risk as perceived draft evaders the Tribunal in   SSH & HR would  have
      so found.


  26. Accordingly, while acknowledging Miss Kashefi's  expertise,  I  cannot
      accept in the absence of better evidence that this Appellant would  be
      at risk on return for any  reason.  He  is  Kurdish  but  without  any
      profile whatsoever that would excite the interest of the authorities.



Notice of Decision



    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C J Martin                              Date 9th June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
