


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/03745/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Civil and Family Court,        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Liverpool                                   |                               |
|On 8 February 2018                          |On 3 May 2018                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                    Mr AN
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson &
Canter           Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal  Smith  dated  23.5.17  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision of 26.3.16 refusing his  protection  claim.  The
      Appellant, a national of Iran, sought protection on the  grounds  that
      he had converted  from  Islam  to  Christianity  in  Iran,  and  since
      arriving in the UK had continued in his  adherence  to  the  Christian
      faith.

2     The Respondent rejected his claim for protection on the  grounds  that
      his account of conversion to Christianity in Iran was not credible, in
      particular on the grounds that the chronology of events set out in his
      claim was inconsistent with his having been fingerprinted in Greece on
      25.9.15.

3     On appeal, the Appellant gave evidence,  as  did  the  Pastor  of  the
      church that the Appellant was then presently attending. The  Appellant
      also relied upon material posted on Facebook regarding the Appellant's
      attendance at church [17], which showed pictures of his attendance  at
      his baptism ceremony along with the various quotes from New  Testament
      [31].

4     The Judge found that he was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
      given a truthful account with regard to his  claim  to  conversion  to
      Christianity  in  Iran.  The  chronology  was  inconsistent  with  his
      presence in Greece, and the Appellant had only sought to  correct  his
      evidence about the chronology  of  events  after  the  Respondent  had
      refused his claim, notwithstanding that a letter  of  corrections  and
      clarifications was provided to the Respondent after the SEF interview,
      but before refusal [22].

5     Further, the  Appellant  knew  very  little  of  key  details  of  the
      Christian faith at the time of  his  asylum  interview,  although  the
      Judge held that such questioning rarely gives any real  assistance  as
      to  whether  a  person  is  a  genuine  convert  or  not  [24].   More
      significantly for the Judge, was  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
      unable to give a clear and compelling reason as to what it  was  about
      the Christian faith that so appealed to him. The Judge  was  satisfied
      that the Appellant's account both in the asylum interview, his witness
      statement, and his oral evidence before the Judge was lacking in  such
      detail. 'The combination of lack of knowledge  about  Christianity  at
      the point of the AI along with any  compelling  reason  given  by  the
      Appellant as to why he wanted  to  convert  to  Christianity  and  put
      himself of such risk further supports my conclusion that the Appellant
      had not genuinely converted to Christianity in Iran." [24]

6     Although the Judge stated that he was impressed  by  the  Pastor,  who
      gave her evidence with care, and whose evidence was given 'appropriate
      weight' [26], and the Judge gave 'considerable weight' to the fact the
      Appellant had demonstrated  a  regular  attendance  at  the  Christian
      churches in Liverpool and Manchester [27], the Judge held that:

           '27 ... When I consider the attendance at the church along  with
           the support of  evidence  from  (the  Pastor),  with  the  other
           written evidence from the church community it does  not  address
           the concerns I have set out above with regards to the chronology
           given by the Appellant as to his history in Iran.  Nor  does  it
           address the issue that I have set out above with regards to  the
           lack of any convincing explanation by the Appellant as to why he
           claims he turned to Christianity in Iran. Despite  this  regular
           attendance at church by the Appellant I am still  not  satisfied
           that he is a genuine Christian convert."


7     At paragraph 30, the Judge held as follows:

           'I have considered the possibility that the Appellant  may  have
           been a 'nongenuine' convert to Christianity at the time  of  his
           arrival in the United Kingdom but who has subsequently  gone  on
           to develop a genuine interest in Christianity. This is  not  the
           case that he has asked me to assess. The Appellant  claims  that
           the he converted to Christianity in Iran. For the reasons that I
           have set out above I do not accept that account."

8     As regards the Appellant's potential risk  of  harm  as  a  result  of
      being returned to Iran, and his online activity,  the  Judge  held  as
      follows at 31:

           'I am satisfied that there is no evidence that he has ever  come
           to the adverse attention of the authorities in Iran. As  such  I
           am satisfied that he is not  at  risk  upon  return  unless  the
           authorities were aware of the church attendance. If he has (sic)
           encountered by the authorities  and  ask  (sic)  questions  upon
           return he is not expected to lie. On the basis that I  have  not
           accepted that he is a genuine convert there is no reason why  he
           should be expected to lie. I have also considered at the request
           of the Appellant  the  country  guidance  case  of  SSH  and  HR
           (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran (CG) [2016]  UKUT  308
           (IAC). There is no evidence before me that upon return  to  Iran
           questions such as 'have you been attending a Christian church in
           the United Kingdom?' are routinely or  indeed  ever  asked.  The
           only potential difficulty to the Appellant would be  if  somehow
           the authorities had become aware of his attendance at church  in
           the United Kingdom. I have considered the material that he  says
           has been uploaded to the  Internet.  It  is  apparently  include
           (sic) the pictures of his attendance  at  the  baptism  ceremony
           along with various quotes from the new  Testament.  Whilst  some
           suggestion in SSH that people of interest to the authorities are
           subject to some  scrutiny  including  enquiries  about  Internet
           Social media history I am satisfied that the risk of the Iranian
           authorities  coming  across  this  material  is  remote  in  the
           extreme. In any event it is always  open  to  the  Appellant  to
           reset his social media history to remove  this  material  if  he
           wishes. It would not be too onerous a requirement upon  him  and
           would not for instance require him  to  lose  contact  with  his
           social media friends."

9     The appeal was dismissed.

10    The Appellant appeals on grounds which argue:

           (i)  The  Judge  had  failed  to  deal  with  the  core  of  the
           Appellant's case. As per Chiver [1997] INLR 212 in having  found
           that the Appellant had not converted  to  Christianity  in  Iran
           that  the  Appellant  may   nevertheless   have   converted   to
           Christianity whilst in the UK. It was suggested that  the  Judge
           had expressly excluded this consideration at [30]. The Judge had
           not given consideration to whether or not, notwithstanding  what
           may have been an embellishment to  his  account  in  respect  of
           activities in Iran, the Appellant  was  nevertheless  a  genuine
           Christian. Consideration of this issue was particularly required
           in view the Judge's assessment of the evidence of the Pastor.

           (ii) The Judge had failed to consider guidance in AB and  Others
           (internet activity - state of evidence) [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC) as
           to risk on arrival in Iran, in particular in the  light  of  his
           internet use. As per paragraph 467 of AB:

                 "The mere fact  of  being  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
                 prolonged period does not lead to persecution.  However  it
                 may lead to scrutiny and there is clear evidence that  some
                 people  are  asked  about  their  internet   activity   and
                 particularly  for  their  Facebook  password.  The  act  of
                 returning someone creates a "pinch point" so that a  person
                 is brought into direct contact with the authorities in Iran
                 who have both the time and inclination to interrogate them.
                 We think it likely that they  will  be  asked  about  their
                 internet activity and likely  if  they  have  any  internet
                 activity for that to be exposed and  if  it  is  less  than
                 flattering of the government to lead to at the very least a
                 real risk of persecution."

           Further, the Judge's finding  at  [31]  that  the  risk  of  the
           Iranian  authorities  coming  across  the   Appellant's   online
           material was 'remote in the extreme', was  not  consistent  with
           the findings in BA.

           (iii) The Judge's conclusion at [31]that  it  was  open  to  the
           Appellant to reset his social media history was not supported by
           any evidential basis, I  was  not  an  issue  canvassed  at  the
           hearing; the Appellant did not have an opportunity to deal  with
           the position taken by the Judge's decision, and, given that  the
           matter was not raised at the hearing, the question as to whether
           the Appellant could or would in fact remove the material has not
           been answered.

11    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Nightingale in a decision  dated  13.9.17,  on  the  basis  that  such
      grounds were arguable.

13    Before me, Mr Holmes relied upon the grounds of appeal, and  Mr  Bates
      upon the Respondent's rule 24 response dated 31.10.17, both with  oral
      amplification of those arguments.

      Discussion

14    It is to be noted  that  the  Appellant  makes  no  challenge  to  the
      Judge's finding that the  Appellant  was  not  a  genuine  convert  to
      Christianity in Iran.

15    No particular passage from the case of  Chiver  was  set  out  in  the
      Appellant's grounds of appeal, but I assume the Appellant relies  upon
      the passage in the last paragraph of the decision:

           " It is perfectly possible for an adjudicator to believe that  a
           witness is  not  telling  the  truth  about  some  matters,  has
           exaggerated the story to make his  case  better,  or  is  simply
           uncertain about matters, but still  to  be  persuaded  that  the
           centre piece of the story stands."

16    What, then, was the centre piece, or core of the Appellant's  account?
      The core account was, I find, that he  converted  to  Christianity  in
      Iran, and continued in his adherence  to  that  faith  in  the  United
      Kingdom. That is how the Appellant  advanced  his  case.  Neither  the
      Appellant in his witness  evidence,  or  Mr  Holmes  in  his  skeleton
      argument, sought to positively advance an alternate case that even  if
      the Appellant's account of converting  to  Christianity  in  Iran  was
      untruthful, he has subsequently genuinely converted to Christianity in
      the United Kingdom. It was clearly not the  core  of  the  Appellant's
      case  that  he  had  'converted'  to  Christianity  in  the  UK.   The
      Appellant's reliance upon the case of Chiver is misplaced.

17    In any event, I find  that  the  Judge  did  make  a  finding  on  the
      Appellant's present adherence or non-adherence to the Christian faith.
      At the end of [27] quoted  at  paragraph  6  above,  the  Judge  held:
      'Despite this regular attendance at church by the Appellant I am still
      not satisfied that he is a genuine Christian convert'. Further, at the
      first and second line of  [31],  the  Judge  reiterates  that  he  had
      rejected the account put forward  that  the  Appellant  is  a  genuine
      convert to Christianity. Further, at the 12th and 13th line  of  [31],
      on page 9, the Judge again states: 'On  the  basis  that  I  have  not
      accepted that he is a genuine Christian convert..."

18    It is sufficiently clear to me with reference to the Judge's  repeated
      use of the present tense that the Judge  has  considered  whether  the
      Appellant is presently a genuine convert to Christianity. The  Judge's
      reference at [30] to the fact that the Appellant has  not  advanced  a
      positive case that he may not have a  genuine  convert  in  Iran,  but
      might be a genuine convert in the UK, does not diminish the clarity of
      the Judge's findings at these points of the decision.

19    The Judge's observation at [30] about the  way  that  the  Appellant's
      case had been put was in any event perfectly correct. It does not seem
      to me to be appropriate to say that the Judge has failed to deal  with
      the core of the Appellant's account - it was never  the  core  of  the
      Appellant's account to say that he lied about his account in Iran, but
      has become a genuine convert in  the  UK.  There  is  nothing  in  the
      Appellant's evidence regarding any 'conversion' to Christianity in the
      UK at all.

20    Appellant's first ground is not made out.

21    Dealing with grounds two and three together, it is apparent  that  the
      Judge was referred to the authority of both AB and Others, and SSH and
      HR in the Appellant's skeleton argument. However, it is apparent  that
      the Judge only refers to the latter in his decision.

22    Paragraph 2.4 of  the  Practice  Directions  of  the  Immigration  and
      Asylum Chambers of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal
      provides that:

           "Any failure to follow a clear,  apparently  applicable  country
           guidance case or to show why it does not apply to  the  case  in
           question is likely to be regarded as grounds  for  appeal  on  a
           point of law."

23    However, AB, whilst reported, is not country guidance.

24    Further, in the context of the Judge's consideration of  the  case  of
      SSH, I am satisfied that the Judge has not left  out  of  account  the
      observations of the Upper Tribunal in AB.  It is to be noted that  SSH
      refers to AB at paragraph 11, which provides:

           "In AB & Others (internet activity -  state  of  evidence)  Iran
           [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC), there is reference at  paragraph  457  to
           the act of returning someone creating a "pinch  point"  so  that
           returnees are brought into direct contact with  the  authorities
           in Iran who have both the time and  inclination  to  interrogate
           them. That however was in the context of people who had  engaged
           in internet activity, and it is relevant to note  also  that  at
           paragraph 470 the Tribunal said that a person who  is  returning
           to Iran after a reasonably short period of time on  an  ordinary
           passport, having left  illegally,  would  almost  certainly  not
           attract any particular attention at all. It went on  to  say  at
           paragraph 471 that where a person's leave to remain  had  lapsed
           and they might be travelling on a special passport  there  would
           be enhanced interest and the more active they had been the  more
           likely the authorities' interest could lead to persecution. That
           is essentially a comment rather than  evidence,  and  though  it
           agrees with what is said by  Dr  Kakhki,  it  takes  matters  no
           further in our view as to the risk of  ill-treatment  on  return
           during a period of questioning. In particular  as  it  cites  no
           evidence to support the view expressed, and also it is a  remark
           made in the context of evaluating risk on  account  of  blogging
           activities, and the reference to  'more  active'  would  not  be
           applicable to a person with no relevant profile."

25    The issues discussed in AB are therefore referred  to  in  SSH,  which
      was referred to by the Judge. The Judge was also  clearly  considering
      the position of persons having  used  social  media  at  [31]  in  the
      decision.

26    I do not find that the Judge left any material  consideration  out  of
      account by not referring directly to AB.

27    In the alternative, if the Judge did err in law by  not  referring  to
      directly to AB, it is apparent  from  the  remainder  of  the  Judge's
      decision that this would not have made any material difference to  the
      outcome of the appeal.

28    The Judge positively held at [31] that there was  no  evidence  before
      him to the effect that the Appellant was likely to be asked whether he
      had been attending church in the UK. There is  no  challenge  to  that
      finding.

29    Therefore even if the Judge has, by reason of a failure  to  refer  to
      AB, underestimated the chances of the authorities asking the Appellant
      for his Facebook password, the Judge's decision  would  be  the  same,
      because of the Judge's alternative finding ('in any event') that it is
      open to the Appellant to reset his Facebook history and to delete  any
      material of interest.

30    Insofar as the Appellant alleges procedural unfairness  in  the  Judge
      having suggested  at  [31]  that  the  Appellant  had  the  choice  of
      resetting his social media history to remove certain material  on  his
      Facebook account, I find that the Appellant's point is not  made  out.
      Insofar as the Judge has taken judicial  notice  of  the  fact  it  is
      possible to delete material in, or even the  entirety  of  a  Facebook
      account, he was entitled to do so.  This  needs  no  expert  evidence.
      Even if, as the Appellant says, it is sometimes difficult to eradicate
      all traces of oneself on the Internet,  the  Appellant  identifies  no
      particular evidence to suggest that what the Judge said could be done,
      could not. No Rule 15(2A) application was  made  seeking  to  rely  on
      evidence to the effect that the Judge was not entitled  to  make  that
      observation.

31    Further, insofar as the Appellant asserts that  the  Appellant  cannot
      reasonably be required to delete any material  of  interest  from  his
      Facebook account, the Appellant fails  to  establish  that  the  Judge
      erred in law in making that suggestion. Given the Judge's finding that
      the Appellant was not a genuine Christian convert, then it  cannot  be
      said that it would be contrary to the Appellant's  fundamental  rights
      (as per HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31)  to  delete  such  photographs;  the
      Appellant's  continued  possession  of  these  photographs  cannot  be
      insisted upon by the Appellant as a core right.

32    Finally, Mr Holmes argued that given that the Tribunal (whether  First
      tier or Upper) has the task of determining the appeal on the basis  of
      an immediate hypothetical return, this meant that there  would  be  no
      opportunity for the Appellant to  delete  any  part  of  his  Facebook
      account. With respect, this moves the argument from  the  hypothetical
      to the surreal. In Ravichandran v SSHD [1996] Imm AR 96, the Court  of
      Appeal held that due both to the statutory construction  of  the  then
      applicable appeals provisions, and because of sound policy reasons, an
      assessment of risk of harm was to be carried out as  at  the  date  of
      hearing, rather than at the date of the  Respondent's  decision.  That
      does not require the Tribunal to consider an appellant's return in the
      artificial way that Mr Holmes suggests. If  during  an  asylum  appeal
      hearing, an appellant had physical possession  of  an  arrest  warrant
      which was held to be false, it would be artificial to argue  that  his
      hypothetical return to his home country, immediately upon the  end  of
      the hearing, would result in  a  risk  of  harm  to  him  because  the
      document might arouse suspicion and give rise an adverse  interest  in
      him upon return. In those circumstances, the hypothetical  return  can
      be presumed to take place giving that appellant the opportunity to put
      his fraudulent evidence in the bin.

      Decision

33    The making of the Judge's decision did not involve the making  of  any
      material error of law.

34    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                            Date: 24.4.18

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

I make an anonymity order under Paragraph  13,  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration
and Asylum Chamber, Guidance Note  2013  No  1:  Anonymity  Orders,  on  the
grounds that this is a protection  appeal.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies to the appellant and to the respondent  and  to  all  other  persons
save as may be required by other proceedings before any Court  or  Tribunal.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

