
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03532/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 May 2019                       |On 03 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan   (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal (the Tribunal) which it made on 26 October  2018  following  a
of hearing of 23 October 2018 and  which  it  sent  to  the  parties  on  16
November 2018. The Tribunal's decision was to dismiss the  claimants  appeal
against a decision of the Secretary of State of 25 February2018,  to  refuse
grant him international protection.

2.    I have decided to grant the claimant anonymity. Anonymity was  granted
by the Tribunal and it does seem to me that it is  appropriate  to  continue
that grant.

3.    Shorn of all but the essential detail, the claimant's account  of  the
events  said  to  underpin  his  claim  to  be  entitled  to   international
protection may be summarised as follows:  He  is  a  national  of  Iran,  of
Kurdish ethnicity and  he  was  born  on  4  May  1997.  His  father  was  a
Peshmerga. He lived in the Sardasht area of Iran and started  to  support  a
pro-Kurdish oppositionist party by delivering leaflets. But  in  due  course
he received a letter from the Etellaat asking him to attend  their  offices.
His uncle advised him not to attend  because  he  was  aware  of  two  other
persons who had received a similar invitation and who had subsequently  gone
missing. Instead, fearing the  authorities  and  or  those  associated  with
them, the claimant fled Iran with the assistance of his uncle.  He  says  he
was taken to an airport where he boarded a  plane  for  the  United  Kingdom
(UK). He also says that he will be persecuted or subjected to  serious  harm
by the authorities or by groups associated with the authorities if he is  to
be returned to Iran.

4.    The Secretary of  State  disbelieved  the  claimant  and  so  did  the
Tribunal. The Tribunal, essentially, thought he  had  provided  inconsistent
evidence with respect to the  claimed  leafleting;  thought  he  given  only
vague information regarding his claimed involvement with  the  oppositionist
party; thought the information he had given as to how he had been  recruited
by the party conflicted with background country  material;  and  thought  he
had given an unconvincing account of his claimed  journey  to  the  UK.   In
seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal it was  argued  that  the
Tribunal had had  regard  to  background  country  material  relating  to  a
different oppositionist  party to that which the  claimant  had  claimed  to
have  been  involved  with  (ground  one);  had  breached   the   "Surendran
guidelines" by  taking  a  point  concerning  what  it  thought  to  be  the
vagueness of key  aspects  of  his  account  without  putting  its  concerns
(ground two); and in failing to  make  any  finding  as  to  his  "political
opinion per se" notwithstanding its disbelief of the detail of  the  account
and in also failing  to  take  account  of  his  families  claimed  previous
involvement with the oppositionist party prior to rejecting  the  appellants
own claim to have had such involvement.

5.    The granting judge made an unlimited grant  of  permission  to  appeal
but clearly thought the most arguable contention  was  that  concerning  the
claimed confusion on the part of the Tribunal with respect to the party  the
claimant had said he belonged to. Permission having been  granted  the  case
was listed for an oral hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  (before  me)  so
that consideration could be given to the question  of  whether  or  not  the
Tribunal had erred in law and, if  it  had,  what  should  flow  from  that.
Representation at that hearing was as stated above  and  I  am  grateful  to
each representative.

6.    Ms Khan pursued with vigour the various points which had been made  in
the grounds of appeal. Mr Diwnycz accepted there  had  been  some  confusion
(which he thought might have been caused  by  what  had  been  said  in  the
Secretary of States written decision) regarding  the  specific  party  which
the claimant had claimed to be a member of. He  suggested  that  such  might
have the Tribunal into error. He did not formally concede but made it  clear
he did not wish to defend the decision of the Tribunal. In  truth,  he  came
as close to conceding without actually using such a word as it  is  possible
to do.

7.    The Upper Tribunal is not bound by even a  clear  concession  made  in
terms by a party. But it  is  difficult  to  disregard  what,  to  my  mind,
effectively amounted to one. A considered stance taken by  a  representative
is not something that should be simply ignored. Mr Diwnycz is a Senior  Home
Office Presenting Officer and in the circumstances,  I  have  attached  some
weight to his deliberate stance in not  seeking  to  defend  the  Tribunal's
decision. I do not know if, had the case been argued  differently  or  if  a
different stance had been taken on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  I
would have reached the same or a different view. But I have decided  in  the
circumstances as set out above that the Tribunal did make an  error  of  law
which might have impacted  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  I  have  decided,
therefore, to set aside the Tribunal's decision.

8.    There is more than one oppositionist party in Iran. The acronyms  used
for some of them in this case have proved rather confusing. I agree with  Mr
Diwnycz that what was  said  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  his  written
decision of 25 February 2018 did not necessarily clarify matters in the  way
that it could have done. But there is a  party  which  appears  to  be  most
commonly known as or  referred  to  as  PDKI  although  other  acronyms  are
sometimes used for that party. I shall from now on simply  refer  to  it  as
the "original party". There is another oppositionist party which appears  to
be commonly referred  to  as  the  KDP-I  (though  there  may  be  different
acronyms for that too) which is an offshoot of the original party.  I  shall
call it the "offshoot party".

9.    The Secretary of State, in his  written  decision,  thought  that  the
claimant's credibility had been damaged by his  confusing  the  two  parties
with each other. Whether that is so or not is something which  will  in  due
course, be assessed by another Tribunal. But by  the  time  the  matter  was
before the Tribunal the claimant had attempted, on my  reading  (though  the
way it is put in the witness statement of 28 March  2018  is  confusing)  to
indicate that he had been involved with  the  offshoot  party  and  not  the
original party. So, whether that was true or not, that was his  position  to
the Tribunal.

10.    I  accept  the  Tribunal  did  not   appreciate   that   attempt   at
clarification though that may be because it was given in a way which  itself
might have lacked clarity.  I accept that the  background  country  material
it relied upon in concluding that the  claimant  had  given  an  implausible
account as to how he came to be recruited, was concerned with  the  original
party rather than the offshoot party.  I  have  very  considerable  sympathy
with the Tribunal because, as I say, I do not think matters were  stated  as
clearly as they could have been by the Secretary of State. Nor, in fact,  do
I think that matters had been stated as clearly as they could have  been  by
or on behalf of the claimant either. But nevertheless, bearing  in  mind  Mr
Diwnycz's conciliatory stance, I have decided that the Tribunal did  err  in
considering background country material which related  to  the  wrong  party
and that it wrongly applied that material to the claimant's  account  as  to
how he was recruited.

11.   Of course, as indicated above,  the  Tribunal  had  also  found  other
reasons to disbelieve the claimant. Some of those have been the  subject  of
further  challenge  but  I  have  not  found  any  such  challenges  to   be
persuasive. In particular, I do not accept that the  Tribunal  was  required
to send some sort of signal as to its concerns prior to concluding that  the
claimant had given a vague account of his claimed  political  activity.  The
Surendran guidelines do suggest that if a new point is to be  taken  by  the
Tribunal in the absence of the representative for the  Secretary  of  State,
that should be put. But in my view the Tribunal was not taking a  new  point
at all. It is true that vagueness which concerned it had not been  expressed
as a specific concern in the Secretary of State's decision letter.  But  the
Secretary  of  State  had  disbelieved  the  account,   the   claimant   was
represented before the Tribunal, it was  for  the  claimant  to  present  an
account  concerning  sufficient  detail  and  in  those  circumstances   the
Tribunal was, in my judgement, entitled (though it did not have to) to  take
an adverse point with respect to vagueness without sending  such  a  signal.
To  argue  otherwise  simply  takes  the  relevant  part  of  the  Surendran
guidelines much too far

12.   Nevertheless, I am not wholly satisfied  that  had  the  Tribunal  not
erred in applying the background material relating to the  wrong  party,  it
would inevitably have reached the  same  conclusion  as  to  the  claimant's
veracity. In the circumstances (and really by consent)  I  have  decided  to
set aside the Tribunal's decision on that basis.

13.   Ms Khan sought remittal.  Mr  Diwnycz  did  not  urge  to  me  take  a
different course. So, I have decided to remit. There will, therefore,  be  a
rehearing of the appeal before a differently constituted tribunal where  all
matters of fact and law will be considered afresh.  Perhaps it might  assist
if the parties, in order to  avoid  further  confusion,  dispense  with  the
acronyms referred to above and simply refer to the original  party  and  the
offshoot party as I have done, but that is up to them.

14.   My having  decided  to  remit  I  am  statutorily  obligated  to  give
directions for the remaking of the decision. But  I  do  not  need  to  give
detailed ones. Accordingly,  I  simply  direct  that  there  be  a  complete
rehearing before a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal (a  different
judge). Any other directions  are  best  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
itself.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside. Further,  the  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008. Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall  name  or  otherwise
identify the claimant or any member of his family.  This  grant  applies  to
all parties to the proceedings. Failure to comply may lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.



Signed      Dated 28 May 2019

MR Hemingway

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


