
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03266/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 15 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     G B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Azerbaijan. He appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 22 February
    2018 refusing his claim for international  protection.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision dated 18 February 2019, dismissed the appeal.

 2. On 7 August, the Secretary of State submitted a Rule 24 notice  stating
    that the respondent did not intend to oppose the  appeal.  Accordingly,
    the Duty Judge at Field House directed that the appeal be  disposed  of
    on the papers.

 3. Both parties accept that the First-tier Tribunal failed to show in  its
    decision that the evidence of the appellant had been treated as that of
    a vulnerable witness. I set aside the  decision  and  direct  that  the
    decision be remade at or following a hearing de novo before the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Newport on the first available date.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision  at  or  following  a
    hearing.


Signed                              Date 8 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.









