
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03758/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 November 2017                   |On 2 May 2018                         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    LKIK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bedford instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 8 May 2017 the Upper Tribunal found the First-tier Tribunal  had
        erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum and human
        rights grounds and listed the matter for a Resumed hearing, part of
        which is to enable the Upper Tribunal to hear evidence in  relation
        to Facebook to ascertain whether guidance can be provided in  cases
        where an individual asserts a real risk on return on the  basis  of
        information posted upon a Facebook or other social media account.



The evidence



     2. There are  a  number  of  social  media  sites  accessible  on  the
        Internet. Names such as  'Facebook'  with  1,500,000,000  estimated
        monthly  visitors,  YouTube,  approximately  a  similar  number  of
        monthly visitors, Twitter, with approximately 400,000,000 estimated
        monthly  visitors,  Instagram,  approximately  275,000,000  monthly
        visitors, Linkedin with approximately 250,000,000 monthly visitors,
        and Reddit, approximately 125,000,000 estimated  monthly  visitors,
        are probably the most frequently used social  networking  sites  of
        which there are in excess of  200  such  sites.  The  term  'social
        media' more generally refers  to  websites  and  applications  that
        enable users to create and  share  content  or  to  participate  in
        social networking.
     3. Data in the form of pictures or written text stored  on  computers,
        tablets, telephones or other electronic devices when used in  court
        proceedings is digital or electronic evidence. Such evidence can be
        transmitted either in digital form or  printed  into  hardcopy  and
        adduced along with other  more  traditional  forms  of  documentary
        evidence.
     4. Earlier concerns relating to the  admissibility  of  such  evidence
        have been resolved. For example, in  the  Civil  Courts,  CPR  32.3
        provides that the court  may  allow  a  witness  to  give  evidence
        through a video link or by other means. The rules of the First-tier
        and Upper Tribunal's allow the admissibility of evidence within its
        proceedings even if such evidence would not be admissible in  civil
        proceedings.
     5. The issue with evidence adduced either in electronic or paper  form
        printed from electronic media ordinarily relates to the weight that
        a court or tribunal will be required to give to  that  evidence  as
        part of its assessment of the case as a whole.
     6. The burden in civil proceedings lies upon  the  person  seeking  to
        rely upon such evidence as proof  of  the  point  in  issue.  Where
        concerns arise in relation to the reliability of such evidence  the
        burden must also rest upon the person asserting  such  evidence  is
        reliable.



The expert report


     7. The appellant instructed an expert to prepare a document  described
        as a 'Social Media Expert Report'.  That  report,  dated  5  August
        2017, was written by a Mr Ross Patel described as a Senior  Analyst
        with Afenis Forensics. That company is based at New Bond House, 124
        New Bond Street, London and are  accredited  expert  witnesses.  No
        issue was taken in  relation  to  either  the  suitability  of  the
        company or Mr Patel in being able to produce the expert report.
     8. The instructions to the expert, in a letter dated 24 July 2017 from
        the appellant's solicitors, raised a series of questions upon which
        the expert's opinion was specifically sought. They are set  out  in
        the report and are as follows:


                i. Can a Facebook account still be viewed after it has  been
                   deleted? If so, in what circumstances and for how long?
               ii. Can a Facebook post be viewed after it has been  deleted?
                   If so, in what circumstances and for how long?
              iii. If the information on a Facebook account has been  stored
                   at a point/s in the past  as  part  of  a  filtering/data
                   collection process, what happens to that  information  if
                   the Facebook account/post is subsequently deleted?
               iv. If a person A comments on/likes/shares  person  B's  post
                   can person A be identified from person B's post, even  if
                   person A deletes their own Facebook account?
                v. If person A's post is shared by person B, what happens to
                   the shared post if person A deletes it.
               vi. Can person A's Facebook post be copied/screen-printed  by
                   person B - does that mean person A can never  delete  the
                   screen-printed copy?
              vii. Can the Facebook friends of a  person  A  see  everything
                   person A posts/comments  on/likes?  How  are  person  A's
                   friends notified that person A has posted something?
             viii. Can the Facebook  friends  of  person  A  see  everything
                   person A posts/comments on/likes? How  are  the  Facebook
                   friends of person  A's  Facebook  friends  notified  that
                   person A has posted something?
               ix. Who can  see  public  posts?  How  can  public  posts  be
                   searched for?


     9. As noted above, Facebook is a term  that  refers  to  one  specific
        social networking website. A person is able to visit the  site  and
        register as a user and thereafter create a profile  of  themselves,
        upload pictures and videos, post content and messages, and  connect
        to others who have also registered and created their own profile on
        Facebook as a means of staying in touch with family,  friends  and/
        or work colleagues or those they may wish to interact with  through
        such a media.
    10. Creation of a Facebook account requires a prospective user to visit
        the Facebook registration and account setup  page  and  to  provide
        their details, free of charge, in the "sign  up"  section.  Details
        provided includes full name, email  address  or  telephone  number,
        password,  birthday  and  gender.  Once  these  details  have  been
        provided the prospective user follows the simple instructions which
        creates an account in that name with  a  verification  email  being
        sent to the registered email address. The user must click on a link
        sent in the email to activate the account.
    11. The expert notes "It is worth noting that there  are  currently  no
        meaningful ways of checking the identity of a Facebook account  and
        as such there are accounts that are fake and run by impostors; some
        opening several accounts and using  various  aliases".  The  expert
        provides an example of a hypothetical individual  by  the  name  of
        Alice opening an account in the name of Jane Smith. It would appear
        that Jane Smith was the account owner responsible for  the  content
        associated with  that  profile  even  though  the  person  actually
        responsible would be the imposter Alice.
    12. In dealing with the specific social media questions  asked  by  the
        appellants representative the report provides a  detailed  response
        supported by screenshots and references from the  Facebook  website
        itself. In summary,  the  author  concludes  in  relation  to  each
        question the following:
    13. Question 1: - Can a Facebook account still be viewed after  it  has
        been deleted? If so, in what circumstances and for how long?


             The expert notes that if a user decides they  wish  to  remove
             their account in its entirety,  including  all  posts/comments
             made, articles saved, media uploaded etc, then they can  visit
             a dedicated page on the  Facebook  website  and  initiate  the
             account   deletion   process.   The   expert   confirms   that
             information, media and all settings/data relating to a deleted
             Facebook account, (including  user  IDs  and  names)  are  not
             accessible after it has been deleted; in other words, any such
             entries by that particular user  account  will  no  longer  be
             visible online and within a matter of days will be permanently
             removed from the service.


             The expert refers to the fact that some  information  will  be
             retained by Facebook for analytical and research purposes  but
             that  those  records  are  physically  stored  on  a  separate
             technical infrastructure that is not accessible to either  the
             public or any third-party organisations and that the  data  is
             retained  in  an  encrypted/scrambled  state  and   with   all
             personally identifiable information and user generated content
             permanently removed. In the  expert's  opinion  it  is  stated
             "From the perspective  of  public  access  (via  the  Facebook
             website,  search  engines  etcetera)   or   access   via   law
             enforcement agencies,  the  Facebook  account  is  essentially
             unavailable from the time of account deletion".


             It is also noted that Facebook  provides  a  secondary  option
             known as 'deactivation' that is  akin  to  'suspension'  which
             allows a user to temporarily disable their account and  remove
             the majority of the content  that  they  have  posted  to  the
             service. Once an account is suspended/deactivated the  account
             profile is no longer accessible and  most  posts/comments  and
             uploaded material removed from the Facebook website,  although
             actual    records    and    data     associated     with     a
             suspended/deactivated account remains on the  Facebook  system
             so they may be accessed by law enforcement  although  none  of
             the material is publicly  accessible  any  more.  A  user  can
             restore  their  account  and  all  associated  content  within
             moments by going through the deactivation  process  again  and
             opting to re-establish their account to the previous state.
    14. Question 2: Can a  Facebook  post  be  viewed  after  it  has  been
        deleted? If so, in what circumstances and for how long?


             The term 'post' is defined by the expert as being a  reference
             to user generated content typically a picture,  website  link,
             and/or text. The original Facebook post and any copy shared by
             other users cannot be viewed after being deleted.  The  expert
             describes Facebook as a dynamic  system  that  refreshes  user
             content on its servers within a matter of seconds meaning that
             content that is added, edited, updated, or removed is  visible
             in that specified state almost immediately.


             The expert accepts,  as  with  any  technical  platform  where
             records  are  generated,  stored   and   manipulated   on   an
             international scale, there is always scope  for  anomalies  or
             failings and provides a reference to limited references on the
             Internet suggesting that in rare  circumstances  even  records
             and accounts on Facebook may  still  appear  accessible  after
             being deleted.
    15. Question 3:  If the information on  a  Facebook  account  has  been
        stored at a point/s  in  the  past  as  part  of  a  filtering/data
        collection  process,  what  happens  to  that  information  if  the
        Facebook account/post is subsequently deleted?


             Facebook  does  not  retain  accessible  or  publicly  visible
             information for deleted/erased accounts. This is because  such
             information is rendered undecipherable and stored  in  servers
             that combine vast datasets making the information  effectively
             a  block  of  encrypted  data  representing  broader   account
             activity. All personally identifiable information is  stripped
             and permanently lost although such information is retained  by
             Facebook for technical diagnostic and research purposes. It is
             said this content is not  accessible  to  the  public  or  law
             enforcement and even if it was leaked to or otherwise accessed
             the material could not be reconstructed  into  any  meaningful
             form. The opinion of the expert is that even  if  the  records
             could be obtained it  would  be  difficult  to  determine  the
             original account username but in any event, it  would  not  be
             possible to reconstruct  any  posts/comments  made  online  or
             media that had been shared.
    16. In relation to the Iranian State, the  expert  states  the  Iranian
        State operates a sophisticated Internet filtering,  inspection  and
        monitoring capability.  This  provides  the  authorities  with  the
        capacity to identify individuals accessing specific websites, using
        certain search terms in email correspondence, instant messaging, or
        posting certain multimedia files. Such online user activity may  be
        easily identified, the user is traced, and all the relevant  online
        activity blocked. The Iranian State has data retention  legislation
        mandating that telecoms and  Internet  service  providers  maintain
        logs for all user activity for  three  months.  Whilst  the  expert
        states it is technically feasible for the regional  authorities  to
        recover deleted content from  Facebook  several  months  after  the
        account and all relevant files have been deleted from  the  service
        platform it is said it should be noted that  due  to  security  and
        privacy controls in place, as well as  the  sheer  volume  of  data
        present on the Facebook platform, which is described as being  very
        dynamic and changing constantly, it is technically very challenging
        to copy meaningful amounts of Facebook data. As a  result,  despite
        mistaken beliefs that persist on the Internet, the expert states it
        is highly unlikely that any  government  or  industry  organisation
        could have comprehensive copies of all Facebook  content  that  has
        been generated or accessed  globally  or  even  specific  to  their
        respective region.
    17. The expert finds it would be technically feasible for a State actor
        with a  dedicated  Internet  filtering  inspection  and  monitoring
        capacity, as employed by the Iranian government, to be more focused
        with the data collection endeavours. Targeted individuals or groups
        could  be  readily  identified  using   the   Internet   inspection
        capabilities based upon the websites and Facebook pages accessed by
        specific individuals. Targeting scope then broadened to include all
        members of a specific group or individuals that are friends  of  or
        have commented  on  content  posted  by  a  specific  person.  That
        targeted group may then be monitored  extensively  and  all  online
        activity inspected in real time  and  all  activity  archived.  For
        example,  all  websites  viewed,  or  email  sent,  Facebook  posts
        created, can be logged and copies retained indefinitely.
    18. It must be noted in respect to the country -related  comments  that
        the author of the report is not a country expert and the source  of
        the information upon which the above observations are based appears
        to be Wikipedia.
    19. Question 4: If a person A comments on/likes/shares person B's  post
        can person A be identified from person B's post, even if  person  A
        deletes their own Facebook account?


             A person with a Facebook account, a user, may generate content
             such as a picture, website link, and/or text,  which  forms  a
             post. Users may show approval for a given post by clicking  on
             a button labelled "like" or may  leave  their  own  text-based
             "comment" or response to the post. The  expert  states  it  is
             possible to share the media or post that has been  made  by  a
             third party by a user simply  selecting  the  'shared'  button
             underneath the post and that they may add a  personal  comment
             or specify whether to share with the public or only with their
             friends. The expert states upon deletion of a Facebook account
             all 'comments,' 'likes' and shared content  is  removed.  This
             content is no longer visible to users of the Facebook  service
             or members of the public. Person  B's  shared  post  would  no
             longer be shared  by  person  A  and  all  reference  to  this
             content/areas removed, including 'likes' and 'comments'.


             It is also said that when person A deletes their account,  all
             references that may identify person A (names, comments,  likes
             and user IDs) are no longer visible  to  Facebook  users,  the
             public, or any lawful access by investigative agencies.
    20. Question 5: If person A's post is shared by person B, what  happens
        to the shared post if person A deletes it?


             In the context of a  shared  post  being  that  of  using  the
             Facebook functionality of sharing, if  person  A  deletes  the
             post (person A being the originating  poster),  person  B  and
             those who have subsequently viewed the post will no longer  be
             able to view the post. In effect, this original post will have
             vanished from their respective timelines.  The  expert  states
             that  person  A's  original  content  is   still   effectively
             "possessed" by them, even after sharing  or  being  shared  by
             person B. Such contact is technically replicated for the  time
             in which the  post  has  not  yet  been  deleted,  it  is  not
             duplicated (copied) to person B.
    21. Question 6: Can person A's Facebook post  be  copied/screen-printed
        by person B - does that mean person A can never delete the  screen-
        printed copy?


             The expert states there are no technical means  of  preventing
             information displayed on the screen from  being  copied  as  a
             result of a screen capture.  The  process  of  screen-printing
             means that content has  been  taken  out  of  the  control  of
             Facebook and entirely into the hands  of  the  person  screen-
             printing which means the resulting copy  data  is  not  stored
             under the control of the Facebook platform.
    22. The expert also confirms that it is possible for a user to download
        a full archive of the  entire  content  of  their  active  Facebook
        account by accessing the Settings page.
    23. Question 7: Can the Facebook friends of a person A  see  everything
        person A  posts/comments  on/likes?  How  are  person  A's  friends
        notified that person A has posted something?


             The expert refers to  accessibility  restrictions  to  sharing
             posted content, adding comments, and  even  'liking'  content.
             When a post is created five options are available to the  user
             allowing for restrictions for accessibility to view:


              . Public          Anyone on and off Facebook
              .  Friends              Users  friends  on  Facebook  (default
                setting)
              . Friends except..         Don't show to some friends
              . Specific friends         Only show to some friends
              . Only me             Only the user can view


             In addition, if person A  is  a  member  of  a  private  group
             (approved membership by the group administrator -  no  content
             is publicly visible), any comments, likes and posts  are  only
             visible to other members of that private group. With regard to
             post notifications, this can depend on  the  "friendship"  and
             active communication  between  person  A  and  their  Facebook
             friends. The expert states that Facebook  uses  algorithms  to
             determine relevant posts to notify the user about new posts:


              . Posts created by organisations and groups  typically  notify
                their friends
              . "Paid for" posts by organisations  and  groups  will  notify
                their friends
              . Posts where person A mentioned or "tagged"  will  appear  in
                person A's notifications.


             Additionally, if person A likes particular posts by friends or
             associated groups, these will be increasingly  prioritised  to
             be the first posts to be seen on person A's homepage.
    24. Question 8: Can the Facebook friends of  person  A  see  everything
        person A posts/comments on/likes? How are the Facebook  friends  of
        person A's Facebook friends  notified  that  person  A  has  posted
        something?


             The expert states that if person A mentioned or "tagged" in  a
             post, friends of friends of person A  will  not  be  notified;
             however, they will be able to view the post if the  friend  of
             person A shares the post to others on their own  timeline.  If
             the friend of person A mentioned or "tagged" in the same  post
             as person A, the friends of the friend to  person  A  will  be
             able to see the post. If person A subsequently  deletes  their
             account, no identifiable information about person  A  will  be
             available to either the friend of person A or to  the  friends
             of the friend of person A - if person A's  named  in  a  post,
             their name will not be visible. This also goes  for  the  case
             where person A is tagged in a  video  or  image;  however,  if
             person A is not the original poster of the content, the  video
             or image will still  be  visible  to  users  (but  person  A's
             identity will no longer be linked by name or account).
    25. Question 9: Who can see public  posts?  How  can  public  posts  be
        searched for?


             The expert writes that both Facebook members and  unregistered
             web users are capable of viewing public posts. Three  possible
             routes identified as being available  to  search  and  view  a
             public post:


              . Using the search functionality of the  Facebook  website  to
                search for specific people, groups and organisations
              . Through third-party services where the public Facebook  post
                has  been  shared  (e.g.  News  media  outlets,  blogs   and
                commercial websites etcetera)-this functionality is provided
                by Facebook, called embedding.
              . Using search engines such as Google or Yahoo to  search  for
                specific people, groups and organisations.


             As noted previously, for each of the methods once  a  Facebook
             post  or  account  is  deleted,  the  content  will   not   be
             visible/accessible  to  the  public  or  any  law  enforcement
             agency.
    26. During the course of the hearing Mr Bates raise the  issue  of  the
        ability of an individual to edit posts, i.e. to alter the  content.
        Mr Bedford objected to this line of submission  on  the  basis  the
        expert had not been asked to specifically comment upon  whether  it
        is possible to edit a post. The reason the expert was not asked  to
        comment upon it was because the appellant did not put a question to
        the expert in those terms. There is, however, available on Facebook
        an official help page in which guidance is  given  to  users.  That
        material sets out a number of questions and then provides  answers.
        One of the questions posed is "How do I  change  a  posts  date  or
        backdate a post so it appears in the past on my Page?". The  answer
        provided by Facebook clearly shows that to change the date  of  the
        post all the user has to do is to go to the Pages  timeline  choose
        the year, month and day to allow when you want the post  to  appear
        on your Pages timeline and click 'save'. It is  therefore  possible
        for the user to manipulate posts to make them appear as if they had
        been created  earlier  by  this  method.  Similarly,  the  Facebook
        guidance makes it possible to  backdate  a  new  post  through  the
        user's timeline although posts cannot be backdated to dates earlier
        than when the users Facebook page was created.
    27. The guidance also poses the question "How do I edit a post  that  I
        shared from my Page?" Facebook guidance  shows  that  if  the  user
        clicks on the individual post and selects 'Edit  Post'  it  can  be
        edited.
    28. The Facebook guidance also shows it is possible to  view  a  post's
        edit history but that without using this facility  a  person  would
        not know whether the posts they were viewing is the  one  that  was
        originally created; especially as  since  early  2017  Facebook  no
        longer clearly labels edited posts.
    29. Another aspect of a person's Facebook account is the  timeline,  to
        which there is reference above. A person's timeline is  where  they
        can see their posts or posts they have been 'tagged  in'  displayed
        by date. The timeline is also part of a Facebook users profile.


Discussion

    30. Material posted on Facebook is more commonly seen by claimants from
        certain countries, such as Iran, and can on the face of  it  appear
        to contain material which the appellant claims will create  a  real
        risk for them if it is discovered by the  Iranians  authorities  or
        others.
    31. The expert above comments  upon  the  technology  employed  by  the
        authorities in Iran and the Tribunal's own case  law  refers  to  a
        'choke point'  on  return  when  a  person  may  be  asked  by  the
        authorities in Iran if they have a Facebook account and, if so, for
        them to enter the password to enable the authorities to  view  that
        account. The  fact  the  authorities  have  to  ask  an  individual
        returning from the UK, for example, whether they  have  a  Facebook
        account or not and requiring the cooperation of that person to gain
        access to such account is evidence that the authorities do not have
        the ability to ascertain for themselves whether a person  has  such
        an account or  the  content.  The  expert  refers  to  Iranian  law
        requiring retention of data for the minimum  specified  period  but
        this does not arguably impact upon social media networks  operating
        outside Iran, especially companies such as Facebook whose main data
        servers are in the United States of America.
    32.  Whilst  the  expert  records  it  is  technically  feasible,  i.e.
        theoretically possible, for the  regional  authorities  to  recover
        deleted content from Facebook several months after an  account  and
        all relevant files have been deleted from the service  platform  if
        they have the necessary software  and  computing  capacity,  it  is
        highly unlikely that any government or industry organisation  could
        have comprehensive copies of all Facebook  content  that  has  been
        generated or accessed globally or even specific to their respective
        region. Relevant to this issue is the use of security  and  privacy
        controls by the  service  providers  and  date  encryption.  If  an
        appellant asserts otherwise, it is for them to establish the  fact.
        No arguable tension is  made  out  between  the  experts  reply  to
        question 1, at paragraph 13 above and paragraph 16.
    33. A modern phenomenon that has arisen with the  expansion  of  social
        media and electronic data in general is that of 'fake  news'.  Fake
        news, or hoax news,  refers  to  false  information  or  propaganda
        published under the guise of being  authentic  news.  Social  media
        sites enable users to create and edit their own material and permit
        members to share information with others.
    34. One of the problems that faces a tribunal faced with what are often
        pages of printouts from an individual's Facebook account is how  to
        assess the authenticity of such material, especially  in  light  of
        the ease by which it can be created, manipulated, and disseminated.


    35. An issue may arise in relation to (a) the weight  to  be  given  to
        that evidence (b) whether  that  evidence  represents  the  alleged
        genuinely held political opinion or belief or characteristic of the
        appellant, and (c) whether even if the material does not  represent
        a genuinely held opinion it may give rise to a real risk on  return
        if that material was to be found by the authorities of the  country
        to which a person is being returned.
    36. In HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon)  [2010]  UKSC  31  the  Supreme  Court
        effectively found that if a person will not  act  in  a  way  which
        invites persecution, preferring to avoid persecution by  concealing
        fundamental parts of his  identity  and  personality,  then  he  is
        entitled to asylum i.e. a situation that may arise if an individual
        has material on their Facebook that  represents  a  genuinely  held
        political opinion or view  the  forms  part  of  their  fundamental
        identity but which that person can avoid a real risk of persecution
        for if such information is deleted.
    37. Evidence from Facebook may appear  as  both  evidence  in  a  first
        asylum claim  and  later  claims  when  earlier  assertions  of  an
        entitlement to international protection have been dismissed  but  a
        claim made on the basis of an alleged  adverse  political  opinion,
        sometimes in a sur place context. When assessing the evidence,  the
        decision-maker will have to consider whether an appellant has shown
        that he or she does  genuinely  hold  those  beliefs  or  political
        opinions the material is said to support, or whether they are  only
        pretending to do so in order to obtain asylum.
    38. It has not been made out that a  person  has  a  right  to  have  a
        Facebook account or any other form  of  social  media  account  and
        possession of an existing account has not been shown to amount to a
        fundamental part of an individual's identity. There is,  therefore,
        in principle no arguable defence to a suggestion that a  person  in
        the United Kingdom with a Facebook account cannot  be  expected  to
        delete that account if the material on  it  does  not  represent  a
        genuinely held belief or opinion. If  an  account  is  deleted,  as
        shown above, it will cease to exist and any posts created  or  sent
        by the account holder  will  be  deleted  and  not  accessible.  If
        information on a Facebook account does represent a  genuinely  held
        aspect of an individual that forms  a  fundamental  part  of  their
        identity then it may offend the HJ (Iran) principles to  expect  an
        individual to delete such data or to act in a  discreet  manner  in
        relation to such data; subject  to  the  guidance  provided  in  HJ
        (Iran) when such an approach may be arguably permissible.
    39. It is also arguable that a religious belief  or  political  opinion
        which is not central but is only marginal to  the  asylum  seeker's
        way of life may be something that he can reasonably be expected  to
        keep quiet about when he goes  back,  or  to  delete  the  Facebook
        account on which material that may reflect such  a  belief  may  be
        found. This is a fact sensitive issue.
    40. The following potential guidance can be given in relation to social
        media produced in the context of protection proceedings:


             1. Any person  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  access  to  the
                Internet and the sites of social media  providers  such  as
                Facebook is able, without precondition, to open and operate
                a social media account.

             2. Social media accounts contain  a  number  of  accessibility
                restrictions the default of which is that  'posts'  can  be
                seen by friends only although an account user  is  able  to
                change the default setting; providing wider  or  restricted
                access to posted content.

             3. If Information is relied upon in support  of  a  protection
                appeal that originates from Facebook and other social media
                sites it will be necessary for  the  person  adducing  such
                evidence  to   establish   the   applicable   accessibility
                restrictions in relation to both that persons  account  and
                any individual messages/posts being relied upon.

             4. If issues arise in relation to such evidence  being  relied
                upon  the  person  adducing  such  material  through  their
                Facebook or other social media account must be  willing  to
                provide a printout of the original timeline to  enable  the
                person assessing such evidence to be  made  aware  of  when
                such evidence came into existence, whether it  was  created
                by the user him or herself or has been  shared  by  another
                Facebook user, and whether the information has been subject
                to any form of manipulation within the user's  Facebook  or
                social media account.

             5. The burden of establishing an entitlement to  international
                protection by,  for  example,  asserting  a  person  has  a
                genuinely  held  adverse  religious  or  political  opinion
                remains on the person so alleging.  If  no  such  genuinely
                held adverse belief or opinion is made out there appears no
                reason, in law, why any potentially offending social  media
                post or the account containing such information  cannot  be
                deleted.

             6. It is not made out that it is a  fundamental  aspect  of  a
                person's identity to own or have  the  use  of  a  personal
                Facebook  or  social  media  account.  No  breach  of   any
                fundamental right or breach of refugee law is made  out  if
                such account is deleted per se.

             7. Evidence adduced from social media is subject to the normal
                procedure rules of the Tribunal including the need for that
                not written in English to  be  accompanied  by  a  properly
                certified translation.

             8. In light of the  comments  regarding  the  difficulties  in
                accessing data on Facebook,  a  person  relying  upon  such
                evidence will be required to establish that there is a real
                risk of the authorities in their home state being  able  to
                access their Facebook account or media posted upon the same
                whilst they create and operate such account from within the
                United Kingdom or elsewhere.

             9. If the appellant asserts that the authorities will be aware
                of their activities  as  a  result  of  posts  made  to  or
                received from accounts adverse to  the  individual  regime,
                and whose content  it  has  been  shown  is  likely  to  be
                monitored by  that  regime  perhaps  allowing  the  regimes
                Internet filtering software to  monitor  individuals  whose
                names appear on such sites, the burden  will  be  upon  the
                appellant to substantiate such an assertion.

            10. It is not made out that mere possession of  a  Facebook  or
                social media account creates a  real  risk  per  se.  If  a
                person has nothing posted on their account that  will  give
                rise  to  a  real  risk  on  return  it  is  arguable  that
                disclosing the existence of the Facebook  account  and  the
                password to the  authorities  will  not  itself  create  an
                actual or implied adverse profile.

            11. If it is not found that  the  alleged  adverse  profile  is
                genuinely held and  it  would  not  breach  the  HJ  (Iran)
                principle for a person to delete their Facebook  or  social
                media account, the fact posts may  have  been  shared  with
                other individuals will not automatically  create  any  real
                risk in light of the fact that the deletion or  closure  of
                the appellant's account will have the automatic  effect  of
                deleting  all  posts  they  have  sent  and  removing   any
                reference to them.

            12. The fact a Facebook user may set their privacy settings  to
                'public' does not mean the content  will  be  automatically
                disclosed to other Facebook users. This setting means  that
                anybody  conducting  a  search  against  the  appellant  or
                related link to an article with this privacy will  be  able
                to see the article whilst it remains in existence, no more.

            13. Deletion of a Facebook account will only  have  the  effect
                set out in the report of the expert of deleting the content
                of the users account and all other  posts  that  they  have
                sent.  It  will  have  no  impact  upon  the   entries   on
                individuals Facebook account that had  been  screen-printed
                or converted into another format, such as a hard copy.




Discussion of the application of the above guidance to  the  facts  of  this
appeal



    41.  The  respondents  Country  Policy  and  Information   Note   Iran:
        Journalists and internet based media,  Version  2.0,  October  2016
        contains the following:


             2.2 Assessment of risk to the journalist,  blogger  or  online
             activist


             2.2.1 The Iranian authorities  severely  restrict  freedom  of
             speech  and  press   freedom.   It   reviews   all   potential
             publications - including foreign printed materials - prior  to
             their domestic release and  may  deem  potential  publications
             unpublishable, remove text or require  word  substitution  for
             terms deemed  inappropriate  (see  Legal  position).  However,
             simply being subject to such censorship  does  not  of  itself
             give rise to a protection need.


             2.2.2  The  Iranian  authorities  reportedly  harass,  detain,
             abuse, torture, and use vaguely worded criminal provisions  to
             prosecute, flog  and  otherwise  severely  punish  publishers,
             editors and journalists. This also includes those involved  in
             internet-based media, such as bloggers  and  users  of  social
             media, where their  reporting  is,  or  is  perceived  to  be,
             critical of the government or offensive  to  public  morality.
             Perceived  government  critics   including   journalists   and
             bloggers are at risk of torture and are likely to be  held  in
             poor detention  conditions,  some  of  which  are  capable  of
             breaching the Article 3 ECHR threshold (see Treatment  by  the
             authorities and the country policy  and  information  note  on
             Iran: prison conditions).


             2.2.3 The  authorities  monitor  the  press,  internet  cafes,
             cyberspace  and  private   communications   including   social
             networking sites and messaging apps, and charge  persons  with
             crimes against national  security  and  insulting  the  regime
             based on  letters,  e-mails,  and  other  public  and  private
             communications (see Internet access).


             2.2.4 Since the Iranian Government is not able to monitor  the
             activities of every individual, decision makers must  consider
             the level of involvement of the person,  in  addition  to  any
             political activity that the person may  have  previously  been
             involved with in Iran.


             2.2.5 Decision makers must be satisfied that persons  claiming
             to be journalists or bloggers are  able  to  demonstrate  that
             their activities have brought, or  will  bring  them,  to  the
             adverse attention of the Iranian authorities. Decision  makers
             should give consideration to all relevant  factors,  including
             in particular:   . the  subject  matter  of  the  material  in
             question;  . the language and tone  used;   .  the  method  of
             communication;  . the reach of the publication (i.e. how  many
             people  are  they  communicating  with);   .   the   publicity
             attracted;  . the frequency of such publications;  . any  past
             adverse interest by the authorities.


             2.2.6 With regard to sur  place  activities,  decision  makers
             must assess risk taking account of factors  similar  to  those
             set out in the country guidance case of BA  (Demonstrators  in
             Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).


    42. Current guidance provided by the Upper Tribunal is to be  found  in
        AB and Others (internet activity - state of evidence)  Iran  [2015]
        UKUT 257 (IAC) in which it was held that the  material  put  before
        the tribunal did not disclose a  sufficient  evidential  basis  for
        giving country or  other  guidance  upon  what,  reliably,  can  be
        expected in terms of the reception  in  Iran  for  those  returning
        otherwise than with  a  "regular"  passport  in  relation  to  whom
        interest may be excited from the authorities into internet activity
        as might be revealed by an examination of blogging  activity  or  a
        Facebook account. However, the determination was reported  so  that
        the evidence considered by the Upper Tribunal is available  in  the
        public domain.
    43. In EZ v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] CSOH  30,
        the Court of Session repeated that AB was not  a  country  guidance
        case.  To say that a great deal of activity was not  necessary  for
        someone to become prominent (which  was  the  import  of  the  last
        sentence in paragraph 466 of AB) was not the same  as  saying  that
        all one need show was  that  the  applicant  carried  on  a  little
        activity and the risk could not be  excluded  that  he  had  become
        known to the authorities.  The onus was always on the applicant  to
        establish his claim.  The Court of Session thereupon found that the
        Secretary of State for the Home Department had  not  erred  in  her
        refusal to accept further submissions as a fresh claim where  inter
        alia there was reliance on four Facebook posts but it was not known
        how widely circulated those posts had been  or  whether  the  posts
        were accessible to the public as opposed to Facebook friends.
    44. The appellant in this case has a Facebook account and has  provided
        a number of documents he says have been printed from that account.
    45. In relation to a  person  such  as  the  appellant  who  left  Iran
        illegally, in SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  Iran
        CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) it was held that (i)   An  Iranian  male
        whom it is sought to  return  to  Iran,  who  does  not  possess  a
        passport, will be returnable on a  laissez  passer,  which  he  can
        obtain  from  the  Iranian  Embassy  on  proof  of   identity   and
        nationality; (ii) An Iranian male in respect  of  whom  no  adverse
        interest has previously been manifested by the Iranian  State  does
        not face a real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3  rights
        on return to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or
        being a failed asylum seeker.  No such risk exists at the  time  of
        questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
        exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have been  established.   In
        particular, there is not a real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
        imprisonment.
    46. In SSH and HR, the appellants were Kurds  and  the  Upper  Tribunal
        said that it was not suggested to them  that  an  individual  faced
        risk on return on the sole basis of being Kurdish.   Being  Kurdish
        was  relevant  to  how  the  returnee  would  be  treated  by   the
        authorities but no examples had been provided of  ill-treatment  of
        returnees with no relevant  adverse  interest  factors  other  than
        their Kurdish ethnicity and the Upper Tribunal concluded  that  the
        evidence did not show a risk of ill-treatment  to  such  returnees,
        though they accepted that it might be an exacerbating factor for  a
        returnee otherwise of interest.
    47. In MA v SSHD [2017] CSOH 134 the First-tier Tribunal had  concluded
        that the appellant had been a supporter of the  Kurdish  cause  but
        had not been a member of KDPI, that he had involved himself in  sur
        place activity in the UK to the extent of attendance at one meeting
        and contact with the KDPI but that was highly unlikely to cause him
        to be of  interest  to  the  authorities.   The  Court  of  Session
        concluded that it  had  been  reasonably  open  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal in the light of country guidance to find  that  even  full
        disclosure by MA of his activities (when questioned at the  airport
        by the authorities) would not create an  interest  in  him  as  his
        activities were of such a low level.
    48. The appellant in this appeal  sought  continue  to  rely  upon  his
        witness statement of 30 September 2016 which was that considered by
        the original Judge the First-tier Tribunal. The account set out  in
        that statement was rejected by the  Judge  in  [28  -  30]  of  the
        earlier determination in the following terms:


             28.  The Appellants ready records to dishonesty  leads  me  to
                  reject his account. I do not accept that he fled  Iran  in
                  the circumstances  he  claims  and  conclude  that  he  is
                  economic migrant.


             29.  I find that his attendance at the KDPI  gathering  was  a
                  further attempt to bolster his claim. He was not  involved
                  in politics in Iran and is not  a  member  of  the  party.
                  There is no evidence that he was a singer in Iran. He  has
                  provided what he says is a picture from the PDKI  Facebook
                  page together with a translation which says  "leaders  are
                  identified". There is no mention of the Appellant and I am
                  not persuaded that he can be identified.


             30.  He also provided picture from what he  says  is  his  own
                  Facebook page together with the transcript. It  refers  to
                  the anniversary of "our party" and an exhortation to stand
                  against the "mollas". He was not a member of the party  he
                  describes as "ours" and I am satisfied that his  behaviour
                  was opportunistic. I note that the Facebook pages  in  his
                  name and that  he  can  be  identified  from  the  picture
                  provided to me.


    49. The appellant's reliance upon the same  evidence  does  not  itself
        justify a departure from these original findings. In the appellants
        oral evidence, he claims  that  he  does  appear  on  the  Facebook
        website of the KDPI singing a song praising this group and  wanting
        to be part of them. The appellant claimed to have a reputation as a
        singer amongst friends and family. The appellant  was  asked  about
        whether the songs he was singing were banned in Iran  to  which  he
        claimed those in Teheran were not published as no one is allowed to
        sing political songs, except Kurdish  folksongs  could  be  at  the
        Kurdish New Year when not  banned.  When  asked  whether  he  sings
        political songs the appellant claimed that he did but not publicly,
        but when his amongst friends, as he would not be  allowed  to  sing
        political songs in the public area. The appellant claims  the  song
        he was singing was in support of both Kurds  and  the  conflict  in
        Kurdistan. When asked whether before Iran the appellant  considered
        himself to be a political opponent of the regime, he claimed he did
        not consider celebrating in Iran but had private thoughts, and that
        the job he had did not allow him to do more.
    50. The appellant was also asked about his statement made on 17 January
        2017 which he confirmed to be true. The appellant was  asked  about
        his own Facebook account and whether he was aware  of  the  various
        settings available on the same, to which  he  claimed  he  was  not
        familiar but stated he could set  up  the  account,  download,  and
        share data. The  appellant  was  asked  about  photographs  on  his
        account noted as being 'public' which the  appellant  confirmed  he
        had noted but claimed not to know what it meant.
    51. The appellant claims he appears on one of the  photographs  on  his
        account at an event amongst friends  when  he  was  singing.  Other
        photos in June 2016 were taken  in  Tehran  although  in  reply  to
        questioning the appellant claimed the photos were taken in 2013 but
        put on his Facebook page on 9 June 2016.  When  the  appellant  was
        asked when he  opened  his  Facebook  account  he  claimed  it  was
        September 2016. When asked how he could put  a  photograph  on  his
        Facebook page in June 2016 if the account had not been opened until
        September 2016 he claimed that he may have  been  wrong  about  the
        date he opened his account. Mr Bates asked  whether  the  appellant
        wanted time to reconsider but he claimed he sure it was  2016.  The
        appellant was referred to paragraph 12 of his witness statement  in
        which he claimed he did not have a Facebook account but had one  in
        September 2016 which he had confirmed was true.
    52. The appellant claimed a friend helped him to set  up  his  Facebook
        account but that  he  had  not  discussed  privacy  settings.   The
        appellant claimed in addition to singing on the KDPI Facebook  page
        he also participated in  active  demonstrations  as  shown  on  his
        Facebook account. When the appellant was asked why such  activities
        only  appear  on  his  Facebook  account  and  not  elsewhere,  the
        appellant claimed he did not have  time  to  publicise  information
        with friends. The appellant claimed to have met Facebook friends in
        person but claimed, when asked, not to have asked them  to  provide
        witness statement in support of his claim  even  though  he  claims
        they were aware of his beliefs and difficulties.
    53. The appellant claimed to support the Kurdish cause.  The  appellant
        confirmed his Facebook  friends  write  comments  on  his  Facebook
        account such as 'like' and sometime share items the  appellant  has
        published.
    54. The appellant claimed the KDPI page  was  popular  and  famous  and
        visited and that lots of videos had been published.  The  appellant
        claimed there was an organised event and  they  did  not  need  his
        permission to post videos of him singing.
    55. The appellant has maintained his claim before  the  Upper  Tribunal
        that he is a genuine activist whose made posts on Facebook  despite
        early having been found not to be credible.
    56.  Having  considered  the  report   of   the   appellant's   expert,
        particularly in relation to the issue regarding privacy settings in
        the Facebook privacy statement, I find the appellants claim not  to
        know anything about this aspect lacks  credibility.  The  appellant
        set up his account and claims to be able to  post  entries  to  his
        account and share posts that he receives which requires a degree of
        knowledge of how to operate the Facebook system. The expert  report
        also confirms that the default position when an individual sets  up
        a Facebook account is 'friends'  rather  than  'public'  indicating
        that this must have been changed in  relation  to  those  posts  in
        which the appellant appears to have allocated the lowest  level  of
        privacy setting.
    57. It is accepted from the expert report that as  a  Facebook  account
        owner the appellant has full  control  of  all  editing  privileges
        which could also include changing subject matters and other aspects
        of a post.
    58. The appellant's credibility was also undermined in relation to  his
        claim to have posted an item to his Facebook account in  June  2016
        even though he did not open that account until September 2016.
    59. I accept the evidence shows  that  posts  on  a  person's  Facebook
        account can be manipulated and that the failure of the appellant to
        provide the activity log relating to his  Facebook  account,  which
        would detail any changes  made  by  him,  was  not  provided.  This
        document would have shown the date anything had been  changed  even
        if the exact nature of the changes was not disclosed.
    60. The appellant also claims to be a supporter of the KDPI and to have
        attended an event and had a video posted of him singing. The First-
        tier Tribunal Judge comments upon this element of  the  claim  made
        before that Tribunal, but there  is  nothing  from  this  group  or
        otherwise in support of the appellants claim.
    61. It is accepted that the appellant's account shows comments such  as
        'likes' and 'accepts' but nothing more. Mr  Bates  referred  to  an
        entry on the 18th April which could be a comment but which had  not
        been translated.
    62. It is also the case the appellant failed to produce any evidence to
        show how many times people had viewed his Facebook account  but  it
        is noted the First-tier Tribunal found the appellant  had  no  pre-
        existing profile. I accept the submission this is relevant  as  the
        appellant's  own  Facebook  account  is  evidence  of   a   limited
        involvement or spreading of his 'message'.
    63. The earlier adverse findings are preserved and I find the appellant
        has failed to establish  that  what  is  entered  on  his  Facebook
        account represents a genuinely held political view adverse  to  the
        Iranian regime or as a supporter of the Kurdish cause. I find it is
        a manufactured Facebook account for the purpose of enhancing a weak
        asylum claim; not reflective of a fundamentally held belief.
    64. I find it is reasonable in all  the  circumstances,  and  will  not
        contravene the HJ (Iran) principle for the appellant to close  down
        his Facebook account which will have the  effect  of  removing  all
        posts he has created.
    65. In relation to the point of  return  I  support  the  finding  made
        earlier that the appellant is no more than an economic migrant  and
        a failed asylum seeker. In relation  to  the  risk  on  return,  as
        such,: in BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on  return)  Iran  CG
        [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) the Tribunal held that  (i)  Given  the  large
        numbers of those who  demonstrate  here  and  the  publicity  which
        demonstrators receive, for example on Facebook, combined  with  the
        inability of the Iranian  Government to monitor all  returnees  who
        have been involved in demonstrations here, regard must  be  had  to
        the level of involvement of the individual  here  as  well  as  any
        political activity which the  individual might have  been  involved
        in Iran before seeking asylum  in  Britain;  (ii)  (a)     Iranians
        returning to Iran are screened on arrival.  A  returnee  who  meets
        the profile of an  activist  may  be  detained  while  searches  of
        documentation are made. Students, particularly those who have known
        political profiles are likely to be questioned as well as those who
        have exited illegally. (b) There is not a real risk of  persecution
        for those who have exited Iran illegally or  are  merely  returning
        from Britain. The  conclusions  of  the  Tribunal  in  the  country
        guidance case of SB (risk on return -illegal exit) Iran  CG  [2009]
        UKAIT 00053 are followed and endorsed. (c)   There is  no  evidence
        of the use of facial recognition technology at  the  Imam  Khomeini
        International airport, but there are a number of officials who  may
        be able to  recognize  up  to  200  faces  at  any  one  time.  The
        procedures used by security at the airport  are  haphazard.  It  is
        therefore possible  that  those  whom  the  regime  might  wish  to
        question would not come to the attention of the regime on  arrival.
        If, however, information is known about  their  activities  abroad,
        they might well be picked up for questioning and/or transferred  to
        a special court near the airport in Tehran after they have returned
        home. (iii) It is important to  consider  the  level  of  political
        involvement before considering the   likelihood of  the  individual
        coming to the attention of the authorities and  the  priority  that
        the Iranian regime would give to tracing  him.  It  is  only  after
        considering those factors that the issue of whether or not there is
        a real risk of his facing persecution on return  can  be  assessed.
        (iv) The following are  relevant  factors  to  be  considered  when
        assessing risk on return having regard to sur place activities  (a)
        Nature of sur place activity. Theme of demonstrations - what do the
        demonstrators want (e.g.  reform  of  the  regime  through  to  its
        violent overthrow); how will they be characterised by  the  regime?
        Role in demonstrations and political profile - can  the  person  be
        described as a  leader;  mobiliser  (e.g.  addressing  the  crowd),
        organiser (e.g. leading the chanting); or simply a  member  of  the
        crowd; if the latter is he active or passive (e.g. does he carry  a
        banner); what is his motive, and is this relevant to the profile he
        will have in the eyes of the regime.  Extent of participation - has
        the person attended one or two demonstrations or is  he  a  regular
        participant? Publicity attracted - has  a  demonstration  attracted
        media coverage in the United Kingdom or the home country; nature of
        that publicity (quality of images;  outlets  where  stories  appear
        etc)? (b) Identification  risk.  Surveillance  of  demonstrators  -
        assuming the regime aims to identify demonstrators against  it  how
        does it do so, through, filming them, having agents who  mingle  in
        the  crowd,  reviewing  images/recordings  of  demonstrations  etc?
        Regime's capacity to identify individuals - does  the  regime  have
        advanced technology (e.g. for facial recognition); does it allocate
        human resources to fit names to faces in  the  crowd?  (c)  Factors
        triggering inquiry/action on return. Profile - is the person  known
        as a committed opponent or someone  with  a  significant  political
        profile; does he fall within a category which the regime regards as
        especially objectionable? Immigration history - how did the  person
        leave the country (illegally; type of visa); where has  the  person
        been when abroad; is the timing and method of return more likely to
        lead to inquiry and/or being detained for more than a short  period
        and ill-treated (overstayer; forced return)?  (d)  Consequences  of
        identification.  Is  there  differentiation  between  demonstrators
        depending on the level of their political profile  adverse  to  the
        regime? (e) Identification risk on return. Matching  identification
        to  person  -  if  a  person  is  identified  is  that  information
        systematically stored and used; are  border  posts  geared  to  the
        task?
    66. In SF and Others v Sweden (Application no. 52077/10)  ECtHR  (Fifth
        Section)15 May 2012 the ECtHR commented that the  relevant  country
        information  confirmed   that   Iranian   authorities   effectively
        monitored internet communications and regime  critics  both  within
        and outside of Iran.  A specific intelligence "Cyber Unit" targeted
        regime critics on the internet.   Further,  Iranians  returning  to
        Iran were screened on arrival.  There were additional factors  such
        as the fact that  the  Appellant  was  a  well-known  musician  and
        prominent Iranian athlete also increased  the  risk  of  his  being
        identified which taken with his  record  in  Iran  indicated  those
        resources might bring him to the authorities' attention.
    67. It is not made out that the appellant is a well-known  musician  or
        prominent individual in Iran or  that  there  is  anything  in  his
        profile that increases the risk of his being identified on  return.
        There is no evidence the appellant has been subject to any  adverse
        interest from the Iranian authorities before  he  left  Iran,  such
        that may create a risk of being identified  and  receiving  greater
        attention.
    68. It is not made out the Iranian authorities would have  the  ability
        or desire to access the appellant's Facebook account and it is  not
        made out that even if questioned at  the  "pinch  point"  that  the
        authorities in Iran would have any knowledge of those matters  that
        the appellant claims will place him at risk. I find the  appellants
        claimed political allegiances do not  represent  a  view  genuinely
        held by him but are matters created for the purposes  of  enhancing
        an otherwise non-existent asylum claim. I find the  appellant  will
        not be required to reveal to the Iranian authorities he  previously
        had  a  Facebook  account.  I  find  it  is  reasonable   and   not
        contravening any established  principles  to  delete  the  Facebook
        account in the appellant name, on the available  evidence.   It  is
        not made out the Iranian authorities have the capacity  or  ability
        to access a Facebook account once it has been closed down  and  the
        expert's report quite clearly indicates that  for  individuals  and
        internationals third parties, such as governments, this task is not
        feasible.
    69. I find the appellant has failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof
        upon him to the required standard to establish he is anything other
        than a failed asylum seeker, and accordingly dismiss this appeal.


Decision

    70. I remake the decision as follows. The appeal is dismissed.




   Anonymity.


    71. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8 March 2018












