
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03591/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019                    |On 11 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     RS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Roopnarine-Davies, promulgated on 18 June 2019.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 2 September 2019



Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is  reiterated  below  because
    the appellant is vulnerable owing to a mental health condition.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 15 April 2005,  with  leave
    to enter as a working  holidaymaker,  valid  until  5  April  2007.  An
    application made by the appellant for further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student was  refused  with  no  right  of  appeal  on  24  April  2007.
    Thereafter he remained in the  United  Kingdom  without  leave.  On  30
    January 2014, the appellant applied for asylum and it is the refusal of
    that claim which  is  the  subject  of  this  appeal.  The  appellant's
    protection claim is based on his support for the LTTE, that his support
    became known to  the  authorities  and  this  led  to  his  arrest  and
    detention in Sri Lanka for a short period  in  2000.  He  was  arrested
    again in 2005 and detained for a longer period because the  authorities
    suspected that he had resumed his activities. He  fears  that  the  Sri
    Lankan  authorities,  who  had  visited  the  family  home  after   his
    departure, are still looking for him.  The  appellant  also  relies  on
    medical evidence which raises a risk of suicide as well  as  sur  place
    political activity in the form of attending demonstrations.

 4. The respondent refused the appellant's protection claim on 9 April 2019
    for  the   following   reasons.   Reference   was   made   to   several
    inconsistencies between the  accounts  provided  by  the  appellant  in
    interview as well as in his supporting  evidence;  a  lack  of  clarity
    regarding many aspects of his claim and a document verification  report
    (DVR) which stated that the evidence of court proceedings  relied  upon
    by the appellant was not genuine. Consequently, the respondent did  not
    accept that the appellant was  a  member  of  the  LTTE,  that  he  had
    experienced the issues he claimed or that he was involved in  political
    activity in the United Kingdom. The appellant's claim under Articles  3
    and 8 based on his mental health was refused as  it  was  not  accepted
    that his removal to Sri Lanka would amount to a  breach  of  his  human
    rights on the basis of his medical condition.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  did  not
    give evidence because a consultant psychiatrist had stated that he  was
    unfit to do so. Therefore, the appeal proceeded by way of  submissions.
    The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  was  arrested  on  the  first
    occasion but not the  second.  The  judge  further  accepted  that  the
    appellant was suffering from PTSD and depression  but  did  not  accept
    that he would be at real risk of suicide on return to Sri Lanka.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of  appeal  argued  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's claim subsequent to his detention in 2000 was fundamentally
    flawed for the following reasons.

 7. Firstly, the judge had made mistakes of fact. These were  finding  that
    the letter from the Human Rights Commission  had  been  tampered  with;
    noting differing spelling in translated documents and  that  the  judge
    failed to  have  regard  to  the  appellant's  evidence  regarding  the
    whereabouts of the appellant's cousin, N, prior to his death.

 8. Secondly, it was argued that the judge did not  identify  the  internal
    consistencies she referred to. There was said to an absence of  reasons
    for negative conclusions; that the judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant had given an inconsistent account of his second arrest; erred
    in finding that it was implausible that  he  was  granted  bail  if  of
    interest; that the appellant's evidence regarding how he left Sri Lanka
    was not taken into consideration and that the reference  to  an  arrest
    warrant was misplaced because the  appellant  had  never  seen  such  a
    document or produced it in support of his claim.

 9. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  sought,  with  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul commenting that the appellant may well  struggle
    to show that the arguable errors were material.

10. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

11. I heard brief submissions from the parties, who agreed that  the  judge
    erred in making a reference to an arrest warrant,  in  connection  with
    the DVR. Neither had had sight of such a document and the appellant had
    not produced one. Mr  Singh  emphasised  that  the  respondent  was  in
    difficulty in defending the decision, that  the  issue  of  the  arrest
    warrant was relevant to the credibility findings and the matter  should
    be heard afresh.

Decision on error of law

12. At [41] of the decision, the judge refers to the DVR  produced  by  the
    respondent in concluding that  the  appellant's  oral  and  documentary
    evidence was inconsistent with the document verified by the respondent.
    She further notes  that  the  appellant  had  made  little  attempt  to
    challenge the DVR. Having considered the documents on file, I can  find
    no trace of the "warrant of arrest" referred to in the DVR.  The  judge
    did not address the fact that the documents produced by  the  appellant
    did not include an arrest warrant and therefore her reliance on  a  DVR
    stating that an arrest warrant was not genuine meant that she fell into
    error. This error  is  material  because  the  majority  of  the  other
    credibility findings relate to the contents  of  the  appellant's  visa
    application when he applied to come to the United Kingdom as a  working
    holidaymaker and the findings of  the  judge  who  allowed  his  appeal
    against the refusal of that  application.  It  may  well  be  that  the
    details of those proceedings have limited utility in his asylum appeal.
    In addition, at [43] of the appellant's  witness  statement  which  was
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  he  expresses  concerns  as  to  the
    involvement of the police in the document registry as well as with what
    was seen or verified by the British High Commission. The  DVR  was  the
    central reason for the refusal of his protection  claim  and  ought  to
    have been considered with anxious scrutiny.

  13. While mindful of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
      Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the appellant  has
      yet to have an adequate consideration of  his  asylum  appeal  at  the
      First-tier Tribunal and it would be unfair  to  deprive  him  of  such
      consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of one day by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 8 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




