
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03570/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2018                          |On 7 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              MN (AFGHANISTAN)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Karen Reid, Counsel instructed by Lupins
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Wilson sitting at Hatton Cross on 24  October  2017)  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to
    recognise him as a refugee on account of him  being  the  target  of  a
    blood feud arising from his paternal uncle being forced to work  as  an
    interpreter for the Taliban  in  the  locality  of  the  family's  home
    village in Parwan Province in about 1999.  The  appellant's  claim  was
    that local villagers opposed to the Taliban had killed  his  father  in
    revenge for his paternal uncle's perceived treachery, and that  he  was
    now at risk himself, as he had reached adulthood.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 8 December 2017 Judge Juliet Grant-Hutchison granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         It is arguable that the Judge has  erred  in  law  and  misdirected
         himself as follows:- (a) by failing to properly apply the burden of
         the standard of proof in circumstances where the  appellant  was  a
         minor at the date of his asylum application and interview and  that
         the facts which establishes his claim occurred when he was a minor;
         (b) by failing to give adequate  reasons  why  the  explanation  of
         appellant's  uncle  concerning  a  contradiction  in  his  evidence
         undermined the appellant's  credibility;  (c)  the  fact  that  the
         appellant's  father  was  killed  is  a  central  element  in   the
         appellant's claim but the Judge failed to give adequate reasons why
         he rejects the appellant's evidence in this regard; (d) by  failing
         to consider the risk the appellant faces by those  who  killed  his
         father on return in addition to being westernised; (e)  by  failing
         to give adequate reasons why he does not want to  accept  that  the
         appellant's maternal uncle had disappeared i.e. that  he  has  fled
         for his own safety or how the appellant owing to his lack  of  age,
         lack of support and clan structure would make it difficult for  him
         to return to certain areas including Kabul  and  (f)  in  terms  of
         Article 8 by failing to consider  whether,  given  the  appellant's
         uncle took on the role of father figure in his  life  when  he  was
         still a minor, that he had a family life such  that  Article  8  is
         engaged, and that  interference  with  the  appellant's  rights  to
         private life, which he accepts, is proportionate.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant's age is a matter of dispute.  The appellant says that he
    was born in Afghanistan on 2  March  2000.   But  the  initial  Merton-
    compliant age assessment conducted by Kent Social Services decided that
    his true date of birth was 2 March 1997.  A second Merton-compliant age
    assessment conducted by Kent Services on 18 February  2015  produced  a
    revised date of birth of 2 March 1998.

 4. The appellant's claim is that he originates from Bayani Aughal  village
    in Parwan Province.  The Taliban came to his village when he was young,
    and forced his paternal uncle to show them  around  because  the  local
    villagers spoke Farsi and not Dari.  Later, the villagers came  looking
    for his uncle, but when they could not find him, they killed his father
    instead.  He could not remember exactly when his father died and he did
    not know how old he was at  the  time.   But  he  understood  that  the
    villagers had killed his father in revenge for the killings  which  the
    Taliban had carried out locally.  His paternal uncle  fled  Afghanistan
    and came to the UK.  (His paternal uncle is recorded as having  arrived
    in the UK in January 2000).

 5. He and his mother went to live with her brother,  "MU",  in  Jalalabad.
    He was married with two children, and  he  supplied  local  shops  with
    goods.  The appellant was brought up in  Jalalabad,  and  attended  the
    Kabul international  school.   This  was  a  private  school,  and  his
    maternal uncle paid the school fees.  His mother died  on  29  February
    2012 due to ill-health.  His maternal uncle decided  that,  as  he  was
    older, he was now more of a target for  his  father's  enemies.  So  he
    arranged for an agent to bring him from Afghanistan  to  the  UK.   The
    maternal uncle gave him his paternal uncle's telephone number  so  that
    he could contact his paternal uncle on arrival.

 6. On 25 March 2017, the respondent  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  to
    recognise the appellant as a refugee.  The account which he gave of the
    circumstances of his father's death was not consistent with that  given
    by his paternal uncle.  In addition, by his own  evidence,  his  father
    did not visit the neighbouring village with his uncle and the  Taliban;
    and his uncle was taken by  the  Taliban  against  his  will.   It  was
    therefore not understood how people from another village would be  able
    to identify his father as a Taliban collaborator,  or  why  they  would
    target and kill him in place of his brother.

 7. So it was not accepted that his father was killed by local villagers in
    revenge for his uncle assisting the Taliban.

 8. On the issue of risk  on  return,  he  had  never  been  threatened  or
    contacted by the local villagers whilst living in Jalalabad,  where  he
    had been able to live a normal life, including attending school.

 9. On the issue of internal relocation, he said that he was too  young  to
    return to Afghanistan, as he would be unsupported,  without  work,  and
    therefore he would be vulnerable and would become destitute.   However,
    he would be returned to Kabul as an  adult.   He  had  not  provided  a
    reasonable explanation as to why he would be unable to relocate  within
    Kabul.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Wilson.   The  Judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant and from his paternal  uncle,
    who had been granted refugee status and who was now a British citizen.

11. In his subsequent decision, the Judge held at paragraph [13]  that  the
    evidence of the paternal uncle was unconvincing.  This was firstly  due
    to the vagueness of how he knew that  the  appellant's  father  was  at
    risk, and also because of the "clear contradiction"  of  where  he  had
    learned of the father's alleged fate.

12. At paragraph [15], the Judge held that the assertion that the appellant
    was now at risk in Jalalabad was further diminished by the  absence  of
    any evidence from the maternal uncle.   He  did  not  accept  that  his
    maternal uncle had suddenly vanished and could not be contacted.

13. The Judge went on to find that he  was  not  satisfied,  to  the  lower
    standard of proof, that  the  appellant's  father  was  killed  in  the
    circumstances  claimed  by  the  appellant  and  his  paternal   uncle.
    However, he accepted that the appellant's father was  dead;  and  that,
    since a very young age, the appellant had been brought up in Jalalabad.
     Accordingly, he held that any assessment of risk on return  should  be
    on the basis that Jalalabad was the  appellant's  home  area,  not  the
    village in Parwan Province.

14. At paragraph [21], he did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  would  be
    without any support on return.  He found that his  maternal  uncle  was
    still living in Jalalabad.  He did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
    family was at particular  risk  from  the  Afghan  government,  as  his
    paternal uncle only claimed to have been an interpreter for the Taliban
    - "not even a fighter" - and that was some 17 years ago.

15. At paragraph [22], the Judge found that the  appellant's  age  and  the
    small period of time that he had spent in the UK meant  that  he  would
    not be treated as westernised.  There was no reason to depart from  the
    second age assessment, which  made  the  appellant  19  years  of  age.
    Accordingly, there would be no risk for him on return  to  Afghanistan,
    even if he chose to reside in Kabul.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

16. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Reid developed the arguments advanced in  the  application  for
    permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   On  behalf  of  the
    respondent, Mr Walker adopted the line taken  in  a  Rule  24  response
    settled by a colleague.   In  summary,  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  had   directed   himself   appropriately.    Throughout   the
    determination, the Judge was fully aware that at the  time  of  arrival
    the appellant was a  minor.   There  was  no  challenge  to  the  Judge
    accepting that the appellant was now 19 years old.   The  grounds  were
    simply an expression of disagreement, arguing that more  weight  should
    have been given to the evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his  maternal
    uncle.

Discussion

17. There are four principal grounds of appeal, as identified by Ms Reid.

The Burden and Standard of Proof

18. The first ground is that the Judge failed properly to apply the  burden
    of the standard of proof in circumstances where  the  appellant  was  a
    minor at the date of his asylum application and  interview,  and  where
    the facts which established his claim occurred when he was a minor.

19. I find that this ground is not made out.  As  stated  in  the  Rule  24
    response, the Judge made  frequent  reference  in  the  course  of  his
    decision to the fact that the appellant was a minor at the time of  his
    arrival in the UK.  The  Judge  noted  that  there  was  a  discrepancy
    between the account given by the appellant in his  screening  interview
    and his subsequent version of events.  In his screening interview,  the
    appellant said that the Taliban had taken both his father and his uncle
    to a neighbouring village.  In his witness statement of September 2014,
    he corrected this claim, saying that, since he had spoken to his  uncle
    in the UK, he had learned that the Taliban only took his uncle, and not
    his father.  The Judge  did  not  hold  this  discrepancy  against  the
    appellant  in  his  assessment  of  credibility.   The  Judge  held  at
    paragraph [8] that any assessment of credibility, as well as looking at
    the background evidence, had to have  primary  regard  to  the  uncle's
    evidence. Accordingly, as the Judge rightly recognised, the credibility
    of the core claim  pivoted  upon  the  uncle's  evidence,  not  on  the
    appellant's evidence.

20. At paragraph [12], the Judge correctly set out the  lower  standard  of
    proof which he needed to apply.  The Judge continued: "Additionally  of
    course on any assessment the appellant was a minor when he arrived  and
    he is  relying  on  what  he  was  told,  not  on  events  he  actually
    witnessed."  Ms Reid submits that this self-direction is flawed as  the
    Judge did not make reference to the need for the liberal application of
    the benefit of the doubt.  However, the Upper Tribunal in  KS  (Benefit
    of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 00552 (IAC), at paragraph [99],  declined  to
    accept the submission that the liberal application of  the  benefit  of
    the doubt was "a cardinal principle".

21.  The Judge was not required to direct himself that he should give  more
    credence to the appellant's core claim simply because he  was  a  minor
    when he presented his claim, or simply  because  he  was  too  young  -
    indeed, on his paternal uncle's account, he had not yet been born -  to
    have had first-hand knowledge of the events which allegedly led to  his
    father being killed.

Alleged Flaws in the Assessment of Credibility

22. Ground 2 is that the Judge's assessment of credibility  was  flawed  in
    three respects.

The Judge's Approach to the Country Expert Evidence

23. At paragraph [5] of his  decision,  the  Judge  addressed  the  Country
    Expert report of Dr Giustozzi. He noted  the  expert's  evidence  that,
    during the course of the fighting in 2001, many former members  of  the
    Hizbi-i-Islami changed sides when it became clear that the Taliban were
    losing.  He also noted that the expert set  out  his  view  that  blood
    feuds frequently arose in Afghanistan; that they were of long duration;
    and that young male children were not at risk.  Although  he  carefully
    noted this view, the Judge observed that on a general basis  it  seemed
    at variance with the shift of allegiance of clans and tribes amidst the
    continuing conflict in Afghanistan,  "and  in  any  event  the  primary
    position of  the  respondent  is  that  the  asserted  killing  of  the
    appellant's father did not occur as suggested."  The  Judge  held  that
    the expert's report could not  of  course  assist  on  that  "basis  of
    dispute".

24. Ms Reid submits that the Judge has adopted an  incorrect  approach,  as
    the  expert's  report  could  assist  in   establishing   whether   the
    appellant's account was consistent with the background  evidence  about
    the situation that existed in Afghanistan.

25. I do not consider that the Judge erred in law in his  approach  to  the
    expert evidence.  The Judge acknowledged that the expert supported  the
    appellant's account of future risk, as his account was  congruent  with
    the prevalence of blood feuds of long duration in Afghanistan, and  the
    fact that male members of the families affected by the blood feud  only
    become a potential target when they approach  adulthood.   However,  it
    was open to the Judge to pick  up  on  another  strand  in  the  expert
    evidence. This was that, in 2001, in order to  avoid  retribution  from
    advancing troops of Jamiat-i-Islami and other allied factions, a number
    of people (including Pashtuns) switched sides  as  soon  as  it  became
    obvious that the Taliban were going to lose.  Some commanders of Hizbi-
    i-Islami who supported the Taliban had  begun  switching  over  to  the
    opposition even before 9/11, as their relationship with the Taliban was
    getting sour.  Local and national  leaders  of  Hizbi-i-Islami  started
    drifting towards President Karzai in 2003 and 2004.

26. The significance of this aspect of the background evidence  is  that  a
    significant number of people who had visibly supported the Taliban in a
    high profile way were successfully able to  switch  allegiance  to  the
    enemies of the Taliban in order to avoid retribution.  Accordingly,  to
    that extent, the appellant's claim that he faced retribution from anti-
    Taliban villagers in  Parwan  Province,  just  because  his  uncle  had
    collaborated with the Taliban in 1999, ran counter  to  the  background
    evidence pointing up the relative ease with which people  could  switch
    sides, without their past allegiance  to  the  losing  side  condemning
    themselves and their male descendants to being  permanently  associated
    with the losing side and a constant target for retribution.

27. Dr Giustozzi  assumes  that  the  appellant's  uncle  and  father  were
    perceived to be "key supporters" of the Taliban. Dr Giustozzi does  not
    in terms offer an opinion on the credibility of  the  specific  account
    given  by  the  paternal  uncle  of  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    appellant's father was alleged to have been killed. So it was  open  to
    the Judge to hold that his report did not assist on this issue.

The Judge's Approach to the Evidence of the Paternal Uncle

28. Ms Reid submits that the adverse credibility finding made  against  the
    uncle is flawed, because the Judge made no  reference  to  the  uncle's
    explanation for the perceived inconsistency about when  he  learned  of
    his brother's death.  However, it is clear from paragraph [10]  of  his
    decision that the Judge was of the view that the uncle had changed  his
    evidence in the course of cross-examination.   The  Judge  records  the
    uncle as correcting his initial statement, and the  Presenting  Officer
    then putting to the uncle that he was lying.  The Judge had the benefit
    of hearing oral evidence from the uncle, and he made a detailed note of
    the cross-examination in his manuscript record of proceedings.  Ms Reid
    has  not  provided  her  own  account  of  how  the   cross-examination
    proceeded, and the Judge has not been asked to produce a  typed  record
    of his notes of the cross-examination.

29. Accordingly, it is not shown that the Judge was unfair to  characterise
    the uncle as being vague in his evidence of how he knew the appellant's
    father was at risk; or that he was unfair to find  there  was  a  clear
    contradiction in the uncle's evidence of the circumstances in which  he
    allegedly learnt of his brother's fate.

The Judge's finding on the cause of the Father's death

30. Thirdly, Ms Reid submits that it was not open to the Judge  not  to  be
    satisfied that the appellant's father was killed in  the  circumstances
    alleged by the uncle, but at the same time not to make a finding as  to
    how or why the father was killed.

31. I consider that Ms Reid has  set  up  a  false  dichotomy.   The  Judge
    accepted at [18] that the appellant's father was  dead,  and  that  the
    appellant had been brought up by his maternal uncle in  Jalalabad.   It
    was not perverse of the Judge to accept that the appellant's father was
    long since dead, while at the same time not accepting that he had  been
    killed  by  the  Northern  Alliance  by  way  of  retribution  for  the
    assistance which his brother had rendered to the Taliban.

Assessment of Risk on Return

32. The third ground of appeal relates to the Judge's findings on  risk  on
    return.  Ms Reid submits that the Judge's findings on  this  issue  are
    insufficiently reasoned - in particular the finding that  the  maternal
    uncle is still in Jalalabad.

33. Given that the maternal uncle had resided for many years  in  Jalalabad
    without any problems, and he had not left Jalalabad at the same time as
    arranging for the appellant to leave the country, it was  open  to  the
    Judge to find not credible the claim of the  uncle  and  the  appellant
    that contact with him had been lost; and that his  current  whereabouts
    were unknown.

34. The appellant offered an explanation for being unable  to  contact  his
    maternal uncle, which  was  that  he  had  fled  for  his  own  safety.
    However, no background  or  expert  evidence  was  brought  forward  to
    support the proposition that Jalalabad  was  no  longer  safe  for  the
    appellant's maternal uncle and his immediate family. So the  Judge  did
    not err in law in not attaching weight to the appellant's suggestion.

35. I consider that the Judge gave adequate reasons for  finding  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk on return to either Jalalabad or  Kabul,
    and that Ms Reid's submissions to the contrary are on analysis no  more
    than  an  expression  of  disagreement  with  the  findings  that  were
    reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence before him.

Assessment of the Article 8 Claim

36. The fourth ground of appeal relates to the Judge's  assessment  of  the
    claim under Article 8 ECHR.  With regard to the appellant's family life
    claim, the Judge noted at paragraph [11] that the appellant's  paternal
    uncle had been out of the UK for nearly a year,  for  the  purposes  of
    visiting his sisters in Pakistan.  It was open to  the  Judge  to  find
    that the family life which the appellant  currently  enjoyed  with  his
    paternal uncle and his cousin (his paternal uncle's son) did  not  meet
    the Kugathas criteria, such that he did not have family life in the  UK
    for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR.

37. With regard to private life, in the light of the  Judge's  findings  of
    fact on the protection claim, it was clearly open to the Judge to  find
    that there were not  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    reintegration into life and society  in  Afghanistan  so  as  to  bring
    himself within the scope of Rule 276ADE.

38. The Judge accepted that the appellant had established private  life  in
    the UK, but found  that  the  interference  was  proportionate,  having
    regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act.  In  the  light  of  well-known
    authorities such as  MG  (Assessing  interference  with  private  life)
    Serbia and Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00113, I do not  consider  that  any
    further reasoning on proportionality was required.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 26 February 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

