
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03757/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st January 2020                          |On 5th February 2020          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     M F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Masih of Counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge O'Hagan  (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 1st July 2019.  The
    Appellant is an Iranian citizen who arrived in the UK on  12th  October
    2018 and claimed asylum.  The Appellant's wife is a  dependant  in  the
    asylum claim.

 2. The asylum claim was made on the basis that the Appellant had converted
    to Christianity in Iran.  The Appellant  had  been  attending  a  house
    church which was raided by the authorities.  The Appellant and his wife
    fled.  His family later told him that the authorities had been  to  the
    family home searching for him.   His  parents  had  been  arrested  and
    interrogated before being released.  The Appellant and  his  wife  left
    Iran with the assistance of an agent on 24th September 2018.  Since his
    arrival in the UK the Appellant has been active  within  the  Christian
    church and he and his wife  have  been  baptised.   The  Appellant  has
    opened a Facebook account which he has used to post Christian  material
    online.

 3. The asylum and human rights claim was refused by the Respondent on 15th
    March 2019.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 4. The appeal was heard on 26th June 2019.  The judge heard evidence  from
    the Appellant and Mr Baillie, a representative of the  church  attended
    by the Appellant.  The judge accepted that the Appellant and  his  wife
    had been baptised, and  that  Facebook  posts  had  been  made  by  the
    Appellant.

 5. Having considered the evidence in the round the judge  did  not  attach
    weight to the opinion of Mr Baillie that the Appellant  was  a  genuine
    Christian convert, and the judge did not find the Appellant had given a
    credible account.  The  conclusion  was  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    established that he and his wife are Christian converts.

 6. The judge found that the Appellant would not be at risk if returned  to
    Iran and the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. In summary it was contended that the judge had made mistakes  of  fact,
    failed to consider material evidence, and misdirected himself in law by
    failing to properly apply the guidance in HB  (Kurds)  Iran  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 430 (IAC).

 8. It was submitted  that  there  was  considerable  evidence  from  third
    parties confirming  that  the  Appellant  had  genuinely  converted  to
    Christianity, and this evidence was contained  within  the  Appellant's
    bundle, but the judge had made no reference to it.   It  was  submitted
    that this was a material error of law as it appeared that the judge had
    failed to analyse relevant evidence.

 9. It was submitted that the  judge  had  not  adequately  considered  the
    guidance in HB (Iran) in relation to the risk to the  Appellant  if  he
    was returned, as his Facebook posts  promoting  Christianity  would  be
    discovered by the authorities.



Permission to Appeal

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Loke in the following terms;

         "2.  It is arguable that the  judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of
             credibility at [56] and [58].  It is also  arguable  that  the
             judge erred in concluding at [65(i)] that there was a risk the
             authorities would be aware of the Appellant's Facebook  posts,
             and failing to consider the fact that  this  in  itself  would
             clearly create the perception that he is a Christian."

11. Following the grant of permission to  appeal,  directions  were  issued
    that there should be an oral  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such that the decision  must
    be set aside.

Our Analysis and Conclusions

12. At the oral hearing Mrs Masih relied and expanded upon the grounds upon
    which permission to appeal had been granted.

13. The challenge to  the  FtT  decision  was  put  on  two  main  grounds.
    Firstly, it was contended that the judge had  not  taken  into  account
    material evidence.  Secondly it was contended that the judge had  erred
    by not considering the  guidance  in  HB  (Iran)  in  relation  to  the
    Facebook posts promoting Christianity and  the  risk  that  this  would
    cause on return.

14. Mrs Aboni conceded that the judge had materially erred in law  on  both
    grounds.

15. We found that although the decision  had  clearly  been  prepared  with
    care, the judge erred by not demonstrating that all  material  evidence
    had been considered when considering whether the Appellant's conversion
    to Christianity was genuine.

16. The judge at paragraph  47  made  reference  to  documentary  evidence,
    referring  specifically  to  photographs  of  baptism,   and   Facebook
    activity.  At paragraphs 48 - 52 the judge considered the oral evidence
    of Mr Baillie who  had  attended  the  hearing.   The  Appellant's  own
    evidence on conversion was considered at paragraphs 53 - 60, the  judge
    concluding that the account was not credible and the Appellant and  his
    wife were not genuine Christian converts.  At paragraph  69  the  judge
    made a finding that the Appellant had fabricated his claim.

17. There is no reference by the judge to a letter dated 31st January  2019
    at pages 38 - 39 of the Appellant's bundle  from  Adam  Martin,  church
    leader  with  the  church  attended  by  the  Appellant.   This  letter
    indicates that the Appellant and his wife "are both  genuine  followers
    of Jesus and their understanding has been growing week by week."

18. There is a letter from another  church  leader,  Ben  Rook  dated  23rd
    February 2019 at A(1) - A(2) of the Appellant's bundle which gives  the
    opinion that the Appellant and his wife are both genuine  followers  of
    Jesus and that their understanding has been growing significantly  week
    by week.

19. At pages 45 - 46 of the Appellant's bundle there is  a  further  letter
    from Adam Martin dated 12th June 2019 detailing the attendance  of  the
    Appellant and his wife at church, which led them to being accepted  for
    baptism and again reiterated  the  view  that  they  were  regarded  as
    genuine followers of Jesus Christ.  The letter also stated that another
    asylum seeker and his  son  had  joined  the  church  as  a  result  of
    conversations with the Appellant and his wife.

20. At page 77 of the Appellant's bundle is a copy of an email sent  by  an
    individual who introduced the Appellant to  the  church  where  he  was
    subsequently baptised.  At page 80 there is a letter from an individual
    confirming that he started attending church as a result of what he  was
    told by the Appellant and his wife.

21. At page 82  is  a  note  from  Janeen  Martin  dated  15th  April  2019
    confirming that she serves within a Christian Mission  Agency  and  she
    works with Iranian asylum  seekers  and  refugees.   She  confirms  the
    Appellant and his wife are  regular  attenders  at  church  and  attend
    various meetings and gives the  opinion  that  they  are  both  genuine
    believers and followers of Jesus, having  spent  time  with  them  both
    within and outside their home.

22. The judge is not expected to refer to each individual page of  evidence
    contained within a bundle  of  documents.   However  in  our  view,  as
    accepted by Mrs Aboni, there is considerable evidence vouching for  the
    Appellant as a genuine convert, to which the judge has made no specific
    reference.  If that evidence was to  be  given  no  weight,  the  judge
    needed to explain why no weight was attached to  it.   It  is  accepted
    that the authors of the letters referred to above did  not  attend  the
    hearing, but it could be said that their evidence supported  the  views
    expressed by Mr Baillie at the hearing, and we find  the  lack  of  any
    consideration of that evidence to be a material error of law.

23. We also find, again as accepted by Mrs Aboni, that the judge erred when
    considering risk on return in relation to the Facebook  posts  made  by
    the Appellant.  The Facebook posts indicated that the  Appellant  is  a
    Christian.   The  judge  considered  this  evidence  at  paragraph  65,
    accepting that the Appellant had  posted  material  on  Facebook.   The
    judge found that the authorities  may  become  aware  of  the  Facebook
    posts.  The judge did not however find that these posts would  put  the
    Appellant at risk, as it was not accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    genuine Christian.  The judge found at paragraph  65(iv)  that  it  was
    "likely that the opportunistic nature  of  those  activities  would  be
    apparent in Iran."

24. The judge did make reference to HB (Iran), setting  out  the  headnote.
    The judge did not however refer to paragraph 97  of  that  decision  in
    which it is found that a returnee without a passport is  likely  to  be
    questioned on return.  At paragraph 114 it was found that part  of  the
    routine process on return would be to  look  at  an  internet  profile,
    Facebook and emails of a returnee.  A person  would  be  asked  whether
    they had a Facebook page and that would  be  checked.   When  a  person
    returns they will be  asked  to  log  onto  their  Facebook  and  email
    accounts.

25. We find that the judge did  not  adequately  consider  this  point  and
    failure to do so, taken together  with  the  failure  to  consider  all
    material evidence, amounts to a material error of law.  It is our  view
    that Mrs Aboni was correct to concede that  such  was  the  case.   The
    decision of the FtT is  set  aside  with  no  findings  preserved.   We
    considered paragraph 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statements,
    and with the agreement of both representatives took the view  that  the
    appropriate course is to remit the appeal back to the FtT,  because  of
    the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding that will  be  necessary
    in order for this decision to be remade.

26. The appeal will be heard at  the  Birmingham  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to  be  heard  by  an  FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge  O'Hagan.   An
    interpreter in Farsi will be required.

27. Mrs Masih pointed out that the Appellant and his wife now have a  child
    and this amounts to a new  matter  not  previously  considered  by  the
    Respondent.

28. We observed that this was not a matter for us, and expressed no view as
    to whether or not the Respondent should consent to the new matter being
    considered by the FtT.  It  may  be  appropriate  for  the  Appellant's
    representatives to contact the Respondent in advance of the FtT hearing
    to ascertain whether consent will be given.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   This  direction  is
made because the Appellant has made a claim  for  international  protection.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed                              Date 27th January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We make no fee  award.   The  issue  of  any  fee  award  will  need  to  be
considered by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 27th January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
