
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03026/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2020                           |On 6 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     MK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Gunn instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who was born on 18 September
    1963.  She arrived in the United Kingdom in June 2006 as a visitor.  At
    the expiry of her six months' leave, the appellant overstayed.

 3. On 25 August 2011, she sought  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  a
    relationship in the UK.  That application was refused on 4 October 2011
    with no right of appeal.  A further application  for  leave  to  remain
    based upon Art 8 of the ECHR was made on 9 January 2012.   Whilst  that
    application was pending, on 29 October  2013  she  was  served  with  a
    notice that she was liable to be  removed  as  an  overstayer.   On  11
    December 2013, her application for leave based upon Art 8 was  refused.
    A subsequent challenge to that decision by way of judicial review  made
    on 31 October 2013, failed as the  appellant  had  a  right  of  appeal
    against the decision to refuse  her  leave  under  Art  8  made  on  11
    December 2013.

 4. Thereafter, the appellant appealed against that decision but her appeal
    was dismissed on 29 July 2014 and she was refused permission to  appeal
    by the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal on 26 August 2014  and  8
    December 2014 respectively.

 5. On 17 July 2015 the appellant made  a  further  application  for  leave
    based upon her private and  family  life.   On  1  October  2015,  that
    application  was  refused  and  her  claim  was  certified  as  clearly
    unfounded.  On 11 December 2015, the appellant challenged,  by  way  of
    judicial review proceedings, the decision to certify her  human  rights
    claim that had been made on 1 October 2015.  On 4  February  2016,  the
    certification decision was withdrawn and her claim was reconsidered  on
    17 July 2015.

 6. On 8 April 2016, the appellant made further submissions and, on  5  May
    2016, her application made on 17 July 2015 and her further  submissions
    made on 8 April 2016 were considered and rejected  in  accordance  with
    para 353 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 7. On 12 May 2016, a judicial review  challenge  to  those  decisions  was
    conceded by the Secretary of  State  the  decisions  were  subsequently
    maintained on 11 July 2016.  A further judicial review claim  was  made
    on 2 August 2016 and was struck out on 23 August 2016  for  failure  to
    file a completed T485 form.  On 21  September  2016  and  26  September
    2016, further representations were made on the appellant's behalf.   On
    8 September 2017, her  claim  for  asylum  was  refused  and  certified
    without a right of appeal.   On  5  October  2017,  that  decision  was
    withdrawn.

 8. Finally, on 9 March 2019,  the  Secretary  of  State  reconsidered  the
    appellant's application for asylum, humanitarian protection  and  under
    Art 8 of the ECHR.  In a decision on that date, the Secretary of  State
    refused each of the appellant's claims.  Principally, the Secretary  of
    State rejected the appellant's claim to be at risk on return to  Sierra
    Leone from her family and members of the Bondo Society.



The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 19 September 2019, Judge Lever dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
    all grounds.  He accepted, as had the  Secretary  of  State,  that  the
    appellant had been subject to Female Genital Mutilation ("FGM")  in  or
    about 1981.  He accepted that the appellant and her family were members
    of the Bondo Society, an all-female secret society that  practices  FGM
    in Sierra Leone.  He also accepted that  the  appellant's  aunt  was  a
    Sowei, a local  leader  of  the  Bondo  Society.   However,  the  judge
    rejected the appellant's claim that, since she had been in the UK,  her
    estranged husband, whom  she  had  discovered  had  bigamously  married
    another woman in Sierra Leone, had informed  her  aunt  that  she  (the
    appellant) had divulged the secrets of the Bondo Society in the UK  and
    that, as a result, she was at risk on return, in  particular  from  her
    aunt or any other family member.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on five
    grounds.  Grounds 1 -  4  challenge  the  judge's  adverse  finding  in
    relation to the appellant's asylum  claim.   Ground  5  challenged  the
    judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's Art 8 claim.

11. The grounds are detailed and do not necessarily raise single points  by
    way of challenge.  I will deal with the detail below.

12. Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  on  27
    November 2019, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Smith) granted  the  appellant's
    permission,  in  particular  upon  Ground  5  that  in  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the expert psychiatric evidence relevant  to  her  capacity  to
    reintegrate on return to Sierra Leone.

13. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 notice.

14. At the hearing before me, the appellant was represented by Ms Gunn  who
    made submissions in support of the  five  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    Secretary of State was represented by Mr Howells.

Discussion

15. I will take each of the grounds in  turn,  although  Ground  4  is  (as
    became clear at the hearing) in  effect  subsumed  within  one  of  the
    points made in Ground 1.

16. On Ground 1, Ms Gunn submitted that the judge had failed to  take  into
    account the appellant's evidence and relevant  background  evidence  in
    making two adverse findings.  First, in para 30 of his determination he
    had rejected the appellant's account that, despite having lived for  25
    years in Sierra Leone, as FGM had been performed on her,  it  was  only
    when she was in the UK that she came to fear her  aunt,  in  particular
    that she would be forced to replace  her  as  a  Sowei  and  that  "the
    pressure either began  or  escalated"  when  she  was  here.   Ms  Gunn
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account   the
    appellant's evidence, given in her asylum interview at questions 52 and
    54 where she pointed out that she was able to resist her aunt when  she
    lived in Sierra Leone because she was a police officer.   The  evidence
    was that she had reached the rank of inspector before her departure  to
    the UK.  Her evidence was that "now the family knows I am no longer  in
    the force, they try to get me".

17. Ms Gunn also relied upon the fact that the appellant's  claim,  as  set
    out in her asylum interview and in her two witness statements, was that
    her estranged husband had told her aunt  that  she  was  divulging  the
    secrets of the Bondo Society in the  UK.   In  her  witness  statement,
    submitted with her claim, she had said:

         "I threatened him over the phone and told him that when I return  I
         will sue him for bigamy because we were legally married.  As an act
         of retaliation he went and told my family that  I  was  in  the  UK
         exposing the Bundu Society.  I soon started receiving threats  from
         my family and I knew that I could not return.  I told  [my  partner
         in the UK] what was happening and he told me that I could stay with
         him."

18. Ms Gunn relied upon the expert report of Ms M Conteh  dated  15  August
    2019 (at A8 - A48 of the appellant's bundle which set out the secretive
    nature of the Bondo Society (see para 34) and the  expert's  view  that
    the Bondo Society's  likely  reaction  to  the  appellant  was  one  of
    physical violence (see paras 45 - 47 and 49).

19. Mr Howells submitted that the judge had  been  entitled  to  reach  his
    adverse finding on the basis of her continued residence in Sierra Leone
    for 25 years without any problems and in rejecting a  letter  from  the
    appellant's sister, supporting the appellant's claimed threats from her
    family, as not being genuine.

20. I accept Ms Gunn's submissions on  this  point.   At  para  28  of  his
    determination, the judge first dealt  with  the  expert  report  of  Ms
    Conteh and, in effect, accepted that the secret  nature  of  the  Bondo
    Society might mean that they  might  not  wish:  "The  details  of  the
    barbaric practices of FGM...to be made public in detail, not  least  by
    the local Sowei who would appear to derive income  and  local  prestige
    from such a role."

21. Then at para 29, the judge accepted that  it  was  plausible  that  the
    appellant's aunt had put pressure on the appellant to  take  over  from
    her as Sowei.

22. Then at para 30, the judge  dealt  with  the  evidence  and  found  the
    appellant's account  to  lack  credibility  that  she  had  experienced
    problems only since being the UK.  He said this:

         "30. On the Appellant's timeframe she would have had FGM  performed
             upon her in about 1981.  She remained in  Sierra  Leone  until
             2006 a period of 25 years.  I accept  her  evidence  that  she
             moved at a young age from Port  Loko  her  home  area  to  the
             capital Freetown and thereafter began a career in  the  police
             force rising to the rank of inspector before her departure for
             the UK.  I also accept as the expert states  that  because  of
             various factors (paragraph  43)  there  may  be  a  desire  to
             recruit younger women for the role and pressure put  on  those
             regarded as suitable.  I also accept that amongst some, belief
             in witchcraft exists and a belief that some women like a Sowei
             may have powers of witchcraft.  I find that the Appellant  was
             able to resist any potential pressure to replace her aunt as a
             Sowei for a significant period of time even though  she  lived
             and worked in relatively close proximity to her home area  and
             would visit Port Loko.  If the  pressure  from  her  aunt  did
             exist it caused no problems for the Appellant and her  refusal
             of the role during 25 years of local residence would have sent
             a clear signal.   I  find  it  highly  unlikely  the  pressure
             continued.  I also find it entirely lacking in credibility  to
             suggest that the pressure either began or escalated  when  the
             Appellant came to the UK.  There is no  reason  or  logic  for
             that fact.  The letter the Appellant  has  produced  from  her
             sister, typed, within the Appellant's bundle,  does  not  bear
             the hallmarks of a genuine letter and  I  do  not  accept  its
             contents as being credible."

23. Whilst  I  accept  Mr  Howells's  submission,  and  indeed  it  is  not
    challenged, that the judge was entitled to reject the supporting letter
    from the appellant's sister, the judge's finding  that  there  was  "no
    reason or logic" for the pressure or threat to the appellant  to  begin
    or escalate when she has been in the UK does fail to take into  account
    evidence that could provide an explanation for that pressure  beginning
    or escalating in the UK.

24. The first is the evidence of the appellant herself that she was able to
    resist pressure from her aunt (and by implication  the  Bondo  Society)
    whilst she lived in Sierra Leone because of her position in the  police
    force.  The judge does not grapple with that  evidence  and  accept  or
    reject  it  in  his  determination  and  before  reaching  his  adverse
    conclusion in para 30.  It is capable of  providing  a  "reason"  or  a
    logical basis for why the appellant was able to resist the pressure  to
    take over from her aunt whilst she lived in Sierra Leone but not  since
    she has been in the UK, and if  she  were  returned  to  Sierra  Leone,
    because she would no longer be an officer in the  Sierra  Leone  Police
    Force.

25. In addition, the  appellant's  case  was  that  the  risk  to  her  had
    increased - i.e. escalated - since she had been in the UK  because,  in
    effect, her estranged husband had retaliated against  her  by  alleging
    she had  divulged  secrets  of  the  Bondo  Society  in  the  UK.   The
    background evidence to which Ms Gunn referred me and the expert  report
    undoubtedly recognised the secret nature of the Bondo Society and  that
    it was plausible that a person would be at risk if they were  perceived
    to be someone who had divulged the secrets of that society.  The  judge
    accepted, as much, in para 28 of his determination.  Again, in  finding
    that there was "no reason or logic" for the pressure to begin or for it
    to escalate in the UK, the judge failed in para 30 to grapple with  the
    evidence concerning the added threat if her estranged husband had  told
    her aunt that the appellant had  divulged  the  secrets  of  the  Bondo
    Society in the UK.

26. In fact, in para 33 of his determination, the judge  went  on  to  find
    that it was not credible that her estranged husband had done this.  The
    judge said this:

         "33. I do not find it credible that  her  estranged  husband  would
             have made any references in  Sierra  Leone  to  her  divulging
             secrets of the Bondo society whilst in the UK.   I  find  that
             for some years he has  had  no  contact  or  interest  in  the
             Appellant."

27. Raised under Ground 1 but also under Ground 4, Ms Gunn  submitted  that
    this finding failed to have regard to the appellant's evidence that the
    reason why he had done this was by way  of  retaliation  when  she  had
    threatened him that, on return to Sierra Leone, she would accuse him of
    bigamy as he had married another woman whilst he was still  married  to
    the appellant.  That evidence is clearly  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement submitted with her asylum application at para 6 (see Annex  C
    of the respondent's bundle).  It is also set out  in  para  13  of  her
    witness statement dated 15 August 2019 in response to the  respondent's
    refusal letter.  There she states:

         "Two months after I came to  the  UK  my  husband  married  another
         woman.  I started receiving threats from my aunt because my husband
         turned against me and told my family that while in  the  UK  I  was
         talking about the Bondo Society giving them a bad name."

28. Whilst the judge made reference to this as part of her claim in para 25
    of his determination, in reaching his finding in para 33 he  failed  to
    take that into account and reached any finding on  whether  or  not  he
    accepted that aspect of the  appellant's  case.   If  he  accepted  her
    evidence, it provided a potential basis for why her  estranged  husband
    would retaliate in the way that she claimed  and  potentially  found  a
    basis for her fear to be at risk on return.

29. To this extent, therefore, I accept Ground 1 and Ground 4 and that  the
    judge erred in law in reaching his adverse finding.

30. I will take Grounds 2 and 3 together.  In respect of Ground 2, Ms  Gunn
    submitted that the judge had failed  to  engage  with  the  appellant's
    claim that not only was she at risk from her  family  but  also,  as  a
    result of her perceived disclosure of the secrets of the Bondo Society,
    she was more widely at risk from  members  of  the  society.   Ms  Gunn
    placed reliance upon the expert report of Ms Conteh at paras 30 and  45
    - 48 recognising that there was a broader risk from members.   Ms  Gunn
    submitted that in para 31 the judge had focussed  simply  upon  a  risk
    from the appellant's aunt and her family discounting any risk from  her
    sisters whom he found "appear [to be] allies  rather  than  people  who
    would probably seek to kill or injure" the appellant.

31. Mr Howells pointed out that the judge was well-aware that the appellant
    was claiming not only a risk from her  family  but  also  from  society
    members.  At para 25 of his determination the judge  had  referred  to:
    "this double betrayal means, the appellant claims, that she fears death
    at the hands of her family and society members."

32. Whilst I accept that the judge  refers  to  the  appellant's  claim  as
    including a risk from society members in para 25, I  accept  Ms  Gunn's
    submission that despite this he failed to deal with this  broader  risk
    when reaching his findings, in particular at paras 28 - 33.  Mr Howells
    did not contend that a broader risk could not exist  if  the  appellant
    had, indeed, been accused of divulging secrets of  the  Bondo  Society.
    However, of course, the judge found it not  to  be  credible  that  the
    appellant's estranged husband had told her aunt that she had done this.
     Any broader risk from  members  of  the  Bondo  Society  would,  as  a
    consequence, not arise.  In itself, therefore, the judge's  failure  to
    specifically deal with this issue was not  material  to  his  decision.
    However, of course, I  have  concluded  that  his  adverse  finding  in
    relation to whether the appellant's estranged husband had told her aunt
    about her divulging Bondo Society secrets in the UK is  legally  flawed
    and cannot stand.  The broader risk will, therefore, be an  issue  when
    the decision is necessarily remade.

33. In relation to Ground 3, an aspect of the appellant's  claim  was  that
    she had left Sierra Leone following the death of three of her children,
    as a result, she believed, of witchcraft.  The judge's reasoning is  at
    para 32 as follows:

         "32. The Appellant has spoken of the death of  her  children.   She
             accounts their death to witchcraft.  I  entirely  reject  that
             prognosis.  Indeed this part of her case  is  unusual  in  the
             extreme.  She makes almost no reference  to  how  or  in  what
             circumstances they died.  She produces no evidence  concerning
             their deaths.  She provides no clues as to whether  they  died
             together or separately.  She claims those deaths  occurred  in
             2004 leaving her with one surviving son and daughter.   It  is
             noteworthy that in her appeal hearing  in  2014  she  made  no
             reference to the deaths of three children and a son-in-law but
             simply referred to having two children now estranged from her.
              I do not accept that aspect of her case as credible.  Nor  do
             I find it credible that her husband  would  suggest,  that  to
             ease her grief she would visit the UK  to  stay  with  a  male
             friend of his.  I find the Appellant simply left Sierra  Leone
             for her own purposes leaving behind two children.   She  began
             living with a man in the UK.  As a result of her  leaving  she
             lost her job with the  Sierra  Leone  Police  Force  which  is
             understandable."

34. Ms Gunn submitted that the  judge  had  been  wrong  to  say  that  the
    appellant had produced "no  evidence  concerning  their  deaths".   She
    relied upon a brief news report at A91 of the bundle referring  to  her
    son-in-law and his wife (one of the appellant's children) who  together
    with five others had died on 2 September 2004.   Ms  Gunn  relied  upon
    para 8 of the appellant's statement dated 15 August 2019 in  which  the
    appellant had set out the circumstances of the death of  her  daughter,
    two sons and her son-in-law who is the named individual  in  the  brief
    news report.

35. Mr Howells accepted that the judge had been wrong to say that there was
    "no evidence" to support  the  appellant's  claim  that  three  of  her
    children had died.  However, he  submitted  that  that  error  was  not
    material to the judge's finding that he did not  accept  she  had  left
    Sierra  Leone  following  the  death  of  her  three  children  in  the
    circumstance that she  claimed.   Mr  Howells  relied  upon  the  fact,
    referred to by the judge in para 32, that the  appellant  had  made  no
    reference to these deaths which had occurred  in  2004  in  her  appeal
    hearing in 2014.

36. In my judgment, it is not possible to  say  that  the  judge's  finding
    would necessarily be the same if he had taken into account the evidence
    said to support her account that three of her children had died in  the
    way that she claimed.  The judge's failure to  consider  that  evidence
    was undoubtedly an error of law and I am not satisfied that it  was  an
    immaterial error.

37. In respect of Ground 5, in finding that the appellant's  removal  would
    not breach Art 8 of the ECHR, Ms Gunn  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider the expert psychiatric report of  Dr  Battersby  and
    also the impact upon the appellant (and her ability to  reintegrate  in
    Sierra Leone society) as a person who had been part  of  Bondo  Society
    but was now, in effect, seeking to reject it.

38. As regards the former, Ms Gunn relied upon Dr  Battersby's  views  that
    the appellant had  symptoms  of  PTSD  though  she  did  not  meet  the
    threshold for full diagnosis; that she needed  CBT  and  was  currently
    prescribed with anti-depressants for PTSD and there was a moderate risk
    of suicide if she learned that she was to be returned to Sierra  Leone.
    As regards the latter, Ms Gunn relied upon  the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Conteh, in particular paras 32 and 65 highlighting the impact on return
    to the appellant  and  that  a  person,  such  as  the  appellant,  was
    "unlikely to survive" without recourse to Bondo Society.

39. Mr Howells accepted that the judge had erred by not taking into account
    Dr Battersby's report.  Indeed, the judge made no reference  to  it  at
    all.  However, he submitted that it was  not  material  as  the  report
    demonstrated a relatively limited  impact  on  the  appellant's  mental
    health.  In particular, he relied on the fact that  the  appellant  had
    not displayed the full PTSD symptoms and that her  depressive  disorder
    had resolved.  Her mental health problems were  "mild"  in  nature  and
    that she had told Dr Battersby that she was functioning well  and  able
    to look after her partner.  Mr Howell submitted that her mental  health
    difficulties were not serious.

40. In substance, I accept Ms Gunn's submissions.  The judge erred  in  law
    by failing  to  consider  Dr  Battersby's  report  and  the  background
    information relevant to the impact upon the appellant of  returning  to
    Sierra Leone given her involvement with Bondo Society.  The  assessment
    of her ability to integrate, relevant to para  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  more
    generally outside the Rules, required the judge to  take  into  account
    all factors relevant to her capacity to effectively participate and  be
    part of the community to which she was returning  (see  SSHD  v  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813 at [14]).  What weight should  be  given  to  these
    factors is, subject to a rationality challenge, a matter for the judge.
     I am  not  satisfied  that  taking  all  the  circumstances  together,
    including the factors which the judge failed to take into  account,  it
    was inevitable that he would reach an adverse finding either under para
    276ADE(1)(vi) or in applying Art 8 outside the Rules.  His  error  was,
    in my judgment, material.

41. For these reasons, therefore, the judge  materially  erred  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 8  of
    the ECHR.

Decision

42. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.   That  decision  cannot
    stand and I set it aside.

43. Both representatives agreed that if  the  judge's  decision  could  not
    stand, the proper disposal of the appeal was to remit it to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

44. Having regard to the nature and extent of fact-finding and to para  7.2
    of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the  proper  disposal  of
    this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Lever.



                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                5 March 2020
