
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03399/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 September 2016                      |On 23 September 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     T R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on  3  October  1987.  She
    last arrived in the United Kingdom on 28 March 2014 and claimed  asylum
    on 3 July 2015.  The basis of her claim was that a  marriage  had  been
    arranged  between  her  and  her  paternal  cousin  but  she  formed  a
    relationship with a local man whom she married in  January  2014.   She
    then travelled to the United Kingdom and subsequently as  a  result  of
    the marriage she gave birth to a child who was born on 21 August  2015.
    She claims that as a result of her marriage a  fatwa  has  been  issued
    against her and she feared if she returned to Pakistan that  she  would
    be killed either by her family  or  her  paternal  uncle's  family  for
    marrying her husband without permission and for having had a child with
    him.

 2. Her asylum application was refused on 24 November 2015.  The  Appellant
    appealed against this decision and her appeal came  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing on 11 May 2015.  In a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 1 June 2016, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Swinnerton
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that he  was  not  persuaded  by  the
    overall account of the Appellant and in relation to the fatwa he  found
    that this was not credible because the Appellant was made aware of  the
    claimed threats against her in May 2014 when she telephoned her parents
    and he did not accept that it would be more than a year later i.e. June
    2015 that she contacted the friend in Pakistan and became aware that  a
    fatwa had been issued [105].

 3. At [111] the judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  did  not  provide  any
    original documentation in support of the claim  and  was  not  able  to
    furnish the email providing the documentation which it is  claimed  was
    sent by her friend, Nila from Pakistan.  As a  consequence,  the  judge
    attached little weight to the fatwa and the other documentation.

 4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis that
    the judge had erred materially in law: firstly, in failing to take into
    account material evidence.  This ground asserted that it would be clear
    from the Record of Proceedings the Appellant explained in  examination-
    in-chief that the documents were initially  sent  by  Nila  via  email.
    They were, however, sent a second time via email after  they  had  been
    attested and a copy of the email correspondence confirming as much  was
    introduced  during  examination-in-chief  having  been  raised  at  the
    beginning of  the  hearing.   The  correspondence  showed  a  chain  of
    continuity  from  Pakistan  including  an  auto  signature  from  Akash
    Computers.  The grounds further asserted  that,  whilst  the  documents
    were given little weight, the judge erred in failing  to  consider  the
    form and contents of the documents nor make any  assessment  of  those.
    The second ground asserted that the judge  had  materially  misdirected
    himself in law in respect  of  his  approach  to  the  credibility  and
    plausibility findings and, thirdly, that the judge had failed  to  take
    into account material evidence in relation to the risk on return to the
    Appellant as a lone woman, it being her case that her husband would not
    accompany her and her son if they had to return.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  on
    11 August 2016 on the following basis:

         "The grounds assert that there was evidence of an email  from  Nila
         [9] before the judge that he did not take into account  (one  email
         it seems was deleted, but the grounds  make  reference  to  another
         email).  I accept this at face value because I have not seen a copy
         of the email referred to.  I accept  that  if  this  is  the  case,
         arguable error arises because the main reason  the  judge  attached
         little weight to the documentary evidence was  that  there  was  no
         evidence of an email from Nila.  All grounds are arguable."

 6. Prior to today's hearing Counsel for the Appellant  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Mr David Sellwood, provided a witness statement attaching the
    email chain and the attachments which were provided by the Appellant at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

     Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was represented by Mr Bandegani
    of Counsel and  the  Secretary  of  State  by  Mr  Jarvis.   Mr  Jarvis
    accepted, having seen the  witness  statement  and  attachments  by  Mr
    Sellwood, that the judge had erred materially in  law  in  that  it  is
    apparent from  the  Record  of  Proceedings  that  the  Appellant  gave
    evidence that the documents had emanated from her friend Nila  but  the
    email containing the documents had accidentally been  deleted  and  the
    documents  had  then  been  re-communicated  through  the  email  chain
    attached to the statement of Mr Sellwood  which  was  provided  to  the
    judge at the hearing.  In light of this  evidence  Mr  Jarvis  accepted
    that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge were  unsustainable.
    Mr Bandegani did not have anything to add.

 8. In light of Mr Jarvis's helpful concession, which with I agree, I  find
    that the judge erred  materially  in  law.   The  fatwa  is  a  crucial
    document in the Appellant's claim that she would be at risk  on  return
    to Pakistan.  An explanation was given as to how she came to receive  a
    copy of the fatwa document and in fact had received it twice, the first
    email to which it was attached having  been  accidentally  deleted.   I
    accept the statement of Mr Sellwood that an explanation  was  given  to
    the judge as to how the Appellant  came  to  receive  the  copy  fatwa.
    However the judge has not engaged either with the email  chain  process
    nor provided any reasons for not accepting or rejecting  the  substance
    of the documents including the  fatwa  that  was  sent  by  email  from
    Pakistan.

Notice of Decision

 9. For those reasons I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and I remit the appeal for a hearing  de  novo  at  Hatton  Cross
    Hearing Centre.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
