
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03487/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 30 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   Mr W N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, Counsel, instructed by Leonard Cannings
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 22 May 2019 Judge Swinnerton  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  the
    decision made by the respondent refusing  his  protection  claim.   The
    appellant a citizen of Cameroon, claimed he would be at risk on  return
    because of his  involvement  in  the  fight  for  the  independence  of
    Southern Cameroon and in the Southern Cameroon National Council  (SCNC)
    which had led to him being arrested and ill-treated in October 2011 and
    October 2012.  The appellant had arrived in the UK in March 2013  on  a
    student visa, which was curtailed in March 2014.  He claimed asylum  in
    July 2016.  The appellant claimed he would also be at risk  because  of
    his sur place activities in support of the SCNC.

2.   The judge did not accept  that  the  appellant  had  given  a  credible
    account of his history in Cameroon.  The judge also concluded  that  he
    could not accept that the evidence demonstrated that "the appellant has
    been or is committed to the political cause of the SCNC in  the  UK  as
    claimed."  The judge concluded at paragraph 25:

         "25. I must now draw together the various points in  this  case  to
             arrive at a decision.  I have highlighted several  aspects  of
             the Appellant's case which trouble me and which have caused me
             to exercise caution before arriving at a decision such as  the
             events leading up to the Appellant leaving  Cameroon  and  the
             absence of any difficulty that he  experienced  travelling  to
             the UK, the lack of any credible reason  for  his  not  having
             become involved in SCNC activities  in  the  UK  earlier,  the
             significant delay in his claiming asylum and  the  absence  of
             any credible reason for the delay, the lack of reliability  of
             the documents provided  in  support  of  his  claim,  and  the
             absence of any enquiries  made  about  the  Appellant  by  the
             authorities in  Cameroon  and  the  absence  of  any  problems
             experienced  by  the  family  members  of  the  Appellant   in
             Cameroon."

3.   The appellant's grounds were essentially twofold, the  first  asserting
    error in the judge's treatment of the  appellant's  claimed  sur  place
    activities, the second raising what Mr Lam described as  "a  collection
    of discrete points".

4.   I am grateful to the submissions I heard from both representatives.

5.   I find the judge's treatment of the appellant's  sur  place  activities
    vitiated by legal error.  There were two aspects to the judge's  error.
    First, the  judge  did  not  make  clear  whether  he  disbelieved  the
    appellant's claimed sur place activities in the UK in their entirety or
    only in relation  to  some  of  them  (their  "claimed  extent").   The
    appellant had claimed that since 2014 he had attended more than fifteen
    demonstrations and more than ten meetings organised by  the  SCNC.   At
    paragraph 23 the judge stated.

         "23. I was shown a number of photographs  at  the  hearing  on  the
             Appellant's mobile phone of the  Appellant  at  various  SCNC-
             related activities in the UK.  None of the photographs that  I
             was shown were referenced by a date and, during the hearing, I
             was provided  with  five  copy  photographs  relating  to  the
             Appellant's SCNC activities in the UK and none of  those  copy
             photographs,  bore  any  date  and  I  noted  that  the   copy
             photographs themselves were all quite unclear.   I  note  also
             that a number of the demonstrations to which  the  photographs
             were claimed to refer related to events  that  took  place  in
             2018 which was some  time  after  the  Appellant  had  claimed
             asylum.  I attach little  weight  to  these  copy  photographs
             because I do not accept that they evidence that the  Appellant
             has been or is committed to the political cause of the SCNC in
             the UK as claimed.  I was also provided  with  copy  documents
             from a news agency website called Cameroon  News  Agency  with
             some of the documents making reference to the Appellant but  I
             was  not  provided  with  complete  documents  and  I  am  not
             satisfied that the documents derive from  the  claimed  source
             such that I do not attach weight to them.  With respect to the
             evidence of Mr  Tamanji,  I  found  his  evidence  helpful  in
             respect of the aims of the SCNC but I was not persuaded by his
             evidence as to the claimed extent of  the  activities  of  the
             Appellant for the SCNC in the UK."

6.   Even though the judge clearly doubted the photographic evidence  as  to
    the appellant's attendance at demonstrations and gave adequate  reasons
    but he was still  required  to  consider  whether  the  other  evidence
    regarding them (in particular the appellant's own claims and  those  of
    Mr Tamanji, the chairman of the SCNC in  the  UK),  were  credible.  To
    simply say, in relation to Mr Tamanji's evidence in particular, that "I
    was not persuaded by his evidence as  to  the  claimed  extent  of  the
    activities of  the  appellant  for  the  SCNC  in  the  UK"  was  quite
    inadequate.   If  believed,  Mr  Tamanji's  evidence  was  capable   of
    establishing that the appellant worked in the  security  department  of
    the SCNC and had attended demonstrations and distributed leaflets.  The
    Home Office Presenting Officer does not appear to have challenged  this
    man's evidence or submitted that little or no weight should be attached
    to it (because of, for example vagueness, lack  of  direct  observation
    etc.).  On its face,  it  provided  significant  corroboration  of  the
    appellant's claimed sur place activities.

7.   If by referring to the claimed "extent" the judge  meant  (as  ordinary
    meaning suggests) to find that the appellant had participated  in  some
    sur place activities but had exaggerated their extent, then  he  should
    have identified what level of activity he was prepared  to  accept  the
    appellant had.

8.   The second erroneous  aspect  of  the  judge's  treatment  is  that  it
    appears to be premised on the assumption that the appellant could  only
    succeed on the basis of his sur place involvement if able  to  show  he
    was "committed to the political cause of the SCNC in the UK" (paragraph
    23).  Despite noting the reference made by Mr Lams  to  the  principles
    set out by Sedley LJ in YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA C9iv  360,  the  judge
    nowhere considered whether the appellant's sur place  activities  (such
    as they were) , even if opportunistic and manufactured, could place him
    at risk on return.  There  was  certainly  evidence  before  the  judge
    indicating that the present Cameroonian regime was  repressive  and  Mr
    Tamanji's evidence was that the Cameroonian authorities  monitored  the
    activities of the SCNC in the UK.  As already noted, the  judge  failed
    to give any reason for rejecting Mr Tamanji's evidence.

9.   In light of my finding that the judge erred in  his  treatment  of  the
    appellant's sur place involvement in the SCNC,  it  is  unnecessary  to
    address the  appellant's  second  ground,  except  to  note  that  this
    included the contention that the judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the evidence of Mr Tamanji and that in  analysing
    ground 1 I have already found that the judge failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the evidence of Mr Tamanji.

10.  Once I made clear during the hearing  my  concerns  about  the  judge's
    treatment of the appellant's sur place claim, Ms Everett submitted that
    in the event I found a material error of law in this regard,  I  should
    preserve the findings of the  judge  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    claimed history in Cameroon.  I am unable to  accept  that  submission.
    For the judge, the concerns regarding the appellant's account generally
    were largely focussed on his conduct in the UK  -  in  failing  to  get
    involved with SCNC in the UK until 2014 and in failing to claim  asylum
    until 2016, for example.  I do not consider it is  possible  to  safely
    demarcate some of the judge's findings and not others.

11.  Whilst accordingly the case will be remitted to the FtT for a  de  novo
    hearing, my decision  is  not  to  be  taken  as  indicating  that  the
    appellant is entitled to succeed.  Some of the  reasons  given  by  the
    judge for disbelieving the appellant appear to have force, although the
    proper assessment of the appellant's credibility (having regard to  the
    consistency  (internal  and  external),  sufficiency  of   detail   and
    plausibility of his account) must be entirely for the next FtT judge.

    To conclude:


    The decision of the judge is set aside for material error of law;


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Swinnerton).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   [pic]                               Date: 28 July 2019

