
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03579/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On February 26, 2018                      |On March 01, 2018                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MR harem khaled
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel, instructed by Broudie, Jackson &
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity order.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  He entered the United  Kingdom  on
    October 21, 2015 and  claimed  asylum  the  same  day.  The  respondent
    refused his protection claim on March 25, 2016 under paragraphs 336 and
    339F HC 395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on April 12, 2016 under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parker (hereinafter called
    "the Judge") on April 5, 2017 and in a decision  promulgated  on  April
    24, 2017 the Judge refused the appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision on  May  8,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dineen
    on August 30, 2017. The  grounds  of  appeal  were  renewed  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Southern granted permission  to  appeal  on  October  6,
    2017. He found it arguable (a) the Judge  had  failed  to  address  the
    issue raised by counsel namely whether the appellant originates  or  is
    from the IKR and (b) the Judge did not explain how some of her findings
    were reached.

 5. In a Rule 24 response dated November 17, 2017  the  respondent  opposed
    the application.  This  matter  came  before  me  on  the  above  date.
    Following submissions, I reserved my decision.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Holmes pursued two grounds of  appeal.  Firstly,  he  submitted  the
    Judge had erred by failing to make clear  findings  and  when  findings
    were made they made no  reference  to  the  country  evidence.  It  was
    unclear  whether  the  Judge  was  reciting  the  arguments  or  making
    findings. Secondly, he argued that simply  because  he  had  been  born
    (originated) in the IKR did not mean he was  from  the  IKR.  This  was
    relevant to the issue of internal relocation.

 7. Mr Bates responded to these submissions. Firstly, the Judge  found  the
    appellant's account lacked credibility and accepted the submissions  of
    the Presenting Officer  and  the  decision  letter.  In  rejecting  the
    factual aspect of the claim, he gave  reasons.  Secondly,  AA  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) dealt with documents and  as  he
    was born in the IKR and had family there he would  be  able  to  obtain
    those documents.

    FINDINGS

 8. The first ground concerned whether there was difference to  "originated
    from" and "was from" the IKR. At Q10 of  his  interview  the  appellant
    stated he came from Darankdikhan. There is no dispute that this town is
    in the IKR. The appellant confirmed at Q12 and 13 of his interview that
    he had relatives throughout the IKR and that  he  remained  in  contact
    with his family.

 9. The appellant claimed that he had left the IKR approximately  13  years
    ago and whilst it was accepted he had been born in (originated in)  the
    IKR, Mr Holmes disputed that he came from  that  area  for  the  simple
    reason that he had moved away.

10. Mr Holmes made this submission at the original hearing and argued there
    was a difference but the grounds of appeal argue the  Judge  failed  to
    address the issue in her decision.

11. Permission to appeal had been given on this point. Mr  Bates  submitted
    that AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG did  not  distinguish  between  when  a
    person left the IKR to determine  whether  they  are  "from"  there  or
    "originated" from there. The facts were the appellant  was  born  there
    and had family living there and even if the Judge did not  engage  with
    Mr Holmes' argument it did not amount to a material error  because  the
    only logical outcome was the fact that the words were the same.

12. The wording in the headnote at E17 of AA (Article 15(c) Iraq CG states-



         "The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if P originates  from
         the IKR and P's  identity  has  been  'pre-cleared'  with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer."

13. At paragraph 150 the wording used is-

         ".... The Respondent also identified that she will  only  return  a
         person to the IKR if that person is from the IKR  and  such  person
         has been pre-cleared for return by the IKR authorities."

14. Mr Holmes argued that  there  was  a  distinction  and  whilst  I  note
    permission to appeal was given I am satisfied that permission was given
    because the Judge did not deal with the point being made by Mr Holmes.

15. I am satisfied the appellant originated from the  IKR  because  he  was
    born there and I am also satisfied that the term "from", in  his  case,
    means exactly the same.

16. A different approach could be taken where for instance a person was not
    born in the IKR but went to live there. That person could  be  said  to
    have come from the IKR albeit he had  not  originated  there.  If  that
    latter person had the right to live there, then he would be covered  by
    what was stated in paragraph 150 of the decision.

17. However, in this appeal the appellant was born there and whilst he  may
    not have been living there prior to coming to  the  United  Kingdom  he
    still had family there and was entitled to go back there and  would  be
    able, in theory, to obtain documents.  I  therefore  do  not  find  the
    omission by the Judge, on these facts, amounts to an error in law.

18. The second argument advanced  by  Mr  Holmes  centred  on  the  Judge's
    decision. Mr Holmes submitted it was  unclear  whether  the  Judge  was
    making findings or was merely repeating what  was  being  said  by  the
    advocates.

19. The Judge's decision consisted of eight pages. At paragraph 9 the Judge
    summarised the reasons for refusal  and  at  paragraph  11  he  briefly
    referred to points elicited in cross-examination but noted that a  full
    record of the evidence was set out in her record  of  proceedings.  The
    Judge did not set out any submissions  but  as  with  the  evidence  he
    stated both would "be referred to  by  me  as  and  when  necessary  to
    support the reasons for my decision."

20. The Judge's style of writing does not amount to an error in law. At the
    beginning of her findings the Judge noted those matters which were  not
    in dispute at paragraphs 14 and 15 respectively. He then recorded  that
    the respondent did not accept the appellant's father was  a  member  of
    the Baath party but he also recorded that Mr Holmes submitted  evidence
    to support his submission.

21. The Judge commented at paragraph 17 that the appellant  demonstrated  a
    limited knowledge of his father's activities and  at  paragraph  18  he
    found that the lack of detail given by the appellant was understandable
    due to his age.

22. The Judge made clear that he would refer to  aspects  of  the  evidence
    where necessary to support his decision and the fact he recites  points
    put forward by both parties does not invalidate his findings.

23. At  paragraph  19  the  Judge  agreed  with  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant's story lacked credibility and whether he is  reciting  facts
    contained in the respondent's decision letter or stating facts  he  has
    found the end result is the  same  as  he  preferred  the  respondent's
    submissions to those advanced by the appellant.

24. At paragraph 20 the Judge noted the appellant's  inability  to  provide
    information  about  the  people  he  claimed  to  fear  and  the  Judge
    identified further inconsistencies. At paragraph 23 the Judge concluded
    that the appellant had failed  to  demonstrate  that  individuals  were
    willing to harm him in any way. Whilst  there  are  grammatical  errors
    these do not detract from the findings made.

25. Mr Holmes submits that mixing findings and facts together  amounted  to
    an error in law. Whilst it is  preferable  to  separate  findings  from
    facts sometimes there is an overlap and whilst the decision could  have
    been  written  differently  there  is  no  doubting  the  findings  and
    conclusions of the Judge. Almost without exception the  Judge  did  not
    find the appellant credible. He concluded at paragraph 38  that  as  he
    was Kurdish  and  was  from  the  IKR,  having  been  born  there,  and
    continuing to have family there it would not be unreasonable, following
    AA, to expect him to live there.

26. There is a difference between a Kurd who comes from the IKR and a  Kurd
    who lived outside the IKR who the respondent was seeking to return. The
    Judge's finding was based on he was a Kurd who originated or came  from
    the IKR and her finding that he could be returned was one that was open
    to her.

    DECISION

27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision.


Signed                              Date     26/02/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     26/02/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
