
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Number: PA/03793/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34 without a     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |On 20 October 2020                   |
|on 7th September 2020                |                                     |
|and following a 'remote' Case        |                                     |
|Management Hearing on 5th October    |                                     |
|2020                                 |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     AM
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                        Appellant/Respondent
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Respondent/Appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant/respondent in  this  determination  identified  as  AM.  This
    direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings

      1. FtT Judge Turner dismissed AM's appeal against the refusal  of  his
         international protection (asylum and humanitarian) and human rights
         (Article 8) claim for reasons set out in a decision promulgated  on
         22nd October 2019 but allowed  his  claim  on  Article  3  grounds.
         Permission to appeal was granted to AM by FtT judge Osborne on  the
         grounds that it  was  arguable  the  judge  erred  in  "failing  to
         recognise the appellant as a refugee or in the alternative  someone
         who qualifies for humanitarian protection" on 19th  February  2020.
         The SSHD was granted permission to appeal  by  UTJ  Kekic  on  16th
         January 2020 on the grounds that it was arguable the FtT judge  had
         erred in finding there was no cogent evidence to  depart  from  the
         2015 Country Guidance on Iraq and failed to take account of country
         evidence which suggested that AM would be able to  obtain  identity
         documents.

         Procedural matters

      2. Although initially listed for hearing  on  12th  March  2020,  that
         hearing  was  adjourned  because  of  the  illness  of  the  Senior
         Presenting Officer. UTJ Plimmer directed that both parties file and
         serve a skeleton argument with authorities.  On  24th  April  2020,
         further directions were sent, following the pandemic  COVID19  and,
         in the circumstances surrounding COVID 19, provision was  made  for
         the question of whether there was an error of law and if so whether
         the decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside, to be determined
         on the papers.

      3. On 7th September 2020 I was under the impression that neither party
         had complied with directions; that neither party had objected to  a
         decision being taken on the papers on whether there is an error  of
         law in the decision by the FtT judge such that the decision is  set
         aside to be  remade;  that  neither  party  had  filed  and  served
         skeleton arguments or submissions, that neither party had filed and
         served a bundle of authorities and that neither party had filed and
         served a Rule 24 response. I proceeded to reach a decision  on  the
         basis of the documents were before me, the conclusion of which was:



          A) That the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in  finding  that
             AM was entitled to Article 3 protection as oppose  to  Article
             15(c) ie humanitarian protection; and

          B) That the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in  finding  that
             AM could not redocument and thus relocate. The finding that he
             has family and friends in Iraq who could support him on return
             to Iraq and that he does not have any ID documents in  the  UK
             stood.

      4.  My  decision  was  thus  promulgated,  with  reasons   for   those
         conclusions, and sent to the parties who received the  decision  on
         24th  September  2020.   On  29th  September   2020,   AM's   legal
         representatives made  an  application  to  set  aside  my  decision
         because I had failed to take into account and consider  submissions
         made by them, receipt of which had been acknowledged by  the  Upper
         Tribunal prior to my decision on 7th September. I directed a remote
         oral hearing for Case Management on 5th October 2020.

      5. At the remote oral hearing, the Secretary of State was  represented
         by  Mr  C  Bates  and  AM  was  represented  by  Mr  C  Holmes.   I
         acknowledged, and  apologised,  for  having  taken  a  decision  in
         ignorance of AM's submissions on the Secretary of  States  grounds.
         Both parties  accepted  that  I  could  and  should  set  aside  my
         conclusions on the grounds relied upon by the  Secretary  of  State
         but that my setting aside of the decision that AM should  be  given
         Article 3 protection was maintained.

      6. Mr Bates confirmed that there had been no written submissions  made
         regarding the Secretary of States grounds. He sought to  make  oral
         submissions and I deal with this below.

      7. In so far as AM's grounds are concerned, Mr Holmes  clarified  that
         he was not seeking to set aside the whole of my  decision,  as  set
         out in the application to set aside but simply my decision  on  the
         Secretary of State's grounds. Mr Bates accepted that  clarification
         and very helpfully confirmed that if I were  to  find  against  the
         Secretary of State in connection with her grounds of  appeal,  then
         AM's appeal should be allowed in full ie he  should  succeed  under
         Article 15(c). He reiterated however that the Secretary  of  States
         position was that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  erred  in  his
         findings regarding Diyala, redocumentation and relocation.

      8. Both parties acknowledge that the caselaw referred by both  parties
         had been overtaken in some sense but that the essential conclusions
         of the case law remained relevant for the purpose of  this  appeal;
         i.e. it made no material difference.

      9. I have considered the documents before me  including  the  detailed
         grounds upon which each party applied for permission  to  appeal[1]
         and the oral submissions  made  on  5th  October  2020  and   I  am
         satisfied there is sufficient information to enable me to  be  able
         to take a decision on whether there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
         decision of the FtT and if so whether the decision  should  be  set
         aside.

         FtT Decision

     10. The first tier Tribunal judge set out in detail and comprehensively
         the basis of AM's claim and the Secretary of State's  rejection  of
         that claim. He identified the issue in the  appeal  before  him  as
         whether the AM could re-document for the purpose  of  returning  to
         Iraq;  whether  AM  was  credible  when  he  claimed  he   had   no
         documentation and had lost all contact with friends and family  who
         could assist him and whether AM's home village remained a contested
         area. Neither party took issue, in the grounds  seeking  permission
         to appeal, to that brief summary of the issues to be determined.

     11. The judge set out in detail his  findings  regarding  contact  with
         family and re-documentation. The  judge  identified  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence before him and considered that evidence in the
         context of the previous evidence given by AM. The  judge  concluded
         that he did not accept that AM was not in contact  with  Hashim  or
         his family or friends in Iraq. He concluded that there was no doubt
         that AM had not been a truthful or credible witness in the  appeal,
         and he had not given a truthful account of events.

     12. At paragraph 60 the judge states that given the initial concessions
         made by AM's counsel, he did not consider the initial asylum  claim
         any further and was satisfied that AM did not face a real  risk  of
         persecution on return to Iraq for a Convention  reason.  The  judge
         then went on to consider  whether  he  could  return  to  his  home
         village in Diyala. He set out extracts of evidence relied  upon  by
         the Secretary of State as to why he could depart from  the  country
         guidance of AA (Iraq) (Article 15c) (Rev 2) [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC).
         He concluded that on the basis of the evidence before  him  he  was
         not satisfied that he had been provided with cogent  evidence  such
         as to allow him to depart from the Country Guidance  of  AA  (Iraq)
         and therefore concluded that Diyala remained a contested  area  and
         is in an area that met the threshold as set out in article 15(c) of
         the Qualification Directive.

     13. The  judge  then  went  on  to  consider  internal  relocation  and
         concluded that AM could not internally relocate to Baghdad  because
         he is Kurdish, does not speak Arabic, has no CSID currently, has no
         family or friends in Baghdad to accommodate him or sponsor him  for
         a room and was unlikely to be able to secure employment. The  judge
         concluded that in those circumstances it would be unreasonable  and
         unduly harsh for him to relocate to Baghdad.

     14. The judge went on to consider whether AM could have obtained a  new
         CSID card and accepted that he did not have any ID  documents  with
         him in the UK. The judge concluded that because AM and  his  family
         were from a contested area he could not conclude  that  the  family
         would still have possession of documents if they have been kept  in
         Diyala by AM's family.

     15. The judge  then  considered  the  possibility  of  re-documentation
         whilst in the UK. The judge concluded that it would not be possible
         for AM to re-document in the UK to a large  extent  because  Diyala
         remains a contested area and that although there was evidence  that
         suggested that the maternal uncle was still in Iraq  and  he  could
         locate his own family  page  and  then  locate  by  way  of  cross-
         reference the relevant page for AM, but that because  the  register
         was held in a  contested  area  it  was  questionable  whether  the
         register was accessible  or  whether  it  even  exists.  The  judge
         concluded that without a CSID card, AM would not  be  permitted  to
         leave the airport in Baghdad. The judge also concluded that  if  AM
         had a CSID card he could have internally relocated to another  area
         within Iraq that was not contested given that it was  not  accepted
         that AM had lost contact with family and friends.  The  judge  also
         concluded that AM could not relocate to the IKR.

     16. In paragraph 74 of the decision of the judge clearly held that  the
         appeal was allowed only on the basis that AM could not  re-document
         because he came from a contested area. The judge did not accept his
         original claim that he was at  risk  on  return  for  a  Convention
         reason and he found that he had family  and  friends  in  Iraq  who
         could support him on return

         Error of law

         Secretary of State

     17. The Secretary of State relied on two grounds of appeal. Firstly the
         Secretary of State submitted that there was, contrary to the  first
         tier Tribunal judge's findings, strong cogent  evidence  to  depart
         from AA(Iraq) in the light of the CPIN November 2018. The Secretary
         of State relied on paragraphs 2.3.30 and 2.3.32 which, she  states,
         refer to a consistent and significant decline in security incidents
         and that the current numbers are typically tens of times lower than
         they were in mid-2014. The Secretary of State also submits that the
         judge  wrongly  concluded  that  the  Evidence  and  Knowledge  for
         Development 30 April  2019  article,  although  referring  to  ISIS
         having concentrated attacks in the Diyala region, fails to  provide
         information on the number of casualties such  as  to  suggest  they
         would reach the required Article 15(c) threshold. The Secretary  of
         State refers to the  Rule  of  Law  in  Armed  Conflict  June  2019
         document relied upon by the FtT Judge which, she submits,  in  fact
         provides a contrast to the position in AA (Iraq). In AA(Iraq),  she
         submits, there  was  systematic  and  widespread  violence  in  the
         contested area whereas,  the  Secretary  of  State  submitted,  the
         threat of violence has not disappeared but  is  confined  to  small
         pockets as mirrored in the June 2019  document.  The  Secretary  of
         State submits that the judge misapplied the law and  evidence  such
         that his findings were perverse and which  were  also  material  to
         AM's ability to obtain a CSID. She submitted that it followed  that
         findings by the judge regarding redocumentation  were  infected  by
         that error of law and could not stand.

     18. The second ground relied upon by the SSHD  was  the  CPIN  note  at
         6.1.10  that  an  alternate  Directorate  of  Civil  ID  had   been
         established in a subdistrict  of  Diyala  and  another  Directorate
         located in the centre of Baquba which  received  IDPs  from,  inter
         alia, Jalawla - AM's home area. The SSHD submits  that  "had  Judge
         Turner consulted the CPIN, he would have found that  the  Appellant
         was in fact able to get documentation given the  existence  of  the
         alternate Directorate of the Civil ID in parts of Diyala."

         Consideration of Secretary of States grounds

     19. Neither the first tier Tribunal judge nor the  Secretary  of  State
         and indeed the CPIN in February 2019 provide the full citation  for
         the case they rely upon. The only citation referred to AA  (Article
         15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC).  This  case  has  been
         overtaken by AA(Iraq) [2017] EWCA CIV  944  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds
         internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212  (IAC).  It  is  not
         clear why the first tier Tribunal judge did not refer  to  AA  Iraq
         [2017] and AAH Iraq [2018] given that both decisions were  in  AM's
         bundle. Nor is it clear why the Secretary of State relies on a case
         that had been replaced. But as expressed before me on 5th  October,
         the references to since superseded caselaw did not, in fact, make a
         difference given the factual matrix in this appeal.

     20. The Secretary of State had not made  any  written  submissions.  Mr
         Bates sought to make brief submissions on her  grounds.  There  was
         some  discussion  before  me  whether  I  could  or   should   hear
         submissions given that Mr Holmes had not had any time  to  consider
         this. It was not possible to put the hearing back for listing as  a
         remote "error of law" hearing.  Although  initially  reluctant,  Mr
         Holmes did respond to the short submissions made  by  Mr  Bates.  I
         have taken these submissions into account and am grateful for  both
         their endeavours.

         Ground 1

     21. In order to succeed on this  ground,  the  Secretary  of  State  is
         seeking  to  challenge  the  factual  findings  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge and that the evidence that was before the First-tier
         Tribunal judge was such that it  was  perverse  for  the  judge  to
         follow country guidance. This is  a  high  threshold.  The  grounds
         themselves refer to there  being  "cogent  evidence"  to  enable  a
         departure from country guidance; that the evidence  "suggests  that
         there is remote violence". The fact that there is  cogent  evidence
         does not mean that a failure to depart  from  country  guidance  is
         perverse, nor does a 'suggestion' of  an  alternate  interpretation
         mean that a conclusion is perverse.

     22. The FtT judge set out the respondent's position with clarity;  such
         summary not being the subject of challenge.  The  judge  identified
         factors adverse to the appellant. He makes  detailed  reference  to
         the submissions before him including that he was  referred  to  the
         2018 CPIN and considers that submission in the context of the later
         dated documents in the appellant's bundle.

     23. It cannot be said that the finding by the  judge  on  the  evidence
         before him at that time was perverse. It is of  course  open  to  a
         judge to pursue investigation of material relied upon  that  is  in
         the public domain but there is a limit to the investigation that  a
         judge both can and can be expected to undertake. If a judge were to
         follow up every hyperlink in every  document  before  him/her  that
         would be a mammoth and unreasonable task. It is incumbent upon  the
         representative to ensure that the judge's  attention  is  drawn  to
         relevant evidence. The documents relied upon by the appellant  were
         in his bundle of documents; the respondent was aware of the  import
         of those documents but failed to identify to  the  judge  why  they
         should not be relied upon and why they cast significant doubt  upon
         the country guidance conclusion that Diyala  remained  a  contested
         area that met the Article 15(c) threshold.

     24. The judge has not, on the  evidence  and  submissions  before  him,
         reached a perverse conclusion that Diyala  remained  contested  and
         met the relevant high threshold.

     25. If the finding that Diyala remains an area that meets  the  Article
         15(c) threshold is maintained, the issue then arises on relocation.
         The respondent does not in her grounds seek to challenge  that  but
         rather that  the  findings  on  internal  relocation  are  infected
         because of the appellant's ability to obtain a CSID which forms the
         basis of challenge under Ground 2.

         Ground 2

     26. Mr Bates submitted that although a complete copy of  the  CPIN  had
         not been before the FtT Judge, the judge had not taken  issue  with
         the fact that he had not been provided with a fully copy. Given the
         full document is a document  in  the  public  domain,  it  was,  he
         submitted, available  to  the  judge;  there  were  hyperlinks  and
         signposts  to  the  relevant  evidence.  The  judge  had  not,   he
         submitted, objected to the manner in which evidence  was  presented
         so it could not be  said  that  the  judge  had  not  had  relevant
         material before him which he should have considered and taken  into
         account.

     27. Mr Holmes referred to his submissions in response to the  'COVID19'
         directions and submitted  that  the  grounds  relied  upon  by  the
         Secretary of State upon which permission had been granted  referred
         to passages from the CPIN which had not been before the  FtT  Judge
         and in any event the CPIN was a policy statement and  not  evidence
         per se. He submitted, reiterated orally  before  me,  that  it  was
         "wrong" for the judge to be expected to have to  look  up  evidence
         arising from passages that were not brought to his attention either
         at the hearing or in written submissions. He  reiterated  that  the
         argument  raised  in  the  grounds  regarding  the  possibility  of
         obtaining a replacement CSID  from  an  alternate  Directorate  was
         raised for the first time in  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
         appeal and was not put in  issue  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge.

     28. The FtT judge is clearly not impressed  with  the  appellant  as  a
         witness. He finds him neither credible nor  reliable  and  that  he
         should not be given the benefit of the  doubt.  He  considers  such
         matters to  be  significant  factors  supporting  the  respondent's
         position.  He finds the appellant has friends and relatives both in
         Iraq and in the UK who could assist him. The judge identifies doubt
         that a register exists after such  a  lengthy  period  of  time  or
         whether  any  family  would  still  have  possession  of   relevant
         documents given the instability of  the  area  and  destruction  of
         property. He notes that

             "replacement CSA offices  have  been  established  for  Mosul,
             Anbar and Salah al-Din but not for Diyala. Given the unrest in
             the  area,  it  is  questionable  whether  the   register   is
             accessible or whether it even exists."

     29. The judge has plainly set out the evidence that was before him. The
         reference in the CPIN to an alternate Directorate in Diyala was not
         before him. From the decision,  reference  was  made  to  alternate
         directorates in some areas  but  not  to  that  which,  it  is  now
         asserted, exists for Diyala. Although a judge may investigate links
         to evidence that is relied upon, the reliance has to be  signposted
         to the judge and it is apparent that it was not in this appeal.   A
         judge cannot be expected to trawl through all the links in all  the
         background material to establish whether something does or does not
         exist.

     30. The judge has not erred in  law  in  failing  to  take  account  of
         something that was not before him.

         Conclusion re SSHD submitted error of law.

     31. The first tier Tribunal judge has not erred in finding that  Diyala
         remains a contested area and meets the threshold of Article  15(c).
         The judge has not erred in finding the appellant cannot re-document
         and thus relocate.

         AM

     32. AM relies on two grounds of appeal: firstly  that  the  first  tier
         Tribunal judge erred  in  dismissing  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
         protection grounds and secondly that the judge acted ultra vires by
         making an improper and unenforceable direction.  Dealing  with  the
         second ground first, AM takes issue with the comment by  the  first
         tier Tribunal judge that once there was cogent  evidence  that  the
         situation in Iraq had improved and that he could access his  family
         record in his home area then his status should  be  reviewed.  This
         was not a direction by the first tier Tribunal judge but a comment.
         It is clear that had the SSHD not sought to appeal  the  First-tier
         Tribunal decision she would have had to comply with the decision to
         allow the appeal on article 3 grounds and not  in  accordance  with
         that comment. There is no merit in that latter  ground  of  appeal,
         which in any event stems from an obiter and  unenforceable  comment
         by the judge.

     33. AM's grounds again rely on AA(Iraq) [2015] rather  than  AA  (Iraq)
         [2017] and AAH (Iraq) [2018]. Nevertheless  the  substance  of  the
         ground is that the judge had found that Diyala was a contested area
         and AM could not reasonably relocate because of his inability to re-
         document, it therefore followed that the appeal fell to be  allowed
         on humanitarian protection grounds because the risk  in  AM's  home
         area was a risk of article 15(c) harm. It was  submitted  that  the
         risk of article 3 harm in the place of relocation  served  only  to
         make relocation unreasonable not to convert the basis of claim into
         a risk centred on article 3 harm.

         Consideration of AM's grounds

     34. If the risk in Diyala is an Article 15(c) risk, the lack of ability
         to redocument does not convert that risk into Article  3  risk  but
         results in a finding that the appellant should receive humanitarian
         protection.

     35. Mr Bates conceded that if the judge's  findings  that  the  Article
         15(c) threshold was met  and  that  it  was  unreasonable  for  the
         appellant to relocate because of lack of documentation or access to
         documentation were upheld, then the finding by the judge  that  the
         appellant  met  Article  3  rather  than  humanitarian   protection
         threshold was an error of law and should be set aside and could  be
         remade allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

         Conclusion on AM's grounds

     36. The FtT judge erred in law in finding AM was entitled to Article  3
         protection as oppose to Article 15(c) protection.

         Remaking the decision

     37. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in finding that  the  appellant
         was entitled to Article 3 protection. The fact that Diyala was,  on
         the basis of the evidence before the judge at the time, a contested
         area such that the Article 15(c) threshold was  met  and  the  fact
         that the appellant could not, on the basis of the  evidence  before
         the First-tier Tribunal judge at that time, re-document, results in
         the clear conclusion that the appellant is entitled to humanitarian
         protection.

     38. I allow his appeal accordingly.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law in so far as (a) the finding  that
    the appellant was entitled to Artice 3 protection  was  concerned;  and
    (b) that the appellant was not entitled to humanitarian protection.

    I set aside the decision to that extent to be remade.

    I remake the appeal and allow the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds only.




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker Date: 13 October 2020
-----------------------
[1] (a) the SSHD's bundle; (b) the two bundles filed on behalf of AM
received by the Tribunal on 15th August 2019 and 3rd October 2019; (c) the
decision of FtT Judge Turner; and (d) the submissions made on behalf of AM
on 15th May 2020; and (e) the application to set aside on 29th September
2020.

