
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03146/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 4th July 2019                     |On 18th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    h a h
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M J Azmi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This was an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Asjad, promulgated on 13th  September  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on  9th  August  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was  born  on  5th  May
    1993.  He arrived in the UK in 2009 as a minor aged 16.  He applied for
    asylum and for humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph  339C  of
    HC 395.  By a decision dated 16th February 2018,  his  application  was
    refused.  He had discretionary leave to remain until 5th November 2010.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is a Kurdish Iraqi from
    Kirkuk.  He has no ID documents.  He has no contact  with  his  family.
    His home area of Kirkuk  is  subject  to  indiscriminate  violence  and
    internal conflict.  Secondly, he has converted to Christianity.  He was
    baptised on 16th April 2017.  He  attends  church.   He  would  now  be
    subject to persecution and discrimination if  returned  to  Iraq  as  a
    Christian convert.  It is a feature of this appeal  that  there  was  a
    previous decision by Judge Sarsfield on 21st February  2011  which  had
    rejected the Appellant's claim, on the basis that the Appellant was not
    credible, and his claim that he did not have any contact details of his
    family was not to be believed.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge, under a heading "My Findings  and  Decision",  set  out  the
    evidence in relation to  the  Appellant's  conversion  in  considerable
    detail (see paragraphs 15 to 16).  The judge then proceeded to consider
    the Appellant's entitlement to remain here on the basis  of  a  section
    headed "Risk on Return", and here the judge referred to the  fact  that
    the Appellant "claims that Christians are routinely  targeted  in  Iraq
    and the authorities in Iraq would be unwilling to  protect  him".   The
    judge also included a sentence  that  "the  Appellant  stated  that  he
    cannot relocate to the IKR as he has no support of family  or  friends.
    He does not have a CSID and would not be able to obtain one" (paragraph
    20).  Thereafter, there was no consideration at all about  this  aspect
    of the claim, namely, the claim relating to the  Appellant's  inability
    to obtain a CSID card.  The judge focused entirely on the  question  of
    the Appellant's conversion to Christianity (see paragraphs 21 to 23).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge had accepted  that  the
    Appellant was a genuine Christian convert.  However, the judge did  not
    consider whether the Appellant could obtain a CSID card, which had been
    specifically addressed in the skeleton argument (at paragraphs 5  to  7
    and at paragraph 13).   Moreover,  the  judge  did  not  consider  this
    question with respect to the specific factors set out in AAH [2018]  CG
    UKUT  212.   This  was  important  because  the  question  specifically
    highlighted in the latest country guidance case is  whether  there  are
    family members who will  be  able  and  willing  to  attend  the  Civil
    Registry with the Appellant to enable him to  get  a  CSID  card.   The
    country guidance case goes on to say that,  "because  the  registration
    system is patrilineal it will  be  relevant  to  consider  whether  the
    relative is from the mother or father's side"  (see  head  note  (iii).
    This the judge had not done.  Accordingly, there was an error of law.

 7. On 4th October 2018 permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    the judge had failed to engage with the test set out in AAH.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 4th July 2019, Mr Azmi, appearing on behalf
    of the Appellant made two firm submissions.  First, that the judge  had
    simply not considered, under the  section  on  "Risk  on  Return",  the
    Appellant's claim that he could not relocate to the IKR because he  had
    no support of family or friends.  Apart from two sentences setting  out
    what the Appellant himself alleged (at  paragraph  20),  there  was  no
    consideration  at  all  of  this  aspect  of  the  claim.   The  entire
    consideration was of the Appellant's conversion  to  Christianity,  and
    the risk appertaining thereto, were it to be returned to Iraq.

 9. Second, there was a recent decision of SS [2019] EWHC  1402  where  the
    High Court had made it quite clear how if what the  CSID  card  was  "a
    crucial document for adult life in Iraq", upon which  matters  such  as
    access to food rations, healthcare or government humanitarian services,
    was entirely dependent (see paragraphs 24 to 30).   He  made  it  quite
    clear how the country guidance case of AAH had to  be  followed.   This
    had not been done here.  That in itself was an error of law.

10. For her part, Ms  Aboni  accepted  that  the  judge  did  not  actually
    consider the Appellant's risk upon return, on the basis  of  his  claim
    that he would not be able to acquire  a  CSID  card.   This  concession
    meant that she could not take the matter any further.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of  TCEIA).
    My decision is as follows.  First, it is plain  that  the  judge  after
    paragraph 20 of the determination does not  actively  engage  with  the
    Appellant's claimed risk on account of the fact that he does not have a
    CSID card and would not be able to get one.

12. Second, the issue is of sufficient importance to have been the  subject
    matter of the latest country guidance case of AAH (Iraq), such that  it
    was necessary to deal with it).  This is  further  highlighted  by  the
    recent High Court decision in SS [2019] EWHC 1242.  Moreover, the fact,
    as the High Court case makes clear, that the  whole  issue  about  CSID
    cards has been set down for another country guidance  case  listed  for
    five days in Field House on  24th  June  2019,  means  that  the  issue
    remained particularly important (see paragraph 10).



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I  remake
the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge N Asjad, pursuant  to
Practice Statement 7.2(b).  Given that the question for  this  Tribunal  has
also been addressed on 24th June 2019 before the Upper Tribunal  in  a  five
day hearing, this appeal should only be listed once  the  decision  in  that
case has been promulgated.

An anonymity order is made.

This appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss
                  12th July 2019


