
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03836/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2017                   |On 06 February 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                  PH (IRAN)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Braganza of Counsel, Camden Community Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 20 July 1985.   He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith dismissing  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision dated 8 April 2016  to  refuse
    his claim of asylum and humanitarian protection.

2.   The appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity.  His evidence is that he  worked
    as a photographer and filmmaker in Iran.  His work  included  producing
    videos and printed leaflets for the banned KDPI (the  Democratic  Party
    of Iranian Kurdistan) and although he was not a member of the KDPI,  he
    was strongly supportive of their political objectives.  He was arrested
    in June 2015 by the Iranian authorities when he was filming  a  Kurdish
    traditional wedding  which  is  illegal  under  Iranian  law.   He  was
    detained, beaten and accused of working with the KDPI.  He was released
    on bail with his father as a surety, the security being  the  deeds  to
    his father's property.  He found that his studio was closed and secured
    by the Iranian authorities and believed that they would have taken  all
    of his computers/hard drives containing all the incriminating evidence.
     On release he was warned by a lawyer to leave  Iran  as  he  would  be
    continually subject  to  monitoring  and  persecution.   He  left  Iran
    illegally and entered the UK on false documentation on 14 November 2015
    and claimed asylum.

3.   The judge found that the appellant does not  have  a  well-founded  (or
    even genuine) risk of persecution, either because of  his  support  for
    the KDPI; or for having taken illegal photographs; or  that  he  is  at
    risk on return for having left Iran illegally.

4.   The judge's findings for reaching his conclusion are  to  be  found  at
    paragraphs 92 to 101.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jordan  as
    follows:  it is arguable that the judge's adverse credibility  findings
    are centred upon the peripheral and this has affected his  approach  to
    the core of the claim.  By way of example only, the judge rejected  his
    having photographed a wedding because the lawyer  could  have  obtained
    evidence that the appellant had been arrested.  The better  course  may
    have been to have made findings on whether he  was  a  photographer  by
    profession, what the  Iranian  attitude  is  to  photographers/wedding-
    photographers, whether the appellant was doing  something  illegal  and
    whether that made it likely he was arrested as he claimed and,  if  so,
    what treatment those arrested receive in detention.   This  might  have
    then fed into his consideration of the risk on return.

6.   Ms Braganza submitted that the appellant's appeal turns on the  judge's
    assessment of credibility.  She submitted  that  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jordan's grant of permission encapsulates the appellant's grounds.

7.   After taking me through the judge's  decision,  Ms  Braganza  submitted
    that the judge's conclusions were relatively brief in what  they  dealt
    with.  There was  a  misapplication  of  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  &
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004  the  approach  to
    credibility.   She  submitted  that  the  judge's  starting  point   at
    paragraph 92 was misleading in that he said the  appellant  used  false
    Spanish papers and that he had failed to take reasonable opportunity to
    make an asylum or human rights claim  while  in  a  safe  country.   Ms
    Braganza said that this finding elevated Section 8.  She submitted that
    the judge should have considered each  part  of  the  evidence  in  the
    context of the objective evidence and the expert report.   The  judge's
    elevation of Section 8 impacted his decision.

8.    Ms  Braganza  submitted  that  in  addition  to  the   screening   and
    substantive interviews, and prior to the respondent issuing  a  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter, the appellant submitted a witness statement dated 3
    March 2016 which was before the judge.  The statement detailed the ill-
    treatment the appellant received in detention.  At question 48  of  the
    substantive  interview,  the  appellant  was  only  asked   about   his
    detention.  She submitted that the appellant's detailed description  of
    the ill-treatment he received in  detention  did  not  feature  in  the
    judge's decision.  Given that the most important part of assessing  the
    appellant's  claim  was  credibility,  she  submitted  that  the  judge
    approached it back to front and assessed credibility through  the  lens
    of Article 8.  The grant of permission identified the approach that the
    judge  should  have  taken.   This  was  not  what   the   judge   did.
    Consequently, the judge's decision is flawed and cannot stand.

9.   Ms Braganza said that there were four additional grounds she wished  to
    rely on.  The first was in respect of the judge's finding at  paragraph
    96 that the appellant had not provided a satisfactory  explanation  for
    the lack of any legal  material  relating  to  the  family  home  being
    offered as surety.  The judge had added that the appellant's father had
    a lawyer, on the appellant's own evidence, and had a  home  offered  as
    surety.   He regarded it as wholly implausible that  the  family  would
    not have retained documents relating to the terms of that  surety,  and
    would not have provided them to the appellant, had  they  existed.   Ms
    Braganza relied on paragraph 3.2 of the appellant's  grounds  where  it
    was stated that at no point had the appellant ever given evidence of  a
    lawyer being involved in his release.  His evidence was that  he  spoke
    to a lawyer after his release and was advised  that  he  would  be  put
    under surveillance, his communications intercepted  and  would  not  be
    released again if arrested.  Reference  was  made  to  the  pre-refusal
    decision statement dated 3 March 2016, at paragraph 34, page 14 of  the
    appellant's  bundle.   As  the  lawyer  had  no  involvement   in   the
    appellant's release, it makes it  irrational  for  the  judge  to  make
    adverse findings on the appellant's failure to produce  documents  from
    him/her.

10.  The second additional ground was that for the judge  to  require  legal
    material was a  misapprehension  of  the  evidence  and  leads  to  the
    conclusion that the judge applied a high test to require the  appellant
    to produce legal material.

11.  The third additional argument was in respect of the judge's finding  at
    paragraph 97 that because no such surety was offered, the appellant was
    not detained.  Ms Braganza said that the judge's decision was wrong  in
    light of paragraph 23 of the appellant's statement.

12.  Her  fourth  argument  was  in  relation  to  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 101 with regard to the origin of the  wedding  and  political
    montages.  The judge had said that on the appellant's evidence  he  did
    not take any of the political photographs but  that  they  were  merely
    still photographs that were subsequently assembled.  Ms  Braganza  said
    that the judge failed to take account of the huge volume of photographs
    and montages which bore  the  appellant's  name.   The  judge  did  not
    consider the actual work the appellant did for the KDPI.  She submitted
    that the judge did not approach credibility correctly.

13.  Mr Wilding said that there was  little  he  could  say  to  defend  the
    determination.  He said that although the appellant's witness statement
    of 3 March 2016 was not in the Home Office's bundle, it was  wrong  for
    the judge to say that the appellant had raised the issue  of  his  ill-
    treatment in detention for the first time in his appeal  statement  for
    rejecting the arrest and detention.

14.  In light of Mr Wilding's submission, and the very strong arguments  put
    forward by Ms Braganza, I find that the judge made material  errors  of
    law.

15.  Accordingly, the judge's decision cannot stand.  The  decision  has  to
    be remade.

16.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than FTJ Keith.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date:  5 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

