
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03032/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd March 2018                             |On 19th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    m j k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M J Azmi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hawden-Beal, promulgated on 5th May 2017, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on  25th  April  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on [  ]
    2000.  He claimed asylum on the basis of the fear of  persecution  from
    the Taliban and because his father worked  for  an  NGO  and  from  his
    villagers who will  kill  him  because  they  believed  that  he  is  a
    Christian. The Respondent Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application because, although  accepting  that  the  Appellant  was  an
    Afghan national whose father worked for Shelter International, she  did
    not accept the age given by the Appellant and deemed  him  to  be  aged
    just over 16 years, rather than 17.  She also did not accept  that  the
    Appellant's father had been  receiving  threatening  letters  from  the
    Taliban because the father could not say  when  these  letters  started
    coming to him.  He did not see them.  He did not know  how  his  father
    got them.  The Appellant's account also was that his  father  had  been
    killed by the Taliban and that after that his father came back  to  the
    village for a week on his way to Kandahar, and was  then  kidnapped  by
    the Taliban.  The Appellant maintained that he knew it was the  Taliban
    that were sending the letters because  his  uncle  told  him  that  his
    father had been taken (paragraph 4 of the determination).

The Judge's Findings

 3.  The judge rejected the Appellant's appeal for the following reasons.

 4. First, she did not accept that the Appellant's father had been targeted
    for working for a Christian NGO given that

         "... his father had been doing his job for over sixteen  years  and
         did it when the Taliban was at the height of its power and there is
         no evidence before me to indicate that the  Taliban  bothered  with
         him and the family then ..." (paragraph 30).

   5. Second, the Appellant's family had never hidden what the father's  job
      was "and have never hidden from the Taliban or anyone else" (paragraph
      30).




   6. Third, that "the Appellant is speculating  when  he  claims  that  the
      letters came from the Taliban, given that his evidence is based upon a
      stamp which he claims was at the top of the one  and  only  letter  he
      saw" (paragraph 31).


   7. Fourth, the Appellant was also speculating when  he  stated  that  the
      Taliban killed his grandfather because there was no evidence of such a
      link.


   8. Fifth, the claim that the Taliban killed his grandfather,

         "... is undermined by the fact that the letter he saw clearly  says
         that his father and his family will be killed if he did not give up
         his job.  Why  would  the  Taliban  kill  the  grandfather  without
         knowing if the father had given up his job as ordered?"  (paragraph
         31).

   9. Finally, the judge found that it was "also curious as to why there  is
      nothing from the father to confirm all of this" (paragraph 34).

10. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state, inter alia, that the Appellant was  a
    minor and that the judge  failed  to  have  regard  for  his  age,  his
    understanding, and made no allowances for the limited information given
    to him, at such a young age.

12. On 14th September 2017, the Upper Tribunal granted  permission  on  the
    basis that there was arguably an  error  in  the  suggestion  that  the
    Appellant had simply speculated on crucial matters (see  paragraphs  31
    to 33), without the judge applying the lower standard of proof  in  the
    context of an asylum account provided by a minor, so as  to  show  that
    the Appellant was given the correct  benefit  of  the  doubt,  in  such
    circumstances.

13. On 28th September 2017 a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the findings were  entirely  open
    to the judge from paragraph 30 onwards and that this was no  more  than
    an attempt to relitigate matters already determined.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 2nd  March  2018,  Mr  Azmi,  appearing  as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, made the following submissions.

15. First, Mr Azmi submitted that at paragraph 2(iv) the Appellant had made
    it clear that he could not say more  about  the  reasons  for  why  his
    father was released from kidnapping because his father did not want  to
    talk about this.  Moreover, at paragraph 34 of the  determination,  the
    judge,  when  dealing  with  the  evidence  of  George   Taubman,   the
    international director for Shelter Now  International  a  German  based
    NGO, had stated that, "he did not even know that the Appellant's father
    had been missing,  which  you  would  have  supposed  would  have  been
    remarked upon even if it had been for any length of time".  However, Mr
    Azmi submitted, that in reliance upon the Grounds  of  Appeal  at  sub-
    paragraph 4, the Appellant had not been able to give any timescale  for
    the period his father went missing.  If this  had  indeed  been  for  a
    short period of time, then it was quite plausible that George would not
    have been aware of this.  If George had  not  known  about  his  father
    disappearing in these circumstances then this would not  have  been  an
    adverse effect in in the assessment of the Appellant's credibility.

16. Second, and in any event, whether the Appellant was aged 16 years and 9
    months,  as  the  judge  determined,  or  younger  as   the   Appellant
    maintained, did not matter materially because the Appellant was still a
    minor.

17. Third, in these circumstances, the judge was  wrong  to  criticise  the
    Appellant (at paragraph 32) as to why he did not  say  who  the  family
    members were that had informed him that his father was  alright.   This
    was because, not only was the Appellant a minor child, but there was no
    evidence that he had even been asked about  this  information,  and  if
    this was so, then this was speculation on the part of the  judge.   The
    judge had made no allowance for the Appellant's age.

18. Fourth, the Tribunal determination of KS (benefit of the doubt)  [2014]
    UKUT 00552 makes it clear that "a child sensitive  application  of  the
    lower standard of proof will still need to be given to persons if  they
    are recounting irrelevant events that took place at a  time  when  they
    were minors or were even younger minors" (paragraph 99).  That was  the
    position here.  Mr Azmi submitted he would put it no higher than  this.
    He would,  however,  maintain  that  a  child  sensitive  approach  was
    required, and there was no evidence  of  this  by  the  judge  in  this
    determination.  The Appellant was recounting events relating to letters
    sent (see paragraph 31) much later than  when  they  took  place.   The
    judge was wrong to criticise the Appellant for identifying a letter  as
    emanating from the Taliban when he had only seen one such  letter  with
    an alleged Taliban stamp on it.  The judge stated that,  "there  is  no
    mention of ever seeing a Taliban stamp  before  then"  (paragraph  31).
    However, the judge failed to consider the Appellant's  answers  in  the
    interview to questions 88 to 91 (at D17) where the Appellant  sets  out
    an explanation that his family were hiding the letters  from  him,  but
    his grandfather read out the last one to his father which talked of the
    threat and the  family  were  speaking  about  it.   Moreover,  in  his
    statement, the Appellant states that no-one else but the Taliban  would
    deliver a letter  like  this.   In  fact  the  judge  was  directed  to
    objective evidence dealing with threats from the Taliban in the form of
    letters (at paragraph 23).  The threat  from  the  Taliban  was  a  key
    feature of the Appellant's claim right the way through.

19. Finally, the judge criticised the Appellant (at paragraph 31)  for  his
    statement that the Taliban killed his grandfather, and the judge stated
    that this did not make sense if the Taliban did  not  know  whether  at
    that time his father had already given up his employment as  they  were
    asking him to with the German  NGO  which  had  Christian  credentials.
    However, there was no evidence whatsoever in  this  regard  either  way
    before the judge. Whether the grandfather was killed  with  or  without
    such knowledge of knowing whether the Appellant's father had  given  up
    his job was not a matter that was ever fully explored and explained one
    way or the other.  Mr Azmi also pointed out  that  there  were  letters
    from the Shelter  Now  International  which  had  not  been  adequately
    factored into the assessment of the well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    which the Appellant acclaimed.

20. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that he would have to accept  that  it
    was expressly argued before the judge that the Appellant was  indeed  a
    child.  He would also have to accept that the Appellant's assessment of
    credibility would have to be approached from on that  basis.   However,
    the judge was entitled to treat the Appellant as being 16 years  and  9
    months old, and not as 15 years of age (as claimed by the Appellant).

21. Moreover, the case of KS [2014] UKUT 00552 did not state that there was
    any rule of law that minors must be treated liberally with  respect  to
    the application of the benefit of the doubt.  However, he would have to
    accept that there had to be a child sensitive approach.

22. Second, the judge did take into account the Appellant's age because  at
    the end of the determination the judge observes that,

         "...  with  respect  to  the  Appellant  having  travelled  through
         Bulgaria  in  June  2016,  before  coming  to  the  UK,  that,   'I
         acknowledge that the Appellant should seek asylum in the first safe
         country but equally I bear in mind the fact that he was a minor  at
         the time and under the control of others'" (paragraph 37).

23. Third, insofar as the credibility points were raised by Mr Azmi, it was
    significant that these are not about the ability of a  minor  child  to
    recollect, and  this  was  clear  from  what  the  judge  sets  out  at
    paragraphs 34 to  35,  when  he  is  looking  at  the  failure  of  the
    Appellant's father to confirm the matters referred to by the Appellant.
     If the story was about the father working for  a  foreign  NGO,  being
    kidnapped, and the grandfather then being  killed,  and  the  Appellant
    then being sent  out  of  the  country  to  seek  sanctuary,  this  was
    something that did not entirely relate to the  Appellant's  ability  to
    recollect events.  The judge refers (at paragraph 34) to the NGO letter
    from Shelter Now International, but this is lacking in full detail  and
    there is nothing in this letter about  the  Appellant's  father  having
    been kidnapped.  Such issues are entirely unrelated to the age  of  the
    Appellant.

24. In reply, Mr Azmi submitted that it was not the case that the judge had
    adopted a child sensitive approach to the Appellant, because  there  is
    no evidence of this from the outset of the determination.   Insofar  as
    is a reference to the Appellant being a minor at paragraph 37, this  is
    only in the context of  his  failure  to  apply  for  asylum,  when  he
    travelled through Bulgaria in June 2016, and the judge  at  that  point
    gives him the benefit of the doubt by saying that he was a minor and he
    was in the control of others.  That is not to say,  however,  that  the
    judge was cognisant of the Appellant being a child when he  was  giving
    evidence in relation to the matters  for  which  he  was  found  to  be
    lacking in credibility with respect to the nature of his claim.

Error of Law

25. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

26. First, it is the case that the Appellant's father did work for  a  bona
    fide Christian charity by the name of Shelter Now International,  based
    in Germany.  Their evidence, regardless of what the Appellant was  able
    to recollect or not, is significant.  First, there is  the  email  from
    George Taubman, the international director,  dated  3rd  January  2017.
    This makes it quite clear that "it is very  dangerous  for  Afghans  to
    work for a foreign NGO and many times employees/staff of  foreign  NGOs
    have been kidnapped and killed".  He makes it quite  clear  that  every
    time his staff members are travelling "their lives will  be  threatened
    if they were stopped by the Taliban or ISIS.   Our  staff  members  are
    often in danger".  In addition, he  draws  specific  attention  to  the
    Appellant's father and observes that, Mr Mohammad Munib and his  family
    "could be targeted" by the "Islamic extremists" where  the  Appellant's
    father now lived because it is "in an area outside of Kabul that is not
    very safe and it has been infiltrated by the Taliban".   Mr  Mills  was
    right to concede that  the  veracity  of  these  statements  cannot  be
    impugned and they must be taken at face value.  If so, they do point to
    a level of risk that has to be the starting  point  in  relation  to  a
    consideration of the claim of this  minor  Appellant.   There  is  also
    thereafter a letter dated 4th April 2017 from George Taubman again (see
    page  4  of  the  Appellant's  bundle)  and  this  confirms  that   the
    Appellant's father is known to have converted to Christianity and  that
    this would place him at very considerable risk, even from  the  Afghani
    government.  Importantly he goes on to say, "it is  dangerous  for  our
    local staff to work with  a  Christian  humanitarian  organisation  and
    there are many examples of workers of similar organisations having been
    killed".

27. Second, there is the credibility of the Appellant himself.  As Mr  Azmi
    made clear it was well recorded in the determination (at paragraph  21)
    that he began by emphasising the fact that the Appellant was  a  child,
    and that this should be borne in mind, and "he  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant was not told everything  that  had  happened  to  his  family
    because of his age".  He goes on to say that the Appellant only saw the
    letter from the Taliban when his grandfather spoke to his father  about
    it and that, "he described a stamp and Mr Azmi submitted that  his  age
    could have explained why he thought  that  the  letter  came  from  the
    Taliban" (paragraph 21).

28. In circumstances where the overwhelming threat in that area is from the
    Taliban it is not unreasonable for the Appellant, as a child,  to  have
    assumed and to have believed that the letter came from the Taliban. But
    even more importantly during his interview (at questions 88 to  91)  he
    had explained that the family were hiding the letters from him and that
    his grandfather had read out the last one  to  his  father  and  talked
    about the threat to the family.

29. In this respect, not only is it the case that the Appellant's  evidence
    stood to be treated as being credible, but there is no evidence that  a
    child sensitive approach was taken from the outset to the consideration
    of his evidence.  Insofar as there is a reference at  paragraph  37  to
    the Appellant being a minor "at the  time  and  under  the  control  of
    others" this is not in relation to the evaluation of his evidence,  but
    only with respect to the fact that he could not  himself  have  claimed
    asylum in Bulgaria, when an adult may have done so.

30. Finally, the criticism of the Appellant's evidence on  the  basis  that
    his grandfather could not have been killed, without the  Taliban  first
    ascertaining whether his father had given  up  the  employment  with  a
    Christian charity, is a criticism that is arguably without  foundation.
    There was no evidence to this effect either way, as Mr Azmi  submitted.
    In any event, had a child sensitive approach been taken a criticism may
    well have been avoided altogether.

31. For all these reasons,  the  determination  has  been  rendered  unsafe
    because of a material error of law.

Re-Making the Decision

32. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal to the  limited  extent  that  it  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by  a  judge
    other than Judge Hawden-Beal, under Practice Statement 7.2(a).

33. An anonymity order is made

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th March 2018

