
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/03971/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 October 2017                        |On 20 October 2017               |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     LS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (Appellant)  against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Wyman (the judge), promulgated on 29 March 2017,  allowing
        the Respondent's appeal against the Appellant's decision,  made  on
        10 December 2015, to refuse his protection and human rights claims.


     2. The grounds contend that the judge fell into  legal  error  in  her
        approach to  the  issues  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and  the
        availability of internal relocation. Although the Appellant did not
        find all of the Respondent's claim to be credible (she  did  accept
        that the Respondent  was  mistreated  by  his  father),  the  judge
        accepted most aspects of the Appellant's  account  (only  rejecting
        his claim that he feared he  would  be  harmed  by  his's  sister's
        husband's family). No challenge has been  mounted  to  the  judge's
        credibility assessment or her factual findings.

Relevant background

     3. The Respondent, a national of Albania, was born on 14 June 2000. He
        was 16 years old at the  date  of  the  judge's  decision.  He  was
        physically abused by his father who forced him to  sell  cigarettes
        instead of going to school and, if not enough cigarettes were sold,
        would beat the Respondent. His  father  was  also  violent  to  his
        mother and sister. The Respondent's mother did report this violence
        to  the  police  but  they  took  no  action.  The  Respondent  was
        eventually asked by some regular customers to transport packages of
        hashish to different bars and cafes in  Tirana.  He  initially  did
        this in exchange for clothes and trainers as well as money but  was
        ultimately compelled to do so by a criminal gang who threatened  to
        harm or kill him if he did not cooperate. The Respondent was forced
        to work for the criminal  gang  for  approximately  6  months.  The
        Respondent believed that the criminal gang may have had connections
        with the police and explained that at least one gang member knew  a
        policeman. The Respondent believed that other members of  the  gang
        worked in other neighbourhoods of Tirana. The  Respondent's  father
        expressed no interest in the threats  received  by  the  Respondent
        from  the  gang  and  indeed  was  content  for  him  to   continue
        transporting hashish as this generated greater revenue than  simply
        selling  cigarettes.  The  Respondent's  sister  met  somebody  who
        promised to help both of them leave Albania. He eventually  entered
        the United Kingdom on 25 June 2015 having  left  Albania  with  his
        older sister on 19 May 2015. He claimed asylum on 19 August 2015.

 The First-tier Tribunal decision

     4. The judge heard evidence from the Respondent, who underwent  cross-
        examination. The judge noted the Appellant's  acceptance  that  the
        Respondent was mistreated by his father  and  that  he  provided  a
        credible and consistent account regarding these problems. The judge
        accepted  the  Respondent's  account  of  his  involvement  with  a
        criminal gang, that he had been forced  to  transport  packages  of
        hashish for the gang, and that he had been threatened by the  gang.
        Whilst noting that the Respondent feared non-state agents the judge
        concluded that the Respondent could not  approach  the  authorities
        for assistance. The judge had particular regard to  the  fact  that
        the authorities previously failed to take any steps to protect  his
        mother  after  she  reported  his  father's  violence.  The   judge
        indicated  that  she  had  specifically  considered   the   Country
        Information and Guidance (CIG) guidance and that  the  availability
        of  a  sufficiency  of  protection  depended  on   the   particular
        circumstances of the case and the profile of the person. The  judge
        took into account that the Respondent was only 16  years  old.  The
        judge concluded that the  Respondent  would  be  unable  to  obtain
        sufficient protection from the authorities.


     5. The judge then turned to the issue  of  internal  relocation.  Once
        again, the judge noted the CIG guidance and that, in general, where
        the threat was from non-state  agents,  internal  relocation  to  a
        different area was likely to be a viable  option.  The  judge  then
        took into  account  the  specific  personal  circumstances  of  the
        Respondent and in particular his young  age.  The  judge  concluded
        that it would be unduly harsh for the Respondent to relocate  to  a
        different part of Albania, especially as all his  family  lived  in
        Tirana and that he had  no  other  source  of  support.  The  judge
        allowed the Respondents asylum claim.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

     6. The Appellant contends that the judge erred in  law  in  concluding
        that there was no effective sufficiency  of  protection.  Reference
        was made  to  the  consideration  in  the  refusal  letter  of  the
        availability of a sufficiency of protection and the conclusion that
        the authorities would be able to provide sufficient protection.  It
        was unclear how the judge concluded there was an unwillingness  and
        inability to  protect  the  Respondent.  The  grounds  additionally
        contend that the judge failed to give reasons why the  Respondent's
        age prevented him from internally  relocating.  The  grounds  again
        stated that full  consideration  to  the  possibility  of  internal
        relocation had been considered in the refusal letter.


     7. Permission was granted on the basis that the judge  arguably  erred
        in law in her application of the Horvath principles (Horvath v  The
        Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2001]  1  AC  489).
        Although the internal relocation point was said to be less arguable
        permission was nevertheless given.


     8. Mr Bramble submitted that there was no adequate assessment  by  the
        judge of the availability of a sufficiency of protection.  Although
        Mr Bramble accepted that the background evidence at  paragraphs  37
        to 44 of the reasons for refusal letter dealt  in  a  very  general
        manner with the availability of a  sufficiency  of  protection,  he
        submitted that  the  judge  and  didn't  adequately  consider  this
        material. Mr Bramble additionally pointed out that  the  Respondent
        had a cousin with whom he stayed, albeit in hiding, shortly  before
        he left Albania. It was submitted that the judge failed to consider
        this in concluding that  internal  relocation  was  not  reasonably
        available.

     9. Mr Collins provided the Tribunal with the decisions  in  Budhathoki
        (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) and MK (duty to give
        reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 9IAC). He invited  me  to  find
        that, read as a whole, the decision did  indicate  that  the  judge
        gave sufficient reasons for her conclusions. The judge adopted  the
        correct test in law and was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
        previous response by the police and the degree of corruption within
        the police force and the Respondent's minority in  concluding  that
        the authorities would be unable or unwilling to  provide  him  with
        sufficient protection against his father and the criminal gang.



Discussion

    10.  The  judge's  conclusions  in  respect  of  the  existence  of   a
        sufficiency of protection  must  be  considered  in  light  of  her
        factual findings, read as a whole. The judge found  the  Respondent
        credible.  No  challenge  was  made  to  her  positive  credibility
        findings. The judge therefore found that the Respondent feared  not
        just his father but a criminal gang with at least one member having
        a connection to the police. This factual finding is not  surprising
        when considered against the background evidence  before  the  judge
        dealing with police corruption. Indeed,  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
        Letter contains an extract from the US State Department  report  of
        2014 indicating that the police did  not  always  enforce  the  law
        equally. Personal associations, political or criminal  connections,
        poor infrastructure, lack of equipment, or  inadequate  supervision
        often influenced enforcement of laws. Low salaries, poor motivation
        and  leadership,  and  a  lack  of  diversity  in   the   workforce
        contributed to continued corruption and  unprofessional  behaviour.
        Impunity remained a serious problem, although the  government  made
        greater efforts to address it, and police corruption was a problem.




    11. The criminal gang threatened to kill the Respondent if he  did  not
        continue transporting hashish and  the  gang  operated  in  various
        neighbourhoods of Tirana. The judge  additionally  found  that  the
        Respondent's mother previously complained to the police  about  his
        father's violence but they  did  nothing.  In  his  statement,  the
        Respondent explained that his father was even told  that  a  report
        had been made that  caused  him  to  become  more  violent  to  the
        Respondent's mother.


    12. From paragraphs 37 to 43 the judge gave a summary of the background
        evidence relating to Albania. The Country Information and  Guidance
        (CIG) report 'Albania:  ground  information,  including  actors  of
        protection, and internal relocation' dated August  2015,  indicated
        that while there was a fully functioning police and judicial system
        there were instances of corruption  and  members  of  the  security
        forces had committed abuses. Poor infrastructure, lack of equipment
        and inadequate supervision all contributed to continued  corruption
        and unprofessional behaviour. The judge noted the conclusion of the
        report that, whilst in general the Albanian authorities  were  able
        and willing to provide protection to  a  person  fearing  non-state
        agents, this was dependent on the particular circumstances  of  the
        case and profile of the person. The judge  additionally  considered
        the US State Department report on human rights practices  for  2015
        which indicated that child abuse  was  widespread  although  rarely
        reported. 58% of children were said to be victims of physical abuse
        and almost 70% of children reported psychological abuse from family
        members. Most child labour occurred in the informal sector.


    13. Having given a summary of the pertinent background  materials,  and
        having specifically indicated that she had taken  the  Respondent's
        particular circumstances into account, including his  age  and  the
        previous failure by the police to take any  steps  to  protect  his
        mother, and clearly mindful that the Respondent feared serious harm
        from a criminal gang with links to the police, the judge  concluded
        that the authorities would be unable to provide him with sufficient
        protection. This is a conclusion the judge was rationally  entitled
        to reach for the reasons given. The  judge  evaluated  whether  the
        authorities would be willing to protect him  given  his  particular
        circumstances and concluded, giving  adequate  reasons,  that  they
        would not. It is inescapable that in reaching this  conclusion  the
        judge had regard to her summary of the background  evidence  before
        her and to her own factual findings.


    14. Having found that the Appellant held a well-founded fear of serious
        ill treatment in his home  area,  and  that  the  authorities  were
        incapable,  given  his  particular  circumstances,   of   providing
        sufficient protection, the judge proceeded to consider whether  the
        Respondent  could  avail  himself  of   the   internal   relocation
        alternative. The grounds contend that the availability of  internal
        relocation was fully considered in the refusal letter and that  the
        judge failed to provide reasons as to why the age of the Respondent
        prevented him internally relocating. The Respondent's home area  is
        a Tirana. When assessing internal relocation, the judge considered,
        at [104] that the constitution and  law  of  Albania  provided  for
        freedom  of  internal  and  external  movement  and  that  the  CIG
        indicated that, in  general,  where  a  threat  is  from  non-state
        agents, internal relocation to  a  different  area  of  Albania  is
        likely to be a viable option. The judge properly noted however that
        each case must be considered on its own specific facts.  The  judge
        took account of the fact that the Respondent was 16  years  old  at
        the date of  the  hearing.  The  judge  previously  summarised  the
        background  evidence  noting  that  child  abuse   was   widespread
        throughout Albania and that  most  child  labour  occurred  in  the
        informal sector. While Mr Bramble pointed out that  the  Respondent
        hid at a cousin's home prior to leaving for the United Kingdom this
        was only for a short time and the fact remains that the  Respondent
        was in hiding. The judge specifically found that the Respondent had
        no other source of support. I note the background evidence  in  the
        US State Department report before the judge  indicated  that  there
        continued to be numerous displaced and  street  children  and  that
        these children were at high risk of trafficking. It is  clear  that
        the judge considered the  US  State  Department  report  given  her
        summary at [41] et seq.


    15. Having holistic regard to the  judge's  factual  findings  and  the
        material she considered, and the particular emphasis placed by  the
        judge on the Respondent's youth, I am satisfied that the judge gave
        legally adequate reasons for concluding that it was unreasonable or
        unduly harsh to expect the Respondent to relocate to  another  part
        of the country.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no legal error. The  appeal
by the Secretary of State for the Home Department is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Respondent  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]                               19 October 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


