
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/03400/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 August 2019                       |On 09 September 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                   Mr H H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Aziz instructed by Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born on 21  March  1994.   He  left
    Iraq on 25 September 2014 he claimed because he had been working for  a
    man named M at his garage in Kirkuk.  M began repairing cars  for  ISIS
    and used a second garage  in  a  different  place  in  order  to  plant
    explosives in vehicles, as a result of which  he  was  arrested  on  16
    September 2014 and subsequently  sentenced  to  ten  years  in  prison.
    Fearing repercussions, the Appellant's uncle took him to  his  friend's
    house for nine days, following which he went into hiding having  learnt
    the authorities searched his home and he then left Iraq with  the  help
    of an agent.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK  unlawfully  on  1  December  2014  and
    claimed asylum the  same  day.   This  application  was  refused  in  a
    decision dated 22 March 2019.   The  Appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision and his appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Devlin for hearing on 15 May 2019.  There was no appearance  by  or  on
    behalf of the Respondent.  In a decision and reasons dated 31 May  2019
    the judge dismissed the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant's
    account was not credible and that he would not be at risk on return  to
    Iraq.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that the judge's
    findings as to the Appellant's credibility were inconsistent,  in  that
    the judge accepted some aspects of the Appellant's claim  but  rejected
    other aspects and failed to take into account that  he  was  vulnerable
    due to his illiteracy.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Bird in a decision dated 3 July 2019, in relation to the  fact  it  was
    arguable that the judge  made  an  arguable  error  of  law  in  making
    findings which, on the face of them, appear inconsistent  and  that  he
    had failed to apply anxious scrutiny to the  appeal  referring  to  the
    Appellant as coming from Iran on two occasions at [222] and [229].

     Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Aziz sought to rely on the
    grounds of appeal.  He also sought  to  raise  a  new  issue,  that  of
    procedural fairness, in that at page 33 of the decision  at  [260]  the
    judge raised a number of points which had not been put to the Appellant
    in order to give him the opportunity to comment,  those  points  being,
    for example:

         "The Appellant did not name (i) his  uncle;  (ii)  the  village  to
         which he accompanied M to pick up the two vehicles;  or  (iii)  the
         friend who warned him that the security  forces  were  looking  for
         him.  It is true he was not asked to do so in the asylum interview.
          However, he had the opportunity  to  add  further  detail  in  his
         statement.  He failed to do so.  I do not think it  can  be  argued
         that he was afraid to incriminate the said individuals since (a) he
         was told at the commencement of the asylum screening interview that
         'the information you give us will be held in  confidence';  (b)  he
         was told at the commencement of  the  asylum  interview  that  'The
         information you provide about your reasons for seeking asylum  will
         not be shared with the authorities in your own country'; and (c) by
         the date of his asylum interview he had been living in the  UK  for
         three years and by his own admission he realised he was in  a  safe
         place".

 6. However, in light of the fact that a  procedural  fairness  ground  had
    neither been raised in the grounds of appeal thus  permission  had  not
    been granted on that point, nor had any formal application been made to
    amend the grounds in advance of the hearing in order to give Mr McVeety
    the opportunity to consider the point, I declined  to  admit  it  as  a
    further ground, not least on the basis that I did not consider it would
    make any material difference to the outcome of the proceedings, as  the
    judge did not make any adverse finding specifically on that  particular
    issue, apart from what is contained at [260].

 7. Mr Aziz also took issue with the judge's finding at [276] that  he  was
    not satisfied the Appellant is illiterate and adopting a  point  I  had
    raised at the outset of the hearing, he submitted that  the  judge  had
    erred in preferring the evidence set out at [2.3.27] to [2.3.35] of the
    CPIN, version 5 dated November 2018, rather than the position taken  in
    the country guidance cases of AA (Iraq) and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal
    relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212 and that he  had  erred  in  finding  at
    [309] that he was not satisfied conditions  in  Kirkuk  are  such  that
    there were substantial grounds for believing that any civilian returned
    there solely on account of his presence faced  a  real  risk  of  being
    subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious  harm  within
    the scope of Article 15(c) of the QD.  Mr Aziz  submitted  this  was  a
    material error of law  which  was  sufficient  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted back to the First-tier.

 8. In his submissions, Mr McVeety stated that in fact the judge's position
    was that he did not  accept  the  Appellant's  credibility,  that  what
    appeared to be findings in respect of the Appellant's  favour  was  the
    judge simply setting out in some detail the Respondent's position which
    had been also set out in the refusal decision.   Mr  McVeety  submitted
    that what the judge had  done  at  [259]  to  [269]  was  consider  the
    Appellant's credibility overall and reject it.  He submitted  that  the
    judge's decision was extremely detailed and long, the  judge  had  been
    perhaps overly forensic and cautious but had  been  extremely  careful,
    perhaps because the Respondent was not represented and had set out  the
    Respondent's case in full, considered the Appellant's  account  in  its
    entirety, found it lacking in detail and dismissed the  appeal  on  the
    basis of credibility.

 9. In relation to the Article 15(c) point, Mr  McVeety  submitted  it  was
    open to the judge to depart from the country guidance, however  it  was
    not in any event a material error because the judge had gone on in  the
    alternative to make a  finding  that  the  Appellant  could  internally
    relocate to the IKR and had given detailed reasons  and  made  detailed
    findings in light of the country guidance decision of AAH (op cit).  In
    light of the clear findings on credibility the Appellant would  not  be
    able to succeed.

10. In reply Mr Aziz sought to reiterate that the manner in which the judge
    had dealt with Article 15(c) in Kirkuk was erroneous and that this  was
    material.

     Findings and Reasons

11. I find no material errors of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Devlin.  The decision and reasons is conspicuously  detailed  and
    runs to 43 pages and 331 paragraphs.  It cannot be said that the  judge
    did not give detailed and careful consideration to each aspect  of  the
    appeal.  I prefer the submissions of  Mr  McVeety  in  respect  of  the
    judge's approach and I find there is no inconsistency  in  relation  to
    his findings on credibility.  It is quite clear  from  page  8  onwards
    that what the judge is there doing is set out by way  of  a  subheading
    "Points raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter".  The judge then sets
    out each point made by the Respondent and whether or not he accepts it.
     Whilst it is the case that a number of points raised by the Respondent
    were not accepted by the judge, e.g. at [46] and [47] viz  whether  the
    Appellant had failed to satisfactorily explain how  he  knew  that  the
    vehicles brought to M's garage were connected to ISIS and gave detailed
    reasons for his findings, ultimately there are  a  number  of  material
    points in respect of which the judge did not find  in  the  Appellant's
    favour.  The analysis of the refusal decision goes to page 28 at [219].



12. The judge then turned to his own observations on  the  case  and  found
    that the Appellant's evidence in respect of his identity  documentation
    was inconsistent and gave detailed reasons for so finding and also  his
    evidence with regard to his home address, which in  part  provided  the
    explanation for his failure to contact his family since he  left  Iraq.
    The judge at [267] to [268] noted that there are real questions as to:

      1) why the Appellant waited at home if he knew that he was  wanted  by
         the security forces in connection with terrorist activity;

      2) why he initially claimed he was not aware of  the  security  forces
         having come to his house, or perhaps more accurately, how he  could
         have forgotten that his uncle told him that  they  did  go  to  his
         house and were looking for him; and

      3) how the Appellant could have been unaware that there was  a  postal
         service in Iraq if, as he claimed, he had lived in Kirkuk  for  the
         first twenty years of his life.  These  remain  unanswered  despite
         having been raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

13. The judge went on to find although there was broad consistency  in  the
    Appellant's account, he noted a number of significant discrepancies  at
    [271] of the decision, none of  which  were  satisfactorily  explained,
    although all the points were raised in oral evidence.  In light of  the
    judge's findings no material issue of procedural fairness  arises.  The
    judge  at  [274]  to  [280]  relied  upon  the  absence  of  supporting
    documentary evidence. Whilst at [276]  he  referred  to  the  Appellant
    being illiterate, the main point he is making at this paragraph is that
    the Appellant, regardless of being illiterate, is legally  represented,
    has been able to communicate his position to  his  representatives  and
    the Tribunal and therefore, even if he was unable to provide  evidence,
    his legal representatives might have sought  evidence  to  support  his
    case: see [279] where reference is made to  the  production  of  expert
    evidence or country background evidence, e.g. to show that M might have
    been sentenced to ten years or that there  was  no  functioning  postal
    system in Kirkuk.

14. The judge considered plausibility at [281] to [286] and  section  8  of
    the 2004 Act at [287] to  [288]  and  also  addressed  the  Appellant's
    behaviour as a witness at [289].  He then reached  his  conclusions  on
    credibility at [292]  through  to  [298].  The  Judge  made  clear  and
    sustainable findings that he could not be satisfied, even to the  lower
    standard, that there was a reasonable likelihood or real risk that  the
    Appellant's account of his events that led to his departure  from  Iraq
    were worthy of credence.  The judge accepted the Appellant was an Iraqi
    national of Kurdish  ethnicity  and  that  he  had  been  arrested  and
    fingerprinted in Austria and Hungary.  The judge gave nine  reasons  at
    [298] for rejecting the Appellant's account, none  of  which  have,  in
    fact, been challenged in the grounds  of  appeal.   Therefore,  I  find
    there is no material error in the judge's assessment of the Appellant's
    credibility.

15. In relation to risk on return, whilst Mr McVeety is correct  in  theory
    that it is open to a judge to depart from a country guidance  decision,
    it is only in certain circumstances that that is  justifiable.  I  find
    that preferring evidence in the form of a CPIN is not sufficient reason
    to depart from the country guidance given by both the Court  of  Appeal
    and the Upper Tribunal.  Thus, the judge erred in law in that  respect.
    However, I have concluded that that error is not material  because  the
    judge then went on to consider in the alternative that if the Appellant
    could not return to Kirkuk whether  he  could  internally  relocate  to
    Baghdad or the IKR.  Those findings have not  been  challenged  in  the
    grounds of appeal, they are predicated on the judge's previous findings
    in relation  to  the  Appellant's  credibility  and  I  find  they  are
    sustainable.  Therefore,  I  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and dismiss the appeal.

16. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 8 September 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


