
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03905/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2020                               |On 19 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     vk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Childs, Counsel instructed by CK Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to VK as the appellant and to
    the Secretary of State as the respondent,  reflecting  their  positions
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This decision is a remaking of the Article  3  ECHR  appeal  originally
    brought by VK as part of his challenge to the refusal of his protection
    and human rights by the respondent on 4 June 2019.

 4. The re-making of the Article 3 ECHR  claim  is  required  following  my
    error of law decision issued on 15 January 2020 which found an error in
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Woolf which had allowed the  appeal
    on Article 3 medical grounds.  As set out in the error of law  decision
    in paragraphs 19, 21 and 22, the error of law and remaking was  limited
    to the appellant's Article 3 medical claim.

 5. The background to this matter is that the appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Ukraine born in 1971.  He came to the UK illegally  in  June  2016.  He
    claimed asylum on 23 December 2018 after being encountered working on a
    building site.  The appellant maintained that  he  was  called  up  for
    military service  in  Ukraine  between  1991  and  1993  and  again  in
    September 2014.  On the latter occasion he was given a role as a driver
    and was injured when a tank fired at his military vehicle.  He suffered
    some  physical   injuries   from   this   attack   and   was   affected
    psychologically.  His military service came to an end in September 2015
    but he remained in the operative  reserves.   He  refused  any  further
    offers to re-join the military.  He attempted to avoid  confrontational
    situations with civilians who did not understand the  difficulties  for
    those who had served in the military.  However,  on  approximately  ten
    occasions he was attacked by Ukrainians who  supported  Russia  in  the
    conflict.  Feeling that he was unable to remain in  Ukraine  and  speak
    freely and also concerned that these attacks might escalate or that  he
    might end up in prison for being involved in  these  fights,  with  the
    assistance of friends he left Ukraine.

 6. The appellant also maintained that after coming to the UK in March 2018
    he was informed by his nephew that a call-up  notice  had  been  issued
    requiring him to attend again for military service.

 7. As above, the respondent refused the appellant's protection  and  human
    rights claims on 4 June 2019.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal and the decision of 20 September 2019, allowing the appeal  on
    Article 3 medical grounds, followed.  The error of law  hearing  before
    me was on 18 December 2019 and, as above, my error of law decision  was
    issued on 15 January 2020.

 8. There is no dispute here that the appellant suffers from post-traumatic
    stress disorder (PTSD) brought on  by  his  service  in  the  Ukrainian
    military and, in particular, an attack on his unit in 2014 in which the
    tank in which he was serving was blown up.  He suffered  head  injuries
    and had to witness the death and  suffering  of  others.  The  specific
    symptoms of this condition were described in a psychology report  dated
    12 July 2019 of  Dr  Green,  a  clinical  neuropsychologist  which  was
    considered in the error of law decision at paragraph 5.10.1:

         "VK has  experienced  a  potentially  life-threatening  trauma  and
         ongoing trauma during the rest of his  time  serving  in  the  army
         during the war.  As described above, he reported  various  symptoms
         that he has experienced or is experiencing, including  poor  sleep,
         nightmares,   flashbacks,   low   mood,   increased   irritability,
         headaches,   a   heightened   startled   response,   and    various
         physiological anxiety responses.  VK reported engaging  in  various
         avoidance behaviours to cope and resorting to using alcohol to help
         him manage with flashbacks and getting to sleep."

 9. The correct approach to an Article 3 medical claim brought on the basis
    of a mental disorder is set out in the case of J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ
    629.  This case provides as follows in paragraphs 26 to 31:
         "26. First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed.  This must attain a minimum level  of
             severity.  The court has said on a number  of  occasions  that
             the  assessment  of  its   severity   depends   on   all   the
             circumstances  of  the  case.   But  the  ill-treatment   must
             'necessarily be serious'  such  that  it  is  'an  affront  to
             fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to
             a country where he is at risk of serious  ill-treatment':  see
             Ullah paras [38-39].
         27.  Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  Article  3
             rights.  Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:
                  'In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment.'(emphasis added).
             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the Article 3  issue  'must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka...'
          1. Thirdly, in the context of  a  foreign  case,  the  Article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.


          1. Fourthly, an Article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).
          1. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach
             of Article 3 in a suicide case, a question  of  importance  is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to  be  based  is
             objectively well-founded. If the  fear  is  not  well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
             the removal will be in breach of Article 3.
          1. Sixthly, a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her Article
             3 rights."
10. The assessment of the appellant's Article 3 medical claim did not  take
    place at the error of law hearing in order to allow  the  appellant  to
    adduce any further material on which he wished to rely  in  support  of
    that claim.  He provided a supplementary bundle for the  hearing  on  5
    March 2020 which included an addendum report from  Dr  Green  dated  18
    February 2020 and medical records from  cognitive  behavioural  therapy
    sessions which have  taken  place  between  22  November  2019  and  13
    February 2020.  The appellant also provided a letter from his GP  dated
    4 March 2020.


11. It is my conclusion, having considered all of the materials  before  me
    against the guidance in J, that the appellant  cannot  meet  the  first
    test set out in paragraph 26 for a minimum level  of  severity  of  the
    medical  condition  to  be  present.  The  case  of  J   confirms   the
    particularly stringent threshold in Article 3 medical cases provided in
    the case of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31.  It was not submitted to  me  that
    the decision of the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights
    in Paposhvili v Belgium (41738/10)  materially  altered  the  threshold
    that the appellant here had to meet.

12. Nothing in the evidence indicated that at  the  time  of  the  original
    trauma or at any time thereafter whilst he remained in Ukraine that the
    appellant had thoughts of self-harm or suicide. It is  also  undisputed
    that he did not present to any authority in the UK with  mental  health
    problems until he was detained and claimed asylum on 23 December  2018.



13. Further, it is also the appellant's case, understandably  so,  that  he
    became particularly unwell during his period of detention in the UK  in
    late 2018 and into 2019 and that his symptoms of PTSD increased  during
    this period.  However, even during this particularly difficult  period,
    the medical records from the detention centre  do  not  show  that  his
    health deteriorated to as to  meet  the  threshold  for  an  Article  3
    medical claim.  The  medical  records  from  the  Heathrow  Immigration
    Removal Centre are contained in pages 29 to 45 of the appellant's  main
    bundle.  On paragraph 30 the records indicate towards the  final  third
    of the page that he did not express ideas of self-harming  or  suicide,
    had not tried to harm himself  and  had  not  received  medication  for
    mental health problems.

14. The next significant piece of medical evidence is the first  report  of
    Dr Green which is dated 12 July 2019.  In  paragraph  5.35  the  report
    states this:

         "5.3.5   With regards risk, [VK] was asked about whether he has any
                current suicidal ideation or thoughts about harming himself.
                 He denied  having  any  thoughts  or  intention  to  commit
                suicide or harm himself.  [VK] mentioned that he had friends
                in the army who have committed suicide.  He stated  that  he
                hoped that this would not be him one day."

15. Nothing further in this report shows any  assessment  of  the  risk  of
    suicide or self-harm or any expression of any behaviour or thoughts  or
    ideation from the appellant that might suggest that this was in any way
    a risk for him.  In my view this also indicates that his  claim  cannot
    meet the minimum threshold for a finding of an Article 3 medical claim.
     The appellant's medical background and the information he gave  to  Dr
    Green did not support the  statements  in  in  paragraph  7.2.3  of  Dr
    Green's report that if the appellant were  faced  with  deportation  to
    Ukraine "there is a risk of suicide" and that:

         "I am concerned that, were he faced with forced extradition to  the
         Ukraine, [VK] is at significant risk of suicide.  As stated  above,
         he has avoided the Ukraine to the point of not being able to return
         home and see his children and I am,  therefore  concerned  that  he
         would damage himself severely if he were forced to return."

16. In his addendum report dated 18 February 2020, Dr Green  refer  to  the
    specific psychological assessments that he carried at the time  of  the
    first report.  He maintained that  I  was  referred  in  particular  to
    paragraphs 6.62 which reads as follows:

         "6.6.2   [VK]  scored  significantly  high  on  the  Anxiety  (98),
                Somatoform (76), Dysthymia (93), Alcohol Dependence (77) and
                PTSD (91) Clinical Syndrome Scales, and the Thought Disorder
                (76) and Major  Depression  (86)  Severe  Clinical  Syndrome
                Scales thus indicating the prominence of syndromes.

         ...


                  - Individuals who score highly on the Dysthymia scale tend
                    to be socially withdrawn, pessimistic  discouraged,  and
                    preoccupied with feelings of personal inadequacy.   They
                    have low self-esteem and  are  persistently  sad.   When
                    symptoms  appear,  these  can  include  poor   appetite,
                    suicidal ideation and problems in concentration.

             ...



                  - Individuals who score highly  on  the  Major  Depressive
                    scale are severely depressed and may be unable to manage
                    their day-to-day activities.  Suicidal ideation  may  be
                    present,  and  their  underlying  personality  style  is
                    likely  to  be  of  the   emotionally   detached   type,
                    especially dependent or depressed."

   2. In paragraph 4.4 of the addendum report,  Dr  Green  refers  to  these
      findings and goes on to state:

         "Taken together, along with his presentation in clinical interview,
         uninformed (sic) the view that they (sic) risk of suicide could not
         be ruled out who (sic) would not be wisely left unaddressed in [VK]
         case.   I continue to hold the belief, that [VK] would be  at  risk
         of suicide should an immigration tribunal recommend his  return  to
         the Ukraine.  It may be that [VK] experiences a  trauma  shaped  is
         current  functioning  such  that  he  has  maladapted  coping  with
         emotions leading to the elevations  on  concerning  subscales  that
         were observed upon the Million Clinical  Multiaxial  Inventory  3rd
         edition as reported  in  my  substantive  report  and  referred  to
         above."

17. My difficulty in accepting this clarification is that the references in
    paragraph 6.6.2 of the first report to suicidal ideation is not to  any
    symptoms, observed or reported, concerning VK but to features that  may
    be present where an individual obtains the scores that VK  did  on  the
    psychological tests that were used.  They do not identify that  VK  has
    ever experienced suicidal ideation.  The  evidence  shows  consistently
    that  he has not. Both of the references here to suicidal ideation  are
    to the effect that this "may" be a symptom.

18. Further, in paragraph 4.5 of the addendum report, Dr  Green  states  as
    follows:

         "I must stress a significant caveat here: I have not met with  [VK]
         for the best part of a year and I therefore  have  no  up  to  date
         information about his psychological functioning.  If so instructed,
         I am in a position to meet  with  [VK]  once  more,  to  update  my
         opinion.  If such a meeting were to be sanctioned, it would  afford
         me the opportunity to conduct further objective testing of specific
         risk of suicide and current state of clinical depression.  This was
         not done at the time of my meeting him  previously  owing  to  time
         constraints and prioritisation of other testing that was  necessary
         and relevant to my instructions at that point."

19. This paragraph indicates  that  there  was  no  "objective  testing  of
    specific risk of suicide" in the previous report and that one  had  not
    been conducted since. This is a  further  factor  indicating  that  the
    evidence does not show that the appellant's mental illness, serious and
    distressing though it may be, does not meet the high threshold required
    for an Article 3 medical case to be made out.

20. Further, the appellant  has  provided  the  notes  from  his  cognitive
    behavioural therapy sessions  from  November  2019  to  February  2020.
    These notes are contained in the appellant's  supplementary  bundle  on
    pages U7 to U11.  The first session with the therapist is  set  out  on
    page U11 and indicates in the third, fourth, fifth  and  sixth  entries
    that the appellant is not a risk to himself, to others or from  others,
    that he has not self-harmed and that he has no plans or  intentions  to
    do so.  The notes also identify a protective factor, his  daughter  who
    is in the Ukraine.  The most recent evidence on the appellant's  mental
    state therefore also do not support his claim to be at  risk  of  self-
    harm or suicide. Page U11  also  shows  that  the  appellant  told  the
    therapist what he told Dr Green, that he knows others "in the army  who
    committed suicide.  He hoped that this would not be him one day".  I am
    not able to read this as an indication that he has ever  had  ideas  of
    self-harm or suicide either in the Ukraine or in the UK, certainly  not
    to the extent that it supports an Article 3 ECHR medical claim.

21. The appellant also provided a letter from his GP dated  4  March  2020.
    This letter confirms what the reports of Dr Green and  the  notes  from
    the detention centre and therapy sessions  indicate,  that  he  suffers
    from anxiety with depression and post-traumatic  stress  disorder.   He
    has been prescribed Mirtazapine and it was not argued  before  me  that
    this medication or a suitable alternative would not be available to him
    in Ukraine.

22. It was suggested for the appellant that  his  presentation  in  the  UK
    could not be taken as an indication of how he would deteriorate  if  he
    returned to Ukraine, the location where he  experienced  the  traumatic
    events that led to his mental illness and where  he  had  a  subjective
    fear for his safety and of being called up to the  military  again.   I
    accept that life in Ukraine will be harder for the appellant for  these
    reasons and that his health may deteriorate. As  above,  however,  even
    when he was still living there and when at his worst in the UK when  he
    was in detention, nothing in  the  evidence  shows  that  he  ever  had
    thoughts of self-harm or suicide.

23. It is therefore my conclusion that the appellant's subjective fears  of
    what he will experience on return to Ukraine are not sufficient to show
    a risk of self-harm or suicide that approaches the  threshold  required
    for a positive finding under Article 3 ECHR.  Where  that  is  so,  the
    Article 8 ECHR claim must be refused.


Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal under Article 3  ECHR  was  set
    aside to be remade.

25. The appeal under Article 3 ECHR is refused.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 11 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

