
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/03055/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 December 2018                      | On 14 January 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     Sm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    M R Toal, Counsel, instructed by Ropemakers
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal which, in a written  decision  that
    followed the hearing at Taylor House  on  6  April  2018,  allowed  the
    appellant's protection appeal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  appellant  had  been  the
    victim of trafficking in Albania and that she  faced  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm if she were returned.  He also  found  for  those  reasons
    that she fell within the category of persons entitled to refugee status
    for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.

 3. We have been significantly assisted  in  reaching  a  decision  by  the
    efforts of the representatives before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Jarvis for
    the Secretary of State and Mr Toal for the appellant.

 4.  It is undoubtedly the case that the law relating  to  trafficking  and
    the interplay between the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  its
    appellate jurisdiction and the conclusions of the Secretary of  State's
    competent authority on that issue are not entirely settled.  We know in
    particular that a decision is awaited from the Supreme Court on whether
    that Court is  to  grant  permission  to  appeal  in  the  case  of  MS
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594.  There  was  debate  before  us  as  to
    whether the present case should serve as a vehicle for  considering  MS
    (Pakistan) which, of course, is binding upon the  Upper  Tribunal,  and
    for considering the Upper Tribunal decisions of AUJ (Trafficking  -  no
    conclusive grounds decision) [2018] UKUT 200  and  ES  (s82  NIA  2002,
    Negative NRM) [2018] UKUT 335.

 5. In the event, however, Mr Toal advanced the submission that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had in substance followed the judgment of the Court
    of Appeal in MS (Pakistan).  In that case at  paragraph  69  the  Court
    held that:

         "... it is  absolutely  clear  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AS
         (Afghanistan)  was  limiting  the  circumstances  in  which,  on  a
         statutory appeal against a removal decision, an appellant can mount
         an indirect challenge to a negative  trafficking  decision  by  the
         authority  (in  the  circumstances  where  the  appellant  has  not
         challenged it by way of judicial review), to where the  trafficking
         decision can be demonstrated to be perverse or  irrational  or  one
         which was not  open  to  the  authority,  those  expressions  being
         effectively synonymous for present purposes."

 6. Mr Toal  submits  and  Mr  Jarvis,  having  taken  the  opportunity  of
    considering the matter, agrees that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in
    the present case did in  fact  follow  that  judgment,  albeit  without
    referring expressly to it.  He did so because in a number of  important
    respects as set  out  in  paragraphs  34  to  36  of  the  decision  in
    particular, the judge noted failures  on  the  part  of  the  competent
    authority to engage with the evidence that was before it,  particularly
    in the form of the asylum interview and the material  relating  to  the
    application for a visa on behalf of the appellant.  For the record, the
    Tribunal sets out in full those paragraphs of the  decision,  and  also
    paragraph 49, where a further point of the same kind was noted  by  the
    judge:

         "34. Unlike the Secretary of State's representative, I do not  find
             that there are any material inconsistencies or  contradictions
             in her account, as given in her Screening Interview, or in her
             subsequent Asylum Interview,  or  in  her  Witness  Statement,
             dated the 5th April 2018, or in the  oral  evidence  that  she
             gave to this Court on the 6th April 2018.  I find  that  there
             is no inconsistency as to when the  Appellant  maintained  her
             husband lost  his  job.   She  indicated,  in  her  answer  to
             question 4.2 of her Screening Interview, that he was dismissed
             from work in December 2013.   What  she  had  claimed  in  her
             Asylum Interview was that her  husband's  problems  had  first
             started in June 2013, not that he had lost  his  job  at  that
             time.   That  was  something  misunderstood  clearly  by   the
             Interviewing  Officer,  who  claimed  in  his  questions,   at
             question 80, "But you claim he lost his  job  in  June  2013",
             when the Appellant had said no such thing.

         35.  Again, paragraph 32 of the 'Reasons for Refusal' Letter  shows
             a complete lack of understanding on the part of the  Secretary
             of State's representative as to  the  order  in  which  events
             occurred.  The Appellant, according to her  account,  which  I
             accept, had been invited to come to the United Kingdom  for  a
             visit by a friend in  December,  as  a  result  of  which  the
             Appellant then applied for a 'Visitor's' Visa on 15th December
             2014.  This, therefore, had already been  applied  for  before
             the incident of her abduction and rape had taken place,  which
             was at the  end  of  December  2014.   It  was  indeed  purely
             fortuitous, from the Appellant's point of view, that her  Visa
             then was issued on the 5th January 2015, at a  time  when  she
             was staying with  her  friend  in  Tirana,  and  was  able  to
             thereafter come to the UK accompanied by her child, A.

         36.  Again, I cannot agree  with  the  conclusion  reached  by  the
             Secretary of State's representative at  paragraph  34  of  the
             'Reasons for Refusal' Letter, where he  or  she  states,  "The
             lack of a report to the Albanian authorities is considered  to
             significantly undermine your claim to have  been  abducted  in
             Albania whilst you were living with your family".  The reality
             of the situation was, as  explained  by  the  Appellant,  that
             having been abducted she requested to telephone her family  to
             tell them that she was fine,  that  she  was  staying  with  a
             friend, and therefore they didn't need to worry about  her  at
             all.

         ...

         49.  I need to mention a matter raised by the Secretary of  State's
             representative at paragraph 31 of the  'Reasons  for  Refusal'
             Letter,  where  it  was  maintained  that  the  Appellant  had
             obtained A's father's consent for her to travel to the UK.  It
             was said that, because the Appellant had claimed that she  had
             lost contact with her husband in March 2014 when he  had  left
             the country, her account was "greatly undermined by  the  fact
             that your husband gave his consent for his daughter to  travel
             out of Albania in a Visa  Application  submitted  in  December
             2014".  The reality was, as was admitted by the  Appellant  in
             her oral evidence before this Court, that that  'consent'  had
             been forged.  In fact, as was rightly pointed out  by  Counsel
             for the Appellant, Mr. E. Waheed, the Appellant had never been
             asked about this in either of her  interviews.   It  was  said
             that she had answered questions about that at Court on the 6th
             April 2018 totally frankly, and I find that to have  been  the
             case."

 7. It is not enough for a judge merely to disagree with a  decision  of  a
    trafficking authority, if and insofar as MS  (Pakistan)  applies  in  a
    particular case.  Assuming for the present that MS (Pakistan) did apply
    to the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, which  is  entirely
    moot given the decision of the Upper Tribunal in ES, the Tribunal finds
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  given  sufficient  reasons  for
    concluding in substance that the decision of  the  competent  authority
    was not merely one with which he disagreed, but one which had  material
    public law failings, which were  identified  in  the  passages  of  the
    determination to which we have made reference.

 8. This means, therefore, that on any basis there can be no error  of  law
    in the judge's decision of the kind that would make it appropriate  for
    the Upper Tribunal to set aside the decision and re-make it or remit it
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. As a result, the contention of the Secretary of State,  as  articulated
    in Mr Jarvis's skeleton argument, to the effect that the case of ES was
    wrongly decided remains to be considered on another occasion,  as  does
    the scope of MS (Pakistan).

10.  For the reasons we have given, assuming that MS (Pakistan) does  apply
    (which represents the maximum for which the Secretary  of  State  could
    contend), the Upper Tribunal  finds  that  the  judge's  decision  must
    stand. It contains no error of law, such as to  necessitate  its  being
    set aside.


Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                               Signed                     Date: 31/12/18






                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber

