
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03935/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 November 2016                    |On 02 December 2016                 |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     MR
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Drummond Miller
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   Housego dismissing an appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born on 6 July 1982 and is  a  national  of  Iran.   He
   claimed to be at risk of persecution in Iran because of his conversion to
   Christianity  and  because  he  had  taken  part  in  protests  following
   elections in 2009.  He was detained following the protests  in  2009  and
   held for a month, during which time he was tortured.  His  conversion  to
   Christianity came a few years later, around 2015.  He  attended  a  house
   church and read the bible in  Farsi.   He  evangelised  his  brother  and
   cousin.  In October 2015 the house church was raided.  The appellant  was
   hit on the forehead with a baton  but  recovered  consciousness  and  ran
   away.  The authorities raided his house  the  same  night  and  took  his
   father away for questioning.  The appellant's brother-in-law arranged his
   travel from Iran to the UK, where he arrived in November  2015.   He  has
   been attending church services in Glasgow.

3) The judge did not believe that the appellant was a genuine convert.   The
   judge did not believe the appellant  had  previously  been  detained  and
   tortured.  The judge did not believe the appellant had been  at  a  house
   church when it was raided.

4)  The  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  summarised  the  application  as
   contending that Judge Housego erred in law (1) by relying on  speculation
   when giving reasons for not accepting expert  medical  evidence;  (2)  by
   improperly relying on evidence which resulted from his own search of  the
   internet; (3) by failing to afford the appellant a fair hearing,  notably
   in relation to whether he should be allowed to call a particular witness;
   and (4) by inappropriately questioning the appellant during the  hearing.



5) In particular, in relation to the medical evidence it is  contended  that
   the judge erred by finding that scarring on the appellant's  back  looked
   more like self-harm than torture.  It was arguable that the  judge  erred
   by failing to give adequate reasons for not accepting the expert  medical
   report that the scars were most unlikely to have been self-inflicted.  In
   relation to the use of the internet it was contended in  the  application
   that the judge erred by relying on his own knowledge that  a  certificate
   was issued to a person who had completed the  Alpha  course.   The  judge
   refused to allow a witness  to  be  called  without  the  witness  having
   received independent legal advice.  The judge was  concerned  that  there
   was an inconsistency between the date when the witness was granted asylum
   on the basis of his conversion to Christianity and the witness's claim in
   his statement that he had been evangelised by the appellant  at  a  later
   date.   The judge refused an adjournment either to allow the  witness  to
   obtain independent legal advice or  to  allow  another  witness  to  come
   forward.  This was said  to  be  an  arguable  error,  which  denied  the
   appellant a fair hearing.  It was contended that the judge had questioned
   the appellant about his religious knowledge  in  an  appropriate  manner,
   when the Secretary of State's representative had had the  opportunity  to
   cross-examine the appellant.

6) There was a rule 24 response dated 15  September  2016.   The  writer  of
   this response ought to uphold the judge's decision but recorded that  the
   medical report was not before the Secretary of State's representative  at
   that time.

7) Although the medical report refers  primarily  to  the  period  when  the
   appellant claims to  have  been  detained  in  2009  it  does  contain  a
   significant finding.  This is that the  scars  on  the  appellant's  back
   appeared to have been systematically and deliberately  inflicted.   Given
   their location it is extremely unlikely that  they  were  self-inflicted.
   They are in keeping with incised wounds from a small bladed implement and
   are classified as Level E, ie diagnostic in the  sense  their  appearance
   could not have been caused in any other way other  than  that  described.
   Nevertheless the judge found at paragraph 66 of  the  decision  that  the
   photographs of the scarring looked more like self harm and were  unlikely
   to be torture.

8) It was contended on behalf of the appellant that this was speculation  on
   the part of  the  judge  and  contrary  to  the  evidence  produced.   By
   proceeding in this way the judge might leave the informed reader with the
   impression the appellant was not being given a  fair  hearing.   Although
   the judge correctly pointed out that the  evidence  of  torture  was  not
   determinative of the asylum claim, the finding that the appellant was not
   truthful about this element of his claim must have had an impact  on  the
   overall  credibility  assessment.   Indeed,  I  observe  that  the  judge
   acknowledged as much at paragraph 66.

9) At the hearing before me neither party sought to defend the  decision  of
   Judge Housego.  It  was  agreed  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal should be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
   hearing before a different judge with no findings made by  Judge  Housego
   preserved.

                                  DECISION

10) The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

11) I set aside the decision.

12) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  the  decision  to
   be remade at  a  hearing  before  a  different  judge  with  no  findings
   preserved.

Anonymity

As the proceedings are continuing, I considered it appropriate  to  make  an
order for anonymity to preserve  the  appellant's  confidentiality.   Unless
and until a Tribunal or court orders otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This order applies  both  to  the
appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  order  may
lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans                         02 December 2016

