
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03849/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision sent to parties on: |
|On 16 January 2018                            |On 18 January 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 NNE (Iraq)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Lynn Brakaj, solicitor with Iris Law Firm
For the respondent:    Mr Myroslav Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
I make an anonymity order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs
otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of publication
thereof shall identify the appellant, whether directly or indirectly. This
order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with
this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.




Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal refusing him leave  to  remain  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection or human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq from the Kirkuk region who has  both
    his CSID and a copy of his national certificate.  He is  married  to  a
    British Citizen.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 3. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that although the appellant's wife  is
    willing to live in Iraq if he is removed, it would not be reasonable to
    expect her to do so.

 4. The Tribunal set out the country guidance headnotes for BA (Returns  to
    Baghdad Iraq CG) [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) and AA (Article  15(c))  (Rev  2)
    [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)  but  there  is  no  indication  in  the  judge's
    reasoning that the guidance was applied.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge preferred the assertion by the respondent
    that Kirkuk was no longer a contested area, but did not indicate  which
    paragraphs of the respondent's country information  and  guidance  were
    relied upon, nor did  he  make  any  reference  to  any  other  country
    information.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

 7. The appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  permission  was
    granted, as it was considered that  there  was  an  arguable  case  for
    saying that the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning was inadequate.

Rule 24 Reply

 8. There was no Rule 24 Reply.

 9. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

10. I heard oral submissions from Ms  Brakaj  and  Mr  Diwnycz,  which  are
    recorded in my notes.  It is not necessary to set out these submissions
    in full: where relevant, I have made reference to them below.

Discussion

11. I begin by considering whether it was an error of law for the judge  in
    this appeal to depart from the country guidance which is set out in his
    decision.  He does not explain why he did so nor is there  any  broader
    assessment of changes in the country information regarding the risks in
    Baghdad and  Kirkuk  for  a  person  who  has  his  CSID  and  national
    certificate details and who comes from Kirkuk.   Whilst  it  is  always
    possible to depart from current country guidance on a proper assessment
    of later evidence, the reasoning in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not reach that standard.  That is a plain  error  of  law
    and the decision must be set aside and remade.

12. There is also no reference to the Article 8 ECHR  consequences  of  the
    spouse remaining behind in the UK when the appellant is removed, either
    under the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended), or outside the  Rules.
    The appellant and his wife produced evidence of how they help  to  care
    for his mother-in-law, who has chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease
    (COPD), and also of the assistance the appellant gives to his sister-in-
    law in caring for her children.

13. When rehearing the appeal, and in dealing with the  asylum  element  of
    the claim, the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  have  the  benefit  of  the
    recalibrated country guidance given by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944  which
    was handed down on 11 July 2017, two months after the decision in  this
    appeal, and which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  That judgment confirms the  Upper  Tribunal's  finding  that
    Kirkuk remains a contested area.

14. Mr Diwnycz told me at the hearing that  the  respondent  maintains  the
    position taken in her own country information and  guidance,  that  the
    evidence now indicates that Kirkuk is no longer a contested area.   The
    Judge who hears the appeal will need  to  consider  whether  there  are
    proper grounds for distinguishing the Court of Appeal's guidance on the
    basis of later country evidence.

15. In addition, the judge will need to make a  fully  reasoned  Article  8
    decision, both within and outwith the Rules, taking into account all of
    the family circumstances relied upon. Whilst these  matters  might  not
    have been determinative of the appeal, the lack  of  reasoning  thereon
    suggests an  insufficiently  thorough  consideration  of  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal.

16. The findings of fact in this  appeal  are  insufficiently  reasoned  to
    enable me to remake the decision myself and it is  necessary  therefore
    for the appeal to be remitted for  hearing  afresh  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, with no findings of fact or credibility preserved, save  that
    the appellant is from Kirkuk, is married to a British citizen, and  has
    with him his CSID and a copy of his national register details.

DECISION

17. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.

    The decision in this appeal will be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on a date to be fixed.


Date:    16 January 2018   Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
