
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03488/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|16 February 2018                              |On 4 May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  SAREH [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Caskie, instructed by Latta & Co. Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Dywnicz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Iran, appeals,  with  permission,  against
    the decision of Judge S T Fox in the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent on 24 March 2017 refusing
    her asylum and human rights claims.

 2. The grounds of appeal raise a number of issues asserting lack of proper
    care by the judge.  The first ground is a detailed assertion  that  the
    judge indicated at the beginning of the hearing, and during it, that he
    had a plane to catch and that it would be  necessary  to  conclude  the
    hearing in order for him to deal with the rest of the list  and  depart
    from the hearing centre in time for  his  plane.    As  the  judge  who
    granted permission observed, "it is unfortunate if  the  appellant  was
    left with the impression she might not be accorded as much time as  the
    case warranted".  That is probably correct, but at the beginning of the
    hearing before us, Mr Caskie told us that he withdrew  that  ground  of
    appeal.  We do not criticise Mr Caskie for doing  so,  but  we  observe
    that the allegation in the first ground of appeal should not have  been
    made, if it was not to be sustained.

 3. There are, however,  a  considerable  number  of  grounds  for  concern
    arising out of the text of the determination itself.   In paragraph  17
    of his  decision,  Judge  Fox  says  that  he  is  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's general credibility has been established.  But paragraph 50
    reads as follows:

         "50.     On the evidence before me today I am  satisfied  that  the
         Appellant has not provided any credible basis for  challenging  the
         assertions, analyses and conclusions in  the  Respondent's  refusal
         letter.  On the evidence before me  today,  I  am  satisfied  those
         assertions, analyses and conclusions are valid and  tenable  and  I
         reach similar conclusions myself like reasons.   I  find  that  the
         Appellant's failure to demonstrate I have  alone  consistent  story
         without a satisfactory explanation, undermines the  credibility  of
         the Appellant's claim to have come to the United Kingdom to  escape
         persecution.   That  credibility  is  further  undermined  by   the
         inconsistencies and implausibilities  in  the  story,  examples  of
         which I have referred to above.  I find therefore that the core  of
         the Appellant's account of persecution lacks credibility and  is  a
         fabrication designed to gain access to the United Kingdom."

 4. The infelicities of expression are in the original.  We find it  wholly
    impossible to reconcile paragraph 17 with paragraph  50,  and  although
    the judge's final conclusion is clearly in line with what  he  says  in
    paragraph 50, it is  not  possible  to  say  why  in  paragraph  17  he
    concluded that the appellant was to be regarded a  generally  credible.
    In paragraph 60 the judge says there is no claim made under article  8,
    but in paragraph 15, the judge works through the parts of sections 117A-
    D that would be relevant if there had been an article 8 claim.

 5. Throughout the  determination  there  are  infelicities  of  expression
    similar to those found in paragraph 50 which we  have  set  out  above;
    some of them are typographical errors that have not been corrected,  or
    errors caused by mishearing of dictation  or  misapplication  of  voice
    recognition software.  Some are readily  correctable,  but  others  are
    not.  It is apparent that the written decision  was  not  read  through
    before being sent to the parties.

 6. Paragraphs 52 to 62 are, as Mr Caskie pointed out,  in  standard  form.
    That is not of itself a defect, but does not give any  confidence  that
    the judge was paying proper attention to the  appellant's  appeal  when
    preparing his determination.

 7. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Dywnicz referred  us  to  the  Rule  24
    response, which asserts that the judge's decision does not reflect that
    adequate scrutiny was not given to matters at  the  hearing,  that  the
    typographical errors are minor and do not affect  the  outcome  of  the
    decision, that his  reference  to  section  117  does  not  affect  his
    findings of fact, and that he has made adequate findings  of  fact  and
    given adequate reasons.  Mr Dywnicz did not seek  to  expand  on  those
    submissions orally.

 8. It is not this Tribunal's practice to  work  over  First-tier  Tribunal
    decisions as a proof reader or as an examiner in the English  language.
    There is, however, a level at which the presentation of a judgment  has
    to be regarded as unacceptable, and we have with  regret  to  take  the
    view that that level has been exceeded by Judge Fox's decision in  this
    case.  It is difficult to understand that either of the parties to  the
    appeal before him could, on reading this decision, consider that proper
    attention had been paid to the need to achieve  professional  standards
    in the adjudication  of  the  case.   In  addition,  the  contradiction
    between the judgment that the appellant is credible and  the  judgement
    that she is not worthy of credit is wholly inexplicable and only serves
    to emphasise the points that we have just made.

 9. In summary, the position  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    cannot stand.  For lack of proper attention by the  judge,  the  public
    and private resources expended upon the hearing and the preparation  of
    the determination, have been entirely wasted.

10.  Judge  Fox's  decision  is  not  properly  intelligible  and   of   an
    insufficiently professional standard: as an exercise  of  the  judicial
    function it is accordingly infected by error of law.   We set it aside.
     We remit  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    determination afresh by a different judge.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 2 May 2018.
