
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03371/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2018                     |On 22 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     A K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Brown instructed by Broudie Jackson & Canter.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Herwald promulgated on 20 May 2017 in which the
         Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on both protection and human
         rights grounds.

Background


      2. The appellant is a national of Iran born on 21 September 1983.  The
         appellant claimed a  fear  on  return  to  Iran  as  a  convert  to
         Christianity. The Judge notes in [9(a)] of  the  determination  "It
         was common ground that the Appellant is Iranian and was  a  Muslim.
         The dispute before me was whether or not he had genuinely converted
         to Christianity and, had he done so, then it  was  acknowledged  by
         both sides that an asylum claim should succeed".

      3. The Judge having considered the evidence from both sides  with  the
         required degree of anxious scrutiny sets out his findings from [13]
         of the decision under challenge. The Judge was  not  persuaded  the
         appellant was telling the truth for the  reasons  set  out  in  the
         decision. It was not found the appellant is a credible  witness  in
         relation to his earlier account although the Judge noted at [13(l)]
         that the appellant's claim now had a different cast to  it  as  the
         claim was now  predicated  to  a  great  extent  not  only  on  his
         rejection of Islam but his adoption of Christianity.

      4. The Judge noted there was no suggestion from the appellant that  he
         had ever followed up  an  interest  in  Christianity  in  Iran  and
         expresses concern  about  the  evidence  of  the  churchwarden  who
         attended to support the appellant's case. It was found  aspects  of
         the appellant's evidence could not be reconciled with the  evidence
         of the churchwarden which  was  found  to  damage  the  appellant's
         credibility. The Judge had no reason to doubt  the  genuineness  of
         the  churchwarden,  who  is  a  churchgoer  who  happens  to  be  a
         churchwarden, and who attended as there is  no  incumbent  at  this
         Church of England parish.

      5. At [13(q)] the Judge writes when referring to the evidence  of  the
         churchwarden, Mrs Jones:

             "I was anxious to know whether or not Mrs Jones  spoke  Farsi.
             She confirmed that she does not. Any  discussion  with  people
             like the Appellant must be done through  interpreters.  Sadly,
             the church does  not  engage  professional  interpreters,  but
             simply uses other Iranians (almost exclusively asylum seekers)
             to interpret. Furthermore, she made clear that  there  was  no
             evidence that the Appellant had an interest  in  Christianity,
             until he was placed in a house in Wigan, with  another  asylum
             seeker who was anxious to prove that he too had  converted  to
             Christianity. If the witness made such an error in respect  of
             the Appellants having attended church  in  Iran,  then  I  can
             place little reliance, I am afraid, on the way  in  which  his
             acceptance of Christianity may have been interpreted  to  her,
             by other asylum seekers who, for all I know, are  particularly
             eager to help the Appellant, and to help their own cases."

      6. When considering the evidence given by the appellant in response to
         questions  regarding   Christianity   the   Judge   noted   further
         discrepancies. At [13(u)] the Judge writes:

             "I made a very careful note of the Appellants evidence. He was
             asked on a number of occasions what Christianity meant to him,
             and why he had chosen to subscribe  to  it.  It  is,  I  find,
             noteworthy, that nowhere in his evidence did he  mention  God.
             Nowhere in his evidence did he mention Jesus."

      7. The Judge  accepts  that  whilst  individual  matters  may  not  be
         determinative the evidence was  not  sufficient  to  establish  the
         appellant was a genuine convert to Christianity.

      8. The Judge, accordingly, found that the appellant had not discharged
         the burden of proof upon him to show he had a well-founded fear  of
         persecution for a Convention reason and rejected his asylum  claim.
         The Judge found there were no  substantial  grounds  for  believing
         that if the appellant returned home he would face a  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm; resulting in a rejection of the  claim  for
         Humanitarian Protection.

      9. The Judge found the claims pursuant to articles 2 and 3  ECHR  fell
         in light of the protection findings above.

     10. The Judge found the appellant unable to succeed pursuant to article
         8 ECHR.

     11. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
         refused by a Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 20 June
         2017. The application was  renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  where
         permission was granted on 9 August 2017 in the following terms:

               1. The grounds of appeal assert the comments of the Judge  in
                  the First-tier indicated that he showed bias or  prejudice
                  against the appellant: they are supported by  a  statement
                  from the supporting witness.

               2. Given the allegation  made  I  will  grant  permission  to
                  appeal.

     12. The application is opposed by the Secretary of State in her Rule 24
         response.

Error of law


     13. The appellant relied upon to grounds of challenge being:

               a) Ground 1 - that the Judge erred  in  his  conduct  of  the
                  hearing, and

               b) Ground 2 - that the Judge erred  in  failing  to  properly
                  assess the risk to the appellant on return at the airport.

    Ground 1

     14. The Court of Appeal have recently reminded us  that  it  should  be
         obvious  that  in  their  handling  of  cases  judges  need  to  be
         scrupulous not merely to refrain from conduct which will result  in
         their recusal but to avoid creating a situation in  which  concerns
         about their impartiality can reasonably be raised at all. They need
         to bear in mind not just the hypothetical fair-minded observer  who
         has ascertained all the relevant facts  but  actual  litigants  who
         cannot be blamed for lacking objectivity and who will only know the
         relevant facts if the judge behaves in  a  transparent  way  -  see
         Bubbles & Wine Ltd v Lusha [2018] EWCA Civ 468 at paragraph  23,  a
         judgment handed down on 14 March 2018.

     15. The Court of Appeal in the above civil case also set out a reminder
         of the law on apparent bias in the following terms:

             "The law on apparent bias

             17.   The  legal  test  for  apparent  bias   is   very   well
                  established. Mr Faure reminded us of the famous statements
                  of Lord Hewart CJ in R v Sussex Justices ex parte McCarthy
                  [1924] 1 KB 256 at 259 that "it  is  not  merely  of  some
                  importance but is of fundamental importance  that  justice
                  should  not  only  be  done,  but  should  manifestly  and
                  undoubtedly be seen to be done" and that "[n]othing is  to
                  be done which creates even a suspicion that there has been
                  an improper interference  with  the  course  of  justice."
                  These principles remain as salutary and important as ever,
                  but the way in which they are to be applied has been  made
                  more precise by the modern  authorities.  These  establish
                  that the test for  apparent  bias  involves  a  two  stage
                  process.  The  court  must   first   ascertain   all   the
                  circumstances which have a bearing on the suggestion  that
                  the judge was biased.  It  must  then  ask  whether  those
                  circumstances  would  lead  a  fair-minded  and   informed
                  observer to conclude that there  was  a  real  possibility
                  that the judge was biased: see Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL
                  67; [2002] 2 AC 357, paras 102-103. Bias means a prejudice
                  against one party or its case for reasons unconnected with
                  the legal or factual merits of the case:  see  Flaherty  v
                  National Greyhound Racing Club Ltd [2005] EWCA  Civ  1117,
                  para 28; Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  AF
                  (No2) [2008] EWCA Civ 117; [2008] 1 WLR 2528, para 53.

             18.  Further points distilled from the case law by Sir Terence
                  Etherton in Resolution Chemicals  Ltd  v  H  Lundbeck  A/S
                  [2013] EWCA Civ 1515; [2014] 1 WLR 1943, at para  35,  are
                  the following:

                  (1)  The fair-minded and informed observer is  not  unduly
                      sensitive or suspicious, but neither  is  he  or  she
                      complacent: Lawal v Northern Spirit Ltd  [2003]  UKHL
                      35; [2003] ICR 856, para 14 (Lord Steyn).

                  (2)  The facts and context are critical,  with  each  case
                      turning on "an intense focus on the  essential  facts
                      of the case": Helow v Secretary of State for the Home
                      Department [2008] UKHL 62; [2008] 1 WLR 2416, para  2
                      (Lord Hope).

                  (3)  If the test of apparent bias is satisfied, the  judge
                      is automatically disqualified from hearing  the  case
                      and considerations of inconvenience, cost  and  delay
                      are irrelevant: Man O' War  Station  Ltd  v  Auckland
                      City Council (formerly Waiheke County Council) [2002]
                      UKPC 28, para 11 (Lord Steyn).

             19.  In Helow v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
                  Lord Hope  observed  that  the  fair-minded  and  informed
                  observer is not to be confused with the person raising the
                  complaint of apparent bias and that the test ensures  that
                  there is this  measure  of  detachment:  [2008]  UKHL  62;
                  [2008] 1 WLR 2416, para 2; and see also Almazeedi v Penner
                  [2018] UKPC 3, para 20. In the Resolution  Chemicals  case
                  Sir Terence Etherton also pointed out that, if  the  legal
                  test is not satisfied, then the  objection  to  the  judge
                  must fail, even if that leaves the applicant  dissatisfied
                  and bearing a sense that justice will not or  may  not  be
                  done: [2013] EWCA Civ 1515; [2014] 1 WLR 1943, para 40."

    16. Of critical importance when an allegation of bias is made against a
        judge is that all the relevant facts are ascertained.

    17. Following the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal an  email  was
        sent by the churchwarden to a Caroline Clark,  the  solicitor  with
        conduct of the appeal, written in the following terms:

             'Dear Caroline,

             I was present at the beginning of the hearing  for  AK  as  we
             came into  the  hearing  room  to  hear  the  judge's  opening
             remarks.

             Judge Herwald began his comments with an audible aside, in the
             presence of both Council, the appellant and the interpreter.

             I noted down his remarks: "this is a  conversion  case,  isn't
             it? Ah well,  all  Iranians  are  either  gay,  Christians  or
             adulterers."

             He then went on to look at specific aspects of  the  case,  at
             which point I left to sit elsewhere, as I was to appear  later
             as a witness.

             He could have been facetious, but to me this seemed a  totally
             inappropriate comment to make in court, in the presence  of  a
             terrified  appellant.  I  don't  know   if   the   interpreter
             translated it for him.

             I have made a note of the judge's  questions  to  me,  one  of
             which Ms Khan challenged at the time - he  asked  me  about  a
             particular Islamic theological point. This is not my  area  of
             specialism. He also asked me to sum up baptism in one  word  -
             something which I thought was quite aggressive in its tone. It
             transpired that the appellant had used  one  particular  word,
             and I didn't use the same one. There are many words  that  can
             be used to describe  the  process,  origins  and  theology  of
             baptism.

             I made a note of the summing up, including the HOPO's comments
             which did not accurately reflect what I had said.

             I hope that this information is of use. If you  need  anything
             further please let me know.

             Hilary

             Mrs N H Jones

             Church Warden

             Parish of Birch with Fallowfield'

         This resulted in the application for permission to appeal.

     18. The Resident Judge of the Upper Tribunal wrote to the Judge  on  17
         January 2018 requesting a response to the  grounds  of  appeal  and
         email from Mrs Jones in accordance with established practice  where
         an allegation of this nature is made. The Judge responded resulting
         in a memorandum been sent to the parties, dated 26 January 2018, in
         the following terms:

             '1.  By way of a letter  dated  17  January  2018,  First-tier
                  Tribunal Judge Herwald  was  invited  to  comment  on  the
                  grounds of appeal and email from Ms Jones. He has done  so
                  in the following terms:

                  "...

                  2.   In opening, may I please point out that I  have  been
                      serving as a tribunal chairman/judge since 1999,  and
                      have never before faced any sort allegation of  bias,
                      apparent or otherwise. Thus I  take  the  allegations
                      very seriously, but reject them.

                  3.   To the extent that comment from me is  appropriate  I
                      respond as follows - Ms Jones has I fear not heard in
                      full my discussions with both advocates in open court
                      at the outset of the hearing, to establish the issues
                      I  must  resolve.  There  were  no  "asides"  as  she
                      asserts. Firstly the Appellant and  interpreter  were
                      present  and  I'd  already  established   that   they
                      understood each  other.  Secondly,  having  read  the
                      papers in detail I wished to check that the Appellant
                      was relying only on his claimed  conversion  and  not
                      other potential avenues revealed  in  his  interview,
                      e.g.  persecution  on  political  grounds.   I   also
                      establish at that time that  the  Appellant  did  not
                      seek to rely on Art 8.

                  4.   It seems  possible  that  Ms  Jones  misheard  and/or
                      misunderstood  the  conversation  I  had   with   the
                      representatives at the  outset  of  the  hearing,  in
                      order to clarify the issues in the appeal.

                  5.   In any event, it is simply incorrect to suggest  that
                      I said that "all Iranians are either gay,  Christians
                      or adulterers" as asserted in the Grounds.

                  6.   I  turn  now  to  the  allegation  that  somehow  the
                      question   about   baptism   to   the   witness   was
                      "aggressive". The witness writes that "he asked me to
                      sum up baptism  in  one  word  -  something  which  I
                      thought was quite aggressive in its tone".  If  she's
                      suggesting that my tone was aggressive I reject  that
                      in  terms.  My  notes  do  not  suggest  that  I  was
                      aggressive and  indeed  I  believe  the  witness  was
                      treated with the respect she deserved. If  she  means
                      that being asked to sum up baptism in one word was of
                      its nature somehow aggressive then I similarly reject
                      that. In the context of the hearing and having  heard
                      the Appellant it was not an inappropriate question in
                      my view.

                  ..."

             2.   The matter will now be listed for hearing.'

     19. The appeal was listed for hearing before  a  Deputy  Judge  of  the
         Upper Tribunal, Mr V L Mandalia, at Liverpool on 18 December  2017.
         On that occasion Ms Khan who represented the appellant at the First-
         tier Tribunal attended. An adjournment was sought as Mrs Jones  was
         unable to attend the hearing as a result of an injury to  her  left
         arm that prevented her driving from Manchester to Liverpool on  the
         day.

     20. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia, in his record of proceedings,
         refers to the adjournment request and makes the  following  entries
         in relation to the submissions of the Presenting Officer, Mr Bates,
         and Ms Khan:

             'Mr Bates

                . The observ has come as a surprise.

                . The allegation is made by the witness herself

                . The Presenting Officers post hearing minutes do  not  make
                  reference to any comment made by the Judge.

             Ms Khan

                . The remark was an "off-the-cuff" remark made by the  Judge
                  at the outset of the hearing.

                . Did not raise it in correspondence in or at the hearing

                . Did not record the comment in my notebook

                . The Judge is known to make remarks such as this.'

     21. There is no further witness statement from  Ms  Khan  who  did  not
         attend the hearing before me either.

     22. Mr Brown submitted the Judge's comments denied a  fair  opportunity
         for the appellant and the witness and that the  Judge  'set  up  an
         atmosphere that  prevented  the  witness  been  able  to  give  her
         evidence'. It was accepted  the  appellant  and  Mrs  Jones  cannot
         communicate as they do not share  a  common  language  and  it  was
         therefore not  known  how  the  witness  was  able  to  assess  the
         appellant as being "terrified".  Mr Brown  submitted  'a  bystander
         must be satisfied the appellant is able  to  give  evidence  in  an
         atmosphere that is fair and that in light of the Judges  comment  a
         bystander is likely to go away feeling the  appellant  and  witness
         would not been treated in a way that was unfair which  creates  the
         danger of the integrity of  the  procedure  being  impacted'.  When
         asked whether there was any evidence of the  appellant  or  witness
         being denied the opportunity give their evidence Mr Brown confirmed
         he was not aware of any or the  way  in  which  the  appellant  and
         witness were not treated fairly at the hearing.

     23. Mr Brown accepted that no application had been made by Ms  Khan  to
         the Judge for  him  to  recuse  himself  at  any  time  during  the
         proceedings and no objection had been raised  on  the  day  to  the
         Judge continuing to  deal  with  the  appeal.  There  was  also  no
         evidence that submissions were made at the hearing by  Ms  Khan  in
         relation to an issue of fairness or  the  Judge's  comments  and/or
         conduct.

     24. The email from Mrs Jones is the  first  indication/confirmation  of
         the conversation that occurred with the  Judge  although  Mr  Brown
         submitted that Mrs Jones mentioned immediately after the hearing to
         Ms Khan her concerns which led to  the  email  being  sent  to  the
         appellant's solicitors.

     25. Mr Brown confirmed, when asked, that no witness statement had  been
         prepared by or received from Ms  Khan  although  she  had  accepted
         orally to Deputy Judge Mandalia that the words referred to  in  the
         email were said.

     26. Mr Brown sought to rely on the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Elay [2016] UKUT 508 and specifically the head note in which it was
         recorded "Justice must not only be done but must manifestly be seen
         to be done".

     27. Mr Brown submitted the comments might possibly have an impact  upon
         the sensitivity of others and that the witness  should  never  have
         been in a position to hear such words. It was submitted the hearing
         created an atmosphere of unfair comment and he  questioned  whether
         the comments were capable of creating an inference of bias.

     28. Mr Brown submitted the comments could not be taken in isolation  as
         it was necessary to consider what the witness said about the manner
         of her questioning.  The Judge's questions related to the taghiegh,
         referred to in the decision under challenge  at  [13(x)],  and  the
         baptism.

     29. In response to a question from the bench Mr Brown accepted that the
         manner of questioning did not fall outside what may be  seen  as  a
         robust approach adopted by the Judge. As such, no arguable bias  is
         made out or inappropriate conduct in the manner of the questioning.
         It has been said elsewhere that Judges are not social  workers  and
         are  entitled  to  take  a  firm  line  with  case  management  and
         ascertaining the facts, through  questions  or  otherwise.   Whilst
         those not  familiar  with  litigious  proceedings  may  think  such
         approach at times aggressive, this is a subjective judgment in this
         case  which  has  not  been  objectively  made  out.   No  arguable
         unfairness such as bullying of the witness has been made out and it
         is clear the witness  had  the  protection  of  Ms  Khan  when  the
         questions were considered to be outside her scope of  expertise  or
         required a fuller answer. It has not been made out the witness  was
         unable to provide a relevant answer following such intervention.

     30. Mr Brown accepted that if the finding of this Tribunal is that  the
         comments did not create apparent bias and that the case  was  fair,
         then the appellant could not succeed on this ground.

     31.  Mr  Bates,  in  his  response,  observed  that  the  Home   Office
         representative made no note of any adverse or other  comment,  such
         as that alleged, and that although he had been able to speak to the
         Presenting  Officer;  due  to  the  passage  of  time  he  had   no
         recollection of any such comments.

     32. Mr Bates submitted there is no record of Ms Khan raising any issues
         at the hearing and in  response  to  a  question  by  Deputy  Judge
         Mandalia Ms Khan confirmed that she had not recorded the  same  but
         did recall that something similar to that recorded in the email had
         been said although did not make any application to  the  Judge  for
         him to recuse himself.

     33. Mr Bates submitted the issue had not been taken on the day and  the
         appellant had not raise the issue himself,  only  the  witness  Mrs
         Jones.

     34. Mr Bates submitted  this  indicated  that  the  comments  were  not
         perceived as amounting to bias at the hearing as they had not  been
         raised by Ms Khan.

     35. Having considered the evidence  and  submissions  made  I  find  as
         follows: The Judge denies making the comments recorded by Mrs Jones
         who, it was noted, was also taking a record of what was said during
         the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal today. Although the  Home
         Office Presenting Officer made no record of any such comment on the
         day, and nor did Ms Khan, Ms Khan did advise the Deputy Judge  that
         something similar to that wording had been used; but also commented
         upon the fact the Judge was known to make remarks such as this.

     36. Whilst it may be  wholly  inappropriate  for  a  Judge  to  make  a
         specific comment during the course of a hearing, or  at  any  other
         time in his or her professional capacity,  making  comment  per  se
         does not automatically show that  the  required  test  of  bias  is
         satisfied. Stupidity or lack of forethought  is  not  the  same  as
         bias.

     37. Whilst Mrs Jones may have taken a particular view of what she heard
         the Judge say it is not the view of this single witness that is the
         determinative issue. The Judge also notes that the wording recorded
         by Mrs Jones has been taken out of context and, even if said, would
         have formed part of a larger  discussion  with  the  advocates.  No
         transcript  of  the  hearing  is  available   as   First-tier   IAC
         proceedings in Manchester are not recorded at this  time.  This  is
         important for had the text of the discussion as a whole  been  made
         available it may have shed light on the purpose of  the  discussion
         and any view an  informed  bystander  hearing  the  same  may  have
         formed.

     38. It is also relevant to observe that the alleged comment made by the
         Judge was made in open court with both  advocates,  the  appellant,
         and an interpreter present. It is also the case that  having  heard
         the comments allegedly made the Presenting Officer did not consider
         they warranted minuting and Ms Khan made no note of the same in her
         counsel's notebook and did not consider it appropriate to make  any
         submissions on the point or to seek the Judge's  recusal.  This  is
         strongly indicative of the fact that neither advocate  thought  the
         comments  gave  rise  to  any  risk  of  bias  or  any   procedural
         irregularity that prevented the Judge from hearing  the  case.  The
         fact the observations were made in open court in  the  presence  of
         both  advocates  strengthens  the  argument  that  no   fair-minded
         observer would have drawn any inference that the Judge would decide
         the case other than impartially and on the basis of his  assessment
         of the merits.

     39. Although there appears to be a material uncertainty about  relevant
         facts, as the Judge does not accept the alleged comments were  made
         in isolation (if at all) as recorded by Mrs Jones, I have looked at
         Mr  Brown's  submissions  from  the  perspective  of   taking   the
         appellant's case at its highest. Those comments must,  however,  be
         taken in context in that it is unlikely this Judge would have  come
         into open court and made the  comment  recorded  by  Mrs  Jones  in
         isolation. The Judge in  his  response  refers  to  the  nature  of
         prehearing discussions with  the  advocates  to  identify  relevant
         issues which is in accordance with good judge craft.

     40. The next point is that the Judge was not expressing  a  preliminary
         view about  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the  appellant's  case
         although if he had done so no criticism could reasonably have  been
         made of him if such comments were made in open court.  The  alleged
         comment, at its highest, is more by way of  a  general  observation
         relating to  the  grounds  for  claiming  international  protection
         relied upon by Iranian asylum seekers.  In  this  respect,  it  was
         noted by a Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in  refusing
         permission on 20 June 2017 that:

             "The grounds have no merit. The  Judge's  alleged  remarks  on
             their face were a reference to the categories of asylum  claim
             most frequently seen in the First-tier Tribunal  and  to  that
             extent were accurate. The Appellant was represented yet, there
             was no application to the Judge to  recuse  himself  then  and
             there as would have been  expected  had  bias  been  genuinely
             feared.  No  complaint  is  made  in  the  grounds  about  the
             substantive conduct of the hearing. Weight was  a  matter  for
             the experienced judge, who gave detailed  and  secure  reasons
             for his adverse  credibility  findings,  having  analysed  the
             evidence meticulously. The Judge took  a  broad  approach  and
             applied demonstrable  anxious  scrutiny,  notwithstanding  the
             unpromising nature of much of the evidence. Risk on return was
             irrelevant given that the judge  found  squarely  against  the
             Appellant  on  the  conversion  issue.  The  grounds  fail  to
             identify any arguable material error of law".

     41. The expression of the views allegedly stated  by  the  Judge  could
         only be thought to indicate bias if they are stated in terms  which
         suggest that the Judge had already reached a final decision  before
         hearing all the evidence and arguments. This is not made out to  be
         the case in this appeal. The Judge clearly  examined  the  evidence
         with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and has  made  factual
         findings supported by adequate reasoning, based upon that evidence.

     42. A very important factor to consider is that reflected on  a  number
         of occasions above, that following the  alleged  statement  by  the
         Judge Ms Khan made no submissions to the  Judge  about  the  future
         conduct of the case and whether it was appropriate for the Judge to
         continue to hear the appeal. It appears from  her  observations  to
         Deputy Judge Mandalia that Ms Khan's view  was  that  the  comments
         were typical of those made by this judge but  did  not  warrant  an
         application for him to recuse himself  as  they  did  not  indicate
         actual or inferred bias.

     43. Notwithstanding Mrs Jones personal reaction to  the  comments  that
         she heard I am satisfied that a fair-minded and informed  observer,
         being  appraised  of  all  the  relevant  facts  and  issues  being
         considered in the appeal, would not conclude that  the  conduct  of
         the judge in this case, as concerning as it may have  been  to  Mrs
         Jones, indicated a real possibility that  the  Judge  was  bias.  I
         therefore find that the appellant fails to make  out  any  arguable
         legal error on Ground 1 and I dismiss that aspect of the appeal.

    Ground 2

     44. Ground 2 relates to an assertion by the appellant  that  the  Judge
         failed to properly assess the risk to the appellant  on  return  at
         the airport.

     45. The appellant suggests that  his  claim  to  have  attended  church
         regularly in the United Kingdom was supported by  the  evidence  of
         Mrs Jones. The appellant claimed he will be at risk because he is a
         genuine Christian convert but had argued in the alternative that he
         will be returned to Iran on a lassiez passer travel document and as
         such will face questioning on return. The appellant referred to the
         evidence of the country expert in SHH and HR  (legal  exit:  failed
         asylum seeker) CG [2016] UKUT 308 where it was made clear  that  an
         undocumented person would  face  the  same  sort  of  treatment  as
         someone who left illegally and that a person who returns to Iran on
         a laissez passer will be questioned. The tribunal in that case  did
         not find that a failed asylum seeker who had  left  Iran  illegally
         will be subject on return to a period of detention  or  questioning
         such there was a real risk  of  article  3  ill  treatment  as  the
         evidence showed no more than they will be questioned  and  that  if
         there  are  any  particular  concerns  arising  from  the  previous
         activities either in Iran or in the United Kingdom they will be  at
         risk of further questioning, detention and potential ill-treatment.
         Such treatment would depend on their individual case  for  if  they
         cooperated and accepted they left Iran illegally and claimed asylum
         abroad there will be no reason for ill-treatment,  and  questioning
         would be for a fairly brief period. It was found  by  the  Tribunal
         that a person with no history other than that  of  being  a  failed
         asylum seeker who had exited illegally and who could be expected to
         tell the truth when questioned would not face a real risk  of  ill-
         treatment during the period of questioning at the airport.

     46. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that  the  appellant  is
         undocumented and will face questioning and that the Judge failed to
         consider  whether  all  these  factors,  undocumented  and   church
         attendance, taken together was sufficient to place the appellant at
         risk of persecution at the airport.

     47. In relation to this  aspect  the  Judge  records  at  9(n)  of  the
         decision under challenge:

             "Finally, Ms Khan asserted  that  if  the  Appellant  were  to
             arrive back  in  Iran  with  a  laisser-passer,  he  may  face
             questioning on his return to determine his  profile  (see  the
             recent decision of Rs SSH and HR (Iran) etc). He may therefore
             be perceived as an apostate on return if he said he  had  been
             to church in this country."

     48. The Judge makes a specific finding in relation to  this  aspect  at
         [13(x)] where it is written:

             "In making this decision, I have  accorded  anxious  scrutiny,
             among other things, to paragraph 24  of  the  decision  in  SA
             (referred to above), kindly brought to my attention once again
             by Ms Khan.  Ms Khan asserted that the appeal must succeed, if
             the Appellant felt constrained to tell the authorities in Iran
             that he had attended church here. I'm not persuaded that  this
             would place the Appellant at risk, bearing in mind  the  well-
             known concept of taghiegh, referred to the case  above  of  FS
             etc.

     49. The grounds assert that the decision in FS was decided in 2004; but
         it remains a country guidance case to  be  followed  by  the  Judge
         unless there was sufficient evidence to warrant the Judge departing
         from the findings, of which none were arguably made out. Passage of
         time is not sufficient to support a challenge to the judge  relying
         on country guidance especially as in SZ and  JM  (Christians  -  FS
         confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT  00082  the  earlier  decision  was
         reconfirmed by the Upper Tribunal.

     50. The reference to 'Taghiegh' is to the acceptable practice  of  some
         in Iran to lie to protect the individual or gain an advantage.  The
         issue  in  relation  to  lying  or  acting  discreetly   to   avoid
         persecution has being considered by the UK courts in cases such  as
         HJ (Iran).

     51. In HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon)  [2010]  UKSC  31  the  Supreme  Court
         effectively said that if a person will  not  act  in  a  way  which
         invites persecution, preferring to avoid persecution by  concealing
         fundamental parts of his  identity  and  personality,  then  he  is
         equally entitled to asylum.  There is a logical extension  of  this
         principle into other areas.  Whereas in the past  the  focus  would
         have been on whether the claimant would actually do those things on
         return that would put him at risk, it no  longer  matters  that  he
         will not in fact do them, provided that his inactivity  stems  from
         fear of persecution.  A strong version of the consequence  is  that
         such a claim may only be defeasible if it can  be  shown  that  the
         claimant  does  not  genuinely  hold  those  religious  beliefs  or
         political opinions, and is only pretending to do  so  in  order  to
         obtain asylum.

     52. The appellant is a Muslim. His claim to have renounced Islam and to
         have converted to Christianity was rejected as not being a credible
         claim. The claim to be at risk as a convert was not made out as the
         act of conversion was not  found  to  represent  a  genuinely  held
         belief or view, but a means to  secure  a  grant  of  international
         protection, and no more, by the Judge. Those findings have not been
         shown to be infected by arguable legal error. The  claim  to  be  a
         Christian was not found to represent  a  fundamental  part  of  his
         identity and personality.

     53. Mr Bates also submitted that the appellant  cannot  claim  that  he
         will have to tell the authorities in Iran he attended church and/or
         claimed asylum without telling them he failed and was not found  to
         be a genuine convert, if he was to tell the truth.

     54. Even though the Judge does not deal with this issue in  any  detail
         the core finding is that the appellant  had  not  made  out  he  is
         entitled to a grant of international protection. The submission  of
         risk on return was not accepted by the Judge indicating this matter
         was dealt with. Considering the HJ(Iran) principles  and  the  fact
         the appellant will  be  able  to  lawfully  conceal  his  UK  based
         activities, as they do not  represent  a  genuinely  held  view  or
         fundamental part of his identity or personality that he  will  have
         to conceal to avoid persecution, no material error is made out.

     55. No arguable error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal is
         made out. The decision shall stand.

Decision

     56. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
         decision. The determination shall stand.

    Anonymity.

     57. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.

         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21 March 2018

