

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03062/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 July 2017                           |On 25 July 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     J s
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr M Shaw of Counsel, instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Walker dismissing her appeal against the respondent's refusal
         on 13 March 2017 to grant her protection in the  UK  as  a  claimed
         victim of trafficking.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  by  way  of  a
         determination promulgated on 2 May  2017  following  a  hearing  at
         Hatton Cross on 25 April 2017.


      2. The appellant is an Albanian national born  on  22  June  1996  who
         arrived here illegally on 7 July 2016 after claiming to  have  last
         left Albania on 5 July 2016 hidden in a lorry. She  claimed  asylum
         on 20 July.


      3. Four points were made in the  grounds  for  permission  to  appeal.
         These were: (1) that the judge made adverse findings relying  on  a
         document  which  was  made  available  to  him  by  the  respondent
         following the hearing and on which the appellant had no opportunity
         to make submissions; (2) that the other credibility  findings  were
         tainted by an  over  reliance  on  speculation  without  sufficient
         engagement with the country material or country guidance cases; (3)
         that the judge incorrectly dealt with the  evidence  regarding  the
         appellant's  mental  health  and  (4)  that  his  approach  to  the
         availability of a sufficiency of protection  was flawed. Permission
         to appeal was granted on 15 June 2017 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Chohan who only referred to the first ground in his decision.



      4. At the hearing before  me  on  20  July  2017,  Mr  Shaw  helpfully
         expanded on  the  grounds  in  his  submissions  and  Mr  Armstrong
         responded. At the conclusion of the hearing,  I  indicated  that  I
         would be setting aside the determination ad  remitting  the  matter
         back to the First-tier Tribunal for a full hearing  afresh.  I  now
         give my reasons for so doing.



      5. Conclusions



      6. The document that is at the heart of the appellant's complaint is a
         letter from the British Embassy in Tirana dated 3 February 2017. It
         translates and summarizes information received  from  the  Albanian
         Ministry  of  the  Interior.  Essentially  it  maintains  that  the
         appellant had not returned to Albania since she flew to Rome on  an
         Alitalia flight on 3 March 2016. The date  of  birth  accords  with
         that given by the appellant herself and the photograph  is  clearly
         of the appellant as she appeared before me. The  information  about
         her departure conflicts with the appellant's claim of her movements
         and is referred to both in the NRM letter and in the refusal letter
         from the respondent. To that extent, the judge was correct  to  say
         that this information was already known to the appellant as it  was
         contained in the evidence before  her.  The  respondent's  Rule  24
         response also correctly makes that point.



      7. The problem, however, lies with the other information contained  in
         the letter which had not been  disclosed  in  any  other  evidence,
         which had not been before the parties at the hearing and which  the
         judge relied on to make adverse credibility. That was  the  absence
         of anyone on Albanian records by the name provided by the appellant
         for her  trafficker.  The  judge  relied  on  that  information  to
         conclude that the trafficker did not exist. Whilst it may  well  be
         that he was right in  his  conclusion  and  that  the  claim  is  a
         fabrication, he erred in failing to disclose  that  information  to
         the parties and in failing to give them the opportunity to  respond
         to it. The prejudice to the appellant was  material  in  that  this
         finding was used to  undermine  her  claim.  That  is  procedurally
         unfair and for that reason alone, the determination cannot stand.



      8. Other matters were also raised by Mr  Shaw;  specifically,  to  the
         judge's alleged failure to engage with country guidance when making
         several  of  his  credibility  findings.  That,  along   with   the
         possibility that his findings were tainted by  the  information  in
         the Embassy letter,  means  that  they  are  unsustainable  and  I,
         therefore, set aside the determination in its entirety except as  a
         record of proceedings.



      9. Decision


     10. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law such that  the  decision
         is set aside. It shall be re-heard afresh by a different  judge  of
         that Tribunal at Taylor House at a date to be arranged.



     11. Anonymity



     12. Although I was not asked to do so, I continue the  anonymity  order
         made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 20 July 2017






