
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/03104/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 September 2018                  |      On 08 October 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                  MR H V T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, Counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Vietnam,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  on  17th
    March 2017  to  refuse  his  application  for  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection.  In a decision promulgated on  16th  June  2018  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge IM Scott dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  but
    allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.   The  Appellant
    appeals to this Tribunal against the decision to refuse the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds with permission granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Brien on 31st July 2018.

 2. The Appellant's account was accepted by the judge. The Appellant claims
    that he was trafficked to the United Kingdom.   His  account  is  that,
    after his parents died in a flood in 1996, he and his sister worked  on
    a farm. When she was 16 his sister became  involved  with  a  group  of
    local gangsters who lent money for the Appellant to be sent  abroad  on
    the basis that he and his sister would pay back the money.   He  claims
    that in April 2010 he was taken to an airport and flown to  Poland  and
    then taken by lorry  to  the  UK  via  France.   He  was  taken  to  an
    apartment, forced to take drugs and to work as a prostitute having  sex
    with men and women.  He was not paid and was not allowed to  leave  and
    was beaten up any time he tried to resist.  This continued  until  2012
    when he telephoned his sister who told  him  that  she  too  was  being
    forced to have sex to pay the debt.  He escaped on 17th June 2012.   He
    was taken in by a Vietnamese man and was  arrested  when  the  premises
    were raided and he then  claimed  asylum.   The  Appellant's  case  was
    referred to the National Referral Mechanism  (NRM)  and  the  Competent
    Authority made a decision  on  16th  March  2017  concluding  that  the
    Appellant is a victim of modern slavery.

 3. In the Reasons for Refusal letter  the  Respondent  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is a national of Vietnam. In light of the decision under  the
    NRM the Respondent accepted that the Appellant had been  trafficked  to
    the UK for the purpose of sexual exploitation. The Respondent  rejected
    the Appellant's claim that he owed  money  to  the  gangsters  who  had
    arranged his journey to the UK. The Respondent considered  that  former
    victims of trafficking were not members of a  Particular  Social  Group
    (PSG) in Vietnam because, "although they share an immutable (or innate)
    characteristic -having been a victim of trafficking -  that  cannot  be
    changed, in view of their  equality  under  the  law  and  the  general
    availability of state protection  against  trafficking,  they  are  not
    perceived  as  different  and  do  not  have  a  distinct  identity  in
    Vietnamese  society"[paragraph  49   Reasons   for   Refusal   letter].
    Accordingly the Respondent concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    member of a PSG and did not fall within the Refugee Convention.

 4. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  that  the  Appellant  had
    maintained a coherent, consistent, detailed and plausible  account  and
    found that the Appellant's claim was credible  [36].   The  judge  took
    into account the fact that the Appellant had been found to be a  victim
    of trafficking for the purposes  of  sexual  exploitation  following  a
    positive  conclusive  grounds  decision  under  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism [37].  The judge also took into account the  evidence  of  Dr
    Tran,  a  country  expert,  whose  report  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge went on at paragraph 39 of the decision to say:-

         "While it is accepted that the  Appellant  has  been  a  victim  of
         trafficking, I am not satisfied that such victims form a particular
         social group in Vietnam.  The weight  of  the  background  evidence
         supports the respondent's position that victims of trafficking  are
         equal under the law in Vietnam; that there is in place a system  of
         criminal law against trafficking; that victims of  trafficking  are
         not generally perceived as being different; and that  they  do  not
         have a distinct identity in Vietnamese society."

    The judge therefore found that there was no Convention reason and  that
    accordingly the Appellant is not a refugee.

 5. The judge went on to consider whether the  Appellant  was  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.  In so considering the judge took into account
    the Home Office Country Policy and Information Note entitled  "Vietnam:
    Victims of trafficking"  dated  November  2016.  The  judge  took  into
    account a number of factors which indicated that the Appellant would be
    at an increased risk of being abused or re-trafficked in Vietnam. These
    included the  fact  that  he  has  an  outstanding  debt  owed  to  his
    traffickers; he lacks family support because his parents  are  deceased
    and his sister's whereabouts are  unknown;  he  has  no  other  support
    network, little education and  no  vocational  skills;  he  has  mental
    health  problems  caused  by  his  experiences  at  the  hands  of  his
    traffickers; and on return to Vietnam he would have  no  accommodation,
    no means of supporting  himself  and  would  be  likely  to  living  in
    conditions of destitution.

 6. The  judge  accepted  that  there  was  in  general  a  sufficiency  of
    protection in Vietnam in that there is a system of criminal  law  which
    the authorities are willing and able to  enforce  and  from  which  the
    Appellant  is  not  excluded.   However,  the  judge   found   in   the
    circumstances of this case that the Appellant would be unable to obtain
    effective state protection. In addition to the factors which place  him
    at an increased risk of harm, the judge took into account the  evidence
    of  Dr  Tran  that  support  in  Vietnam  for  victims  of  trafficking
    concentrates on the needs of women and children  and  no  such  support
    exists for male  victims.   The  judge  took  into  account  Dr  Tran's
    evidence about the registration system, which would make  it  necessary
    for the Appellant to firstly return to his  home  area  to  re-register
    before being able to relocate and considered that this shows that there
    is a danger  that  this  would  bring  him  to  the  attention  of  the
    traffickers to whom he still owes money who  would  have  a  continuing
    adverse interest in him and would be  able  to  trace  him.   In  these
    circumstances the judge concluded that there were  substantial  grounds
    for believing that the Appellant would face a real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm on return to Vietnam and therefore allowed the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

The grounds of appeal

 7. Three grounds are put forward in the Grounds of Appeal.   There  is  no
    challenge to the finding that the Appellant is entitled to humanitarian
    protection, however the Appellant contends that the judge erred in  his
    approach to the issue as to whether victims of trafficking are a PSG in
    Vietnam.

 8. The first ground contends that the judge failed  to  consider  material
    evidence.  Reliance is placed Dr Tran's report,  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found  to  be  reliable,  which  states  that  there  is
    evidence that criminals and traffickers have  corrupt  links  to  local
    authority officials which  are  not  investigated  or  pursued  by  the
    Government; that  Vietnam  does  not  fully  comply  with  the  minimum
    standards  of  the  Trafficking  Victim  Protection  Act   2000;   that
    enforcement of the judicial  system  with  regards  to  trafficking  is
    identified as  "overloaded  and  powerless"  amounting  to  a  "serious
    problem";  and  that  victims  of  human  trafficking  are  treated  as
    criminals rather than victims.  It is contended that  there  is  strong
    evidence in Dr Tran's report to show that victims  of  trafficking  are
    perceived as different and do have a distinct  identity  in  Vietnamese
    society.  Part 7 of Dr Tran's report is highlighted which states that a
    victim of trafficking, particularly sex trafficking, "faces strong  and
    unfair persecution and treatment from wider society.  They  are  likely
    to face frequent verbal abuse from society".  Male victims  are  likely
    to be regarded as "sick" or "disgusting" characters and it states  that
    the social stigma  is  considered  one  of  the  most  challenging  and
    difficult issues facing victims of trafficking (paragraph 7.7 to  7.8).
    It is contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made no reference to
    this evidence and that it is unclear whether it  has  been  taken  into
    account.  It is contended that deficiencies in an existing legal regime
    to assist traffickers and complicity of enforcement officers and  state
    officials negate arguments based on legal regimes being  able  to  deal
    with trafficking (HC & RC (Trafficked  women)  China  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    00027).

 9. The argument put forward in the second ground relies on the decision in
    Liu v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  249
    which states at  paragraph  30  that  assessing  the  effectiveness  of
    protection goes to the risk of persecution rather than  the  definition
    of a particular social group. Accordingly, it  is  contended  that  the
    judge  took  irrelevant  matters  into  account  in  referring  to  the
    existence of a criminal justice system addressing trafficking.   It  is
    contended that the  decision  in  Liu  indicates  that  the  particular
    characteristic   can   be   identified   by   wider   society   through
    discrimination, recognition or perception from surrounding  society  of
    the characteristic or objective observations of the characteristic.  It
    is submitted that this is all that needs to be shown for a group within
    an immutable characteristic to satisfy the definition of a PSG.  It  is
    contended that, in taking matters such as the criminal  justice  system
    into account, the judge addressed the risk of persecution and in  doing
    so blurred these discrete issues.  It  is  contended  that,  whether  a
    victim has avenues of redress does not alter whether they are a  member
    of a particular social group but rather has an impact on  the  risk  on
    return.

10. The third ground contends  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons why he felt that background evidence weighed in favour  of  the
    respondent's assessment of whether the Appellant is a member of a  PSG.



The submissions

11. In his skeleton argument Mr Toal highlighted that the Refugee or Person
    in Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 SI
    2006/2525 (the Qualification Regulations) provides at Regulation 6.1:-

         "In deciding whether a person is a refugee:




         ...




         (d)  a group shall be considered to form a particular social  group
             where, for example:




              (i) members of that group share an innate characteristic, or a
                  common background that  cannot  be  changed,  or  share  a
                  characteristic  or  belief  that  is  so  fundamental   to
                  identity or conscience that a person should not be  forced
                  to renounce it, and




              (ii)          that  group  has  a  distinct  identity  in  the
                  relevant  country,  because  it  is  perceived  as   being
                  different by the surrounding society".



    He relied on SB (PSG - Protection Regulations-Reg 6) Moldova CG  [2008]
    UKIAT 00002 where the Tribunal held at paragraph  56  that  trafficking
    and former victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation  are  capable
    of being members of a particular social group because of  their  shared
    common  background  or  past  experience  of  having  been  trafficked.
    However, the Tribunal emphasised that in order for  former  victims  of
    trafficking or former victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation to
    be members of a particular social group, the  group  in  question  must
    have a distinct identity in the society in question.

12. Mr Toal also relied on the decision in AZ (Trafficked  women)  Thailand
    CG [2010] UKUT 118 (IAC) where the Tribunal held at paragraph 141  that
    the shared past experience of being trafficked for sexual  exploitation
    amounts to a common immutable characteristic.  He also referred  to  AM
    and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT  80  (IAC)  where  the
    Tribunal held at paragraph 166 that victims of trafficking  in  Albania
    would be members of a  particular  social  group.   He  relied  too  on
    paragraph 30 of Liu (above).   This indicates that a particular  social
    group may be  identified  by  the  recognition  or  perception  of  the
    surrounding society in general, that the group  in  question  shares  a
    particular characteristic or the distinguishing characteristic  in  the
    group in question, and  thus  the  group  in  question  may  simply  be
    objectively observable irrespective  of  the  insight  of  the  general
    society in which it is placed.

13. In his skeleton argument Mr Toal contended that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge erred in finding at paragraph 39 that victims of  trafficking  in
    Vietnam are not a particular social group.  He contended that it is not
    necessary to demonstrate want of equality under the  law  to  establish
    the existence of a PSG, that the existence and efficacy of  the  system
    of criminal law against trafficking is  relevant  to  the  efficacy  of
    protection rather than the existence of a PSG, and that the  weight  of
    the  background  evidence  compels  the  conclusion  that  victims   of
    trafficking are perceived as different  and  possessed  of  a  distinct
    identity.  It is submitted that as a victim  of  trafficking  or  as  a
    victim of trafficking for sexual  exploitation,  the  Appellant,  along
    with other such victims, has a common immutable characteristic,  namely
    his experience of having been trafficked, and that shared possession of
    that characteristic establishes the existence of the particular  social
    group and that the Tribunal erred in law by failing to treat that as  a
    relevant, if not decisive, consideration for the  purpose  of  deciding
    whether victims of trafficking are a particular social group.

14. At the hearing before me Mr Toal accepted that the issues identified by
    the judge whereby victims of trafficking are not generally perceived as
    being different and they do not have a distinct identity in  Vietnamese
    society [39] are a relevant consideration, but in  his  submission  the
    conclusions are perverse because the only conclusion open to the  judge
    on the basis of the evidence was that victims  of  trafficking  have  a
    distinct identity.  He contended that the evidence in the  Home  Office
    Country Information and Policy Note (CIPN) shows positive and  negative
    features, measures to  support  victims  of  trafficking  and  societal
    stigmatisation, all of which demonstrate that victims are  identifiable
    and identified in Vietnam, therefore in his  submission  the  Appellant
    satisfied the second limb of the definition of particular social group.



15. It is further contended in the skeleton argument that on the Tribunal's
    finding of fact it was bound to conclude that the Appellant had a well-
    founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of his membership  of  the
    particular  social  group  of  victims  of  trafficking   (for   sexual
    exploitation in  particular).  This  is  because  of  the  findings  at
    paragraph 42 that the Appellant has an outstanding  debt  owed  to  his
    traffickers and for that reason would be at an increased risk of  being
    abused or re-trafficked and that he has mental  health  problems  as  a
    result of his experiences as well as the finding at  paragraph 45  that
    there is a real risk that the Appellant  returning  to  his  home  area
    would bring him to the attention of traffickers to whom he  still  owes
    money who have a continuing adverse interest in him and would  be  able
    to trace him. It is contended that the debt referred to as a  cause  of
    the risk to the Appellant is an integral,  inherent  component  of  his
    experience of being trafficked.  Reliance is placed on the decision  in
    Sivakumar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  UKHL  14
    paragraph 41 where Lord Rodger said:-

         "So long as the decision-maker is satisfied that one of the reasons
         why the persecutor  ill-treated  the  applicant  was  a  Convention
         reason and the applicant's reasonable fear relates  to  persecution
         for that reason, that will be sufficient."

16. Mr Toal relied upon paragraphs 7.2 to 7.4. of the expert report from Dr
    Tran and submitted that on this evidence the only reasonable conclusion
    open to the judge was that the Appellant was a member of  a  particular
    social group.  He referred to 6.1.5 of  the  CIPN  and  submitted  that
    these factors contributed to  the  risk  of  being  re-trafficked.   He
    submitted that here at least two  of  the  reasons  for  the  fear  are
    directly related to the Appellant's membership of a  particular  social
    group.  He submitted that the  appeal  should  be  allowed  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds.

17. Mr Tufan submitted that for someone to be  a  member  of  a  particular
    social group they have to share an innate characteristic and must be at
    risk arising from that and  must  be  for  a  lack  of  sufficiency  of
    protection as set out in the CIPN.  He referred to the case  of  Nguyen
    (Anti-Trafficking Convention: respondent's duties)  [2015]  UKUT  00170
    (IAC) paragraph 52 where the Tribunal said:-

         "...It has not been shown that the  background  evidence  indicates
         that returning without her partner  and  with  the  children  would
         place her at risk of breach of her Article 3 rights or that even if
         she is a member of a particular social group  of  trafficked  women
         from Vietnam, she faces a real risk of harm on that account.  It is
         speculative and no more to suggest that she would face a real  risk
         of coming across her previous traffickers or that as a woman in the
         circumstances in which she would return she faced a  real  risk  of
         being trafficked by someone else.  We do not understand it to  have
         been suggested that she would be unable to make contact again  with
         her brothers, born respectively in  1989  and  1991,  or  with  her
         sister born in 1993.  There is evidence, in the US State Department
         Report of 2010, referred to in paragraph 50 above, to  support  the
         respondent's conclusion in the decision  letter  that  there  is  a
         sufficiency of protection provided by the authorities  in  Vietnam.
         Accordingly we find that she has not shown a real risk on return to
         Vietnam of persecution or a breach of her human rights."

18. Mr Tufan submitted that there is a general sufficiency of protection in
    Vietnam.  He submitted that in this case the judge was very generous in
    his interpretation of the risk to the Appellant, but he  accepted  that
    the judge's findings had not been challenged.  In  practical  terms  he
    submitted that there was no material difference to the Appellant  going
    forward.  The Appellant here fears gangsters.  He  submitted  that  the
    second element required that the Appellant  to  show  membership  of  a
    particular social group does not bite.  He accepted that if I was  with
    Mr Toal in his submissions that I could remake the decision by allowing
    the appeal on asylum grounds.

19.  In  response  Mr  Toal  submitted  that  the  issues  in  relation  to
    sufficiency of protection were  separate  from  those  of  whether  the
    Appellant was a member of a particular  social  group.   In  any  event
    sufficiency of protection has been decided in the Appellant's favour at
    paragraph 45.  He submitted  that  the  decision  in  Nguyen  had  been
    reported not because of a  sufficiency  of  protection  issue,  but  in
    relation  to  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Action  against
    Trafficking in Human Beings and paragraph 52 related to the facts  only
    and took the case no further.

20. At the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give as follows.

Error of Law

21. It is clear from the case law that a victim of trafficking could  be  a
    member of a PSG (HC & RC (Trafficked Women) China CG, Hoxha [2005] UKHL
    19, SB).  The  definition  of  PSG  in  the  Qualification  Regulations
    requires, inter alia,  that  members  of  the  group  share  an  innate
    characteristic or a common background that cannot be changed, and  that
    the group has a distinct identity in the relevant country,  because  it
    is perceived as being different  by  the  surrounding  society.  In  AZ
    (Trafficked  women)  Thailand  the  Tribunal  found  that  the   shared
    experience of being trafficked for sexual  exploitation  amounts  to  a
    common immutable characteristic. The Tribunal  referred  to  the  UNHCR
    guidelines which state that it is the past trafficking experience  that
    would constitute one of the elements defining the group in such  cases,
    rather than the future persecution now feared [141].

22. It is the Secretary of State's case as set out at paragraphs  42-50  of
    the Reasons for Refusal letter that the victims of trafficking are  not
    a PSG in Vietnam because, whilst victims  of  trafficking  do  share  a
    characteristic which cannot be  changed,  they  are  not  perceived  as
    different and do not have a distinct identity in Vietnam. This view was
    accepted and adopted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge. The judge  found
    that "The weight of the background evidence supports  the  respondent's
    position that victims  of  trafficking  are  equal  under  the  law  in
    Vietnam; that there is in  place  a  system  of  criminal  law  against
    trafficking; that victims of trafficking are not generally perceived as
    being different; and that they do  not  have  a  distinct  identity  in
    Vietnamese society.  Although the  judge  set  out  extracts  from  the
    expert's report and the CPIN he did not  specify  which  parts  of  the
    background evidence supported this conclusion.

23. I agree with Mr Toal's submission that the first two issues  identified
    by the judge, that is equality and the system of criminal  law,  go  to
    the issue of risk of persecution and sufficiency of  protection  rather
    than identification of victims of trafficking as a PSG. Thus the  issue
    is  whether  there  was  evidence  before  the  judge  to  support  the
    conclusion that victims of trafficking are not generally  perceived  as
    being different and that they  do  not  have  a  distinct  identity  in
    Vietnamese society.

24. I have considered the evidence which was before the judge which, it  is
    not in dispute, was the CPIN and Dr Tran's  expert  report.  The  judge
    summarised Dr Tran's report at paragraph 33 (b) and at paragraph 37 the
    judge indicated that the Appellant's account  was  consistent  with  Dr
    Tran's report. It seems clear that the judge accepted Dr Tran's report.



25. At paragraph 7.2 of his report Dr Tran states that  Vietnamese  society
    has a very negative attitude towards sex workers  or  people  who  have
    been sexually abused, whether forced or otherwise, and whether  or  not
    they are human trafficking victims.  People avoid contact with  victims
    who were sexually abused as they think they have  poor  characters.  At
    7.3 Dr Tran states that verbal abuse within and from the community is a
    common means of enforcing group norms and signifying  dishonour  and/or
    social stigma.  It states that parents might not allow  their  sons  or
    daughters to marry such women or men, even if they understand that they
    are fundamentally victims, and that forms of abuse are common in  rural
    areas and in major cities, and that this can  lead  to  further  sexual
    abuse as these victims are extremely vulnerable as a  result  of  their
    stigmatisation and cannot  easily  find  support  and  protection  from
    society.  At 7.4 of the report Dr Tran states  that  the  sexual  abuse
    victim is hardly able to start their normal life such as  finding  work
    or starting a family in their home town, and that parents, siblings and
    relatives can feel shame for the family if somebody in their family has
    worked as a sex slave or has been sexually abused and that  the  victim
    may be blamed for their circumstances.   The  judge  made  no  specific
    reference to this evidence at paragraph 39.

26. The CPIN of September 2018 (which Mr Tufan submitted  and  accepted  is
    the same as that which was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge) states
    at paragraph 5.1.8:-

         "5.1.8 The USSD TiP Report 2018, stated:

         'Vietnamese women and children are  subjected  to  sex  trafficking
         abroad; many are misled by fraudulent employment opportunities  and
         sold to brothel operators on the borders of  China,  Cambodia,  and
         Laos, and elsewhere in Asia, including Thailand, Malaysia, Republic
         of Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore. Some Vietnamese women  who  travel
         abroad  for  internationally  brokered   marriages   or   jobs   in
         restaurants, massage parlors, and karaoke bars-including to  China,
         Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Saudi  Arabia,  Singapore,  and  Taiwan-are
         subjected to domestic servitude or forced prostitution.  Pronounced
         social stigma associated with prostitution, especially in Vietnam's
         rural areas, complicates protective service  provision  for  female
         victims of sexual exploitation, and places them at higher  risk  of
         recidivism. False advertising, debt bondage, passport confiscation,
         and threats of deportation are  tactics  commonly  used  to  compel
         Vietnamese victims into servitude.' "

27. The CPIN report states at 8.1.2:-

         "8.1.2 The 2017 DFAT Report stated that  'DFAT  is  aware  of  some
         assistance provided to victims of sex trafficking by the Government
         in the form of a one off cash payment  of  up  to  VND1.5  million,
         healthcare, training, legal aid and counselling. However,  staffing
         levels  and  effectiveness  of  assistance  reportedly  varies   by
         location and many  victims  are  reluctant  to  return  and  accept
         assistance for fear of  being  stigmatised  by  authorities,  their
         family and community."

28. Section 8.4 deals with the risk of re-trafficking and states:-

         "8.4.1 The Asia Foundation noted that:

         'Even when these victims manage to return  to  Vietnam,  they  face
         tremendous difficulty  in  reintegrating  into  their  communities.
         Stigmatized by society and traumatized by  their  experience,  they
         generally do not  have  the  education  and  skills  necessary  for
         gainful employment. These women are at a high  risk  of  being  re-
         trafficked. [...] Because many trafficking  victims  actually  know
         their traffickers, the need for communities to reach out  to  their
         members is critical. [...]  Because  of  official  condemnation  of
         illegal prostitution as well as a prohibition on emigrating without
         notifying authorities, many survivors of trafficking are left  with
         few avenues to receive assistance. Often,  they  are  reluctant  to
         seek help for fear of further abuse by traffickers,  debt  bondage,
         punishment from government authorities for illegal border crossing,
         or stigma from being labelled a prostitute. This isolation and fear
         leaves them vulnerable to re-trafficking.'

         ...

         8.4.4 The USSD TiP Report 2018 noted that  'Endemic  social  stigma
         associated with victimhood and concerns over retribution  in  their
         local communities likely  further  discouraged  many  victims  from
         seeking or benefiting from protection services.'"

29. In my view the evidence set out above  (which  was  before  the  judge)
    shows  that  victims  of  trafficking,  more  particularly  victims  of
    trafficking for sexual exploitation, do have  a  distinct  identity  in
    Vietnam and are perceived as being different by surrounding society.

30. In these circumstances the judge made a material error at paragraph 39.
    Contrary to the judge's conclusion, the evidence shows that victims  of
    trafficking for sexual exploitation are perceived  as  being  different
    and are subject to social stigmatisation. In these circumstances I  set
    aside the decision of the judge to dismiss the  asylum  appeal  on  the
    basis of the absence of a Convention reason based on the  finding  that
    the Appellant is not a member of a Particular Social Group.

31. Not all victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation will be at  risk
    on return. However, in unchallenged findings, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge found that this Appellant is at increased risk of being abused or
    re-trafficked due to the factors set out at paragraph 42. Although  the
    judge found that there is in general a  sufficiency  of  protection  in
    Vietnam, he found  that  this  Appellant  would  be  unable  to  obtain
    effective state protection [44]. The judge  found  that  there  was  no
    viable internal relocation option for this  Appellant  [45].  Mr  Tufan
    accepted that if I found that the Appellant was a member of a  PSG  the
    appeal should be allowed on asylum grounds.

32. In light of my finding that the Appellant is a member of a PSG I remake
    the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remake the decision by allowing it on asylum grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date: 1st October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date: 1st October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

