
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03410/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 September 2017                      |On 22 September 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    [Y C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, Counsel, instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of China and his date of birth is [ ]  1973.
     He made an application for asylum which was refused by  the  Secretary
    of State on  31  March  2017.   The  Appellant  appealed  against  this
    decision and his appeal  was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal L K Gibbs, following a hearing on 28 April 2017.  The decision
    was promulgated on  4  May  2017.   Permission  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gill on 10 July 2017.

2.   The Appellant's  case,  very  much  summarised,  is  that  in  1993  he
    borrowed money from loan sharks to set up a biscuit factory  in  China.
    The business failed and the factory was closed down because flour  used
    in the manufacture of the biscuits was found to be poisonous. Following
    this in 1996 he was arrested by the authorities  in  spent  a  year  in
    police detention during which time he  was  tortured.  The  Appellant's
    debt  remained  outstanding.  He  was  released  from  police   custody
    following his wife having raised a surety of 30,000 RMB.  The Appellant
    breached bail and went into hiding in Fujian Province.  In 2002 he then
    made arrangements with a snakehead to leave China, paying the snakehead
    around 200,000 RMB.

3.   The Appellant arrived in the UK in 2003.  He was arrested on 29  August
    2013 and released on reporting restrictions.  The Appellant  absconded.
    He was encountered again on 11 January 2017 and he made an  application
    for asylum on 22 February 2017.  The Appellant claimed to be the victim
    of trafficking and his claim was  referred  to  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism (NRM). In a decision of 23 March 2017 the  NRM  rejected  the
    Appellant's claims to have been trafficked.   The  NRM  decision  maker
    relied on the fact that the Appellant agreed with the snakehead to come
    to the UK in order to earn money and that he did not claim that he  was
    forced to travel to the UK.  There has been, as far as I am  aware,  no
    challenge to the NRM decision.

4.   The judge made findings which are contained in paragraphs 18 to  22  of
    the decision:

         "18. I find it implausible that if the  appellant  faced  the  risk
             that he claims from both the Chinese authorities and the  loan
             sharks that he would have remained in China for  around  seven
             years following his claimed release  from  detention  (1996/7-
             2003).  Further, I  find  that  the  chronology  that  he  has
             provided in this  regard  lacks  consistency  because  in  his
             asylum screening interview (ASC) he said that he was  arrested
             in 1995 but in his full asylum interview (AIR) says 1996.   He
             also provides an account of where  he  was  living  in  hiding
             (AIR86) but  this  chronology  only  amounts  to  four  years,
             leaving at around three years unaccounted for which I find  is
             a significant discrepancy that undermines his credibility.   I
             also note that the appellant remained in the  Fujian  province
             where he has lived all of his life which further, in my  view,
             undermines the credibility of his claim to have been at  risk.
             In addition, on the issue of his detention in  China,  I  find
             that the appellant's credibility is undermined by his  failure
             to mention this in his ASC despite being asked if he had  been
             ever been detained (ACS 5.4).


         19.  The appellant's evidence is that he paid the snake  head,  Xin
             Zhong 200,000 RMB to help him leave  China.   I  find  however
             that he was unable to explain where he got this money from (if
             he had been in hiding for years), and why, if he had access to
             such money, he did not seek to repay the loan  sharks  who  he
             claims were after him.  I consider that this is evidence  that
             is  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's  claim  and   further
             undermines the weight that I can attach to his evidence.


         20.  In addition to these  concerns  is  that  the  fact  that  the
             appellant as able to leave China using a passport in  his  own
             name which I find undermines his claim to  be  wanted  by  the
             authorities.  I also find his evidence  is  that  he  arranged
             with Xin Zhong to travel to the UK to work here, not  that  he
             was forced to do so (AIR 109) and at  AIR  110  the  appellant
             agreed that his main reasons for  not  wanting  to  return  to
             China are economic.


         21.  Further, the appellant's evidence is  not  that  he  owes  Xin
             Zhong money for arranging his journey because he  had  already
             paid him in  China,  and  I  find  that  this  diminishes  the
             credibility of his claim in his ASC that he was forced to work
             in the UK.  Additionally I find it very  significant  that  in
             his AIR 111 he retracts this claim 'I never said  that  I  was
             locked up' which I find is a significant  inconsistency  which
             he has failed to reasonably explain.  The fact  that  he  then
             reinstates this claim in his witness  statement  that  he  was
             forced to work in the UK without the chance to escape  further
             undermines his credibility in  my  mind,  notwithstanding  the
             lower standard of proof.


         22.  Whilst I do not dispute that the Appellant has cigarette burns
             on his arms, given my over concerns regarding his  credibility
             I am not persuaded that  these  were  caused  by  the  Chinese
             authorities.  Given the nature of the scars I find that  there
             are possible alternative explanations for these which have not
             explicitly been considered by  the  doctor  at  the  detention
             centre."


5.   The grounds are twofold.  First; it is asserted  that  the  judge  gave
    inadequate reasons for reaching conclusions in respect of  the  medical
    evidence and failed to take into account the Rule  35  report.   It  is
    further stated that the  judge  focused  on  minor  inconsistencies  to
    conclude that there are possible alternative explanations in respect of
    the Appellant's scarring. Secondly,  it  is  asserted  that  the  judge
    should have considered Article 8, including paragraph  276ADE,  as  the
    Appellant has been here for fourteen years and he has some family  ties
    and family life here.

6.   I heard submissions from Mr Mannan and he conceded  that  the  Rule  35
    report does not clearly consider possible alternatives and  that  there
    was a deficiency in the medical evidence before the judge. However, the
    thrust of his argument was that the judge fell into error  in  alluding
    to other causes when this was not considered by the doctor.  Mr  Mannan
    suggested the way forward would be to direct the doctor  to  provide  a
    further report dealing with possible alternative explanations.

7.   Ms Pal submitted that the judge did not err.   The  judge  had  a  very
    brief report on which basis she had to make findings of fact. It was  a
    matter for the Appellant to obtain  further  medical  evidence  to  put
    before the judge, if that was appropriate, but it is too  late  now  to
    fill the gaps in evidence.

Conclusions

8.   The Rule 35 report, prepared by Dr N Ali, following  an  assessment  of
    the Appellant, is dated 9 March 2017.  The doctor concludes that  "that
    there is some scarring on his [the Appellant] left forearm as a  result
    of cigarette burns, this is shown in section 5." The report goes on  to
    conclude: "This gentleman's account is plausible and  the  scarring  on
    his left forearm could be consistent with a burn from a cigarette." The
    judge clearly did consider the Rule 35 medical report (see para 22) and
    accepted that the Appellant has cigarette burns on his arms.

9.   A proper reading of the decision makes it clear that the judge did  not
    rule out that the scars were forced by torture, but she did not  accept
    that they had  been  caused  by  the  Chinese  authorities  during  the
    Appellant's detention in 1996. It is in this context that she  referred
    to "possible alternative explanations not considered by the doctor". It
    was  not  for  the  judge  to  speculate  about  possible   alternative
    explanations, the point she made is that having considered the evidence
    in the round, including the very limited medical evidence, it  did  not
    establish that the cigarette burns had  been  caused  in  1996  by  the
    Chinese authorities in the circumstances described  by  the  Appellant.
    This finding was open to the judge on the evidence. There is  no  error
    of law.

10.  Article 8 was not advanced at the hearing by  the  Appellant  and  this
    ground was not expanded upon in oral submissions before me.  It was not
    incumbent on the judge to consider the appeal under Article 8.  In  any
    event, in the light of the lawful dismissal of the  Appellant's  asylum
    claim and the absence of evidence of very significant obstacles  it  is
    inevitable that the appeal would have been dismissed under the Rules.

11.  In terms of the wider Article 8 assessment, albeit  he  has  been  here
    since 2003 and the decision interferes with his private life, there  is
    no evidence of the Appellant's family  life  now  referred  to  in  the
    grounds before me or indeed of a significant private  life  here.   The
    Appellant has been here  unlawfully.  Having  regard  to  all  material
    factors, including the scant evidence  in  respect  of  Article  8  and
    section 117B of the 2002 Act, it is inevitable  that  the  only  lawful
    conclusion is that the decision  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    interest ( in this case  is  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  country
    through the maintenance of immigration control).

Notice of Decision

12.  The decision of the judge is lawful and sustainable  and  there  is  no
    error of law and the decision is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                   Date 22 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
