
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03931/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 October 2017                       |On 7 November 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     M s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I/we make an anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia who was born on [  ]  1992.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely in a lorry  on  10  October
    2015.  He claimed asylum on 20  October  2015.   An  initial  screening
    interview took place on 20 October  2015.   This  was  followed  by  an
    asylum interview on 4 April 2016.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim was  that  his  father  had  been  a
    member of the opposition group, Ginbot 7 ("G7") and had  been  detained
    and killed by the Ethiopian authorities.  The appellant claimed that he
    had also been a member and had been arrested, detained and ill-treated.



 4. On 7 April 2016, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  L  Murray
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  She made  an  adverse
    credibility finding and did not accept that the appellant would  be  at
    risk on return to Ethiopia.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 29
    March 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ford) granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal on the single ground that the judge had failed  to
    consider whether the appellant's return to Ethiopia would breach Art  3
    on the basis that there was a real risk that he would commit suicide.

 7. The respondent filed a Rule 24 notice in response on 13 April 2017.

 8. The appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the additional grounds upon which permission had been
    refused.

 9. On 14 July 2017, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ) Perkins granted the appellant
    permission to appeal on those additional grounds.

The Appellant's Grounds

10. In the renewed application, the appellant  sets  out  four  grounds  of
    challenge to the judge's decision; in addition to the ground upon which
    the First-tier Tribunal gave permission.

11. First, it  is  contended  that  the  judge  misstated  the  appellant's
    evidence  set  out  in  his  asylum  interview  when   identifying   an
    inconsistency in his account at para 28 of her determination in respect
    of the number of times he claimed to have been arrested or detained  in
    Ethiopia.  Mr Neale, who represented  the  appellant,  placed  reliance
    upon the verbatim transcription of the interview contained in the First-
    tier Tribunal bundle at A33 - 35.

12. Secondly, it is contended that the judge erred in law in  relying  upon
    discrepancies between the appellant's evidence  given  at  his  initial
    screening interview and his later account, in particular in his  asylum
    interview.  Mr  Neale  placed  reliance  upon  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in JA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  450  that  caution
    should be exercised in relying upon discrepancies  when  there  was  no
    independent recording of the screening interview to verify the accuracy
    of what was said.

13. Thirdly, it is contended that the judge failed properly  to  take  into
    account in assessing discrepancies in the appellant's evidence that  he
    had been diagnosed with PTSD by Dr Longman whose report and  conclusion
    in this regard, the judge accepted.

14. Fourthly, it is contended  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons, when rejecting  the  appellant's  account  that  he  had  been
    involved with G7 in Ethiopia, that he had not been involved with G7  in
    the UK until after his asylum claim had been refused.

15. Finally, relying on the ground upon which permission was granted by the
    First-tier Tribunal, Mr Neale  submitted  that  the  judge  had  wholly
    failed to consider whether the appellant's return would breach Art 3 on
    the basis of a risk of suicide.

Discussion

16. The judge's reasons, set out under the heading "Findings  and  Reasons"
    at paras 18 - 37 of a determination, are detailed.

17. The judge had before her an expert report from Dr Longman  relating  to
    injuries that the appellant claimed he had suffered whilst in detention
    and in respect of his mental health.  At paras 21 - 22, the judge dealt
    with the expert evidence concerning the appellant's injuries which  she
    accepted were "highly consistent" with a deliberate assault and, on the
    basis of the evidence, that the injuries were "very  unlikely  to  have
    occurred accidentally" and that there were "few other possible  causes"
    rather than the cause of the trauma as described by the appellant.  The
    judge said this:

         "21. The Appellant relies on an expert report drafted by  Dr  Tania
             Longman  who  has  provided  an  opinion  on  the  Appellant's
             scarring and in his  mental  health  in  accordance  with  the
             Istanbul Protocol, Dr Longman is a GP who since June 2011  has
             worked  for  Medical  Justice,  London.   She   assessed   the
             Appellant on 6 October 2016.  The Appellant  reported  to  her
             that he was interrogated about  his  father's  involvement  in
             Ginbot 7 and was punched, slapped  and  kicked  all  over  his
             body.  He said that his left hand and right leg was stamped on
             and he was beaten all over his body  with  wooden  sticks  and
             with a rifle butt.  She examined the  scars  on  his  body  of
             which  there  were  32.   She  finds  the  legions  that  were
             attributed to being caused  by  wooden  sticks  to  be  highly
             consistent with their appearance.  She considered  alternative
             causes for these lesions but found that  it  was  less  likely
             that they would have arisen through the  possible  alternative
             cause of allergic reactions and were not consistent with self-
             harm.  She considered the scars attributed to being kicked and
             stamped during  beatings  and  found  that  they  were  highly
             consistent with their appearance.  She found that  they  would
             also have been caused by some infective process but that  that
             she would have expected to see  a  more  indented  appearance.
             The appearance of his fingernail was  highly  consistent  with
             being stamped on and she  concludes  that  it  could  also  be
             caused  by  accidental  injury.   She  considered  the   scars
             attributed to being cut with sharp portions of sticks and find
             that they are highly consistent with incision wounds caused by
             beatings with sharp instruments.  She  is  aware  of  no  skin
             conditions which could have caused  these  scars.   Accidental
             injury is a feasible alternative.   The  scars  attributed  to
             being beaten by a rifle butt are found to be  consistent  with
             their appearance.  She also finds the  scars  which  have  not
             been attributed to be consistent with  beating  and  that  the
             location is highly suggestive of injury inflicted deliberately
             and as a group are highly consistent with deliberate  assault.



         22.  She finds that  the  overall  pattern  of  lesions  is  highly
             consistent with the history he has given and that the  pattern
             and  number  of  scars  is  very  unlikely  to  have  occurred
             accidentally.  This means therefore, according to the Istanbul
             Protocol that the lesion could have been caused by the  trauma
             described and there are few other possible causes."

18. At para 23, the judge turned to Dr Longman's report in relation to  the
    appellant's mental health and accepted that he had been diagnosed  with
    PTSD.  The judge said this:

         "23. She concludes also that a diagnosis of PTSD is compatible with
             his observed mental state.  She finds that he is at moderately
             low risk of suicide.  She considers  whether  is  malingering.
             The Appellant did not know the origin of most  scars  and  did
             not take the opportunity to attribute  them  being  due  to  a
             specific part of his maltreatment which she  considers  to  be
             entirely compatible with accounts of trauma.  She  finds  that
             his presentation was more in line with a genuinely traumatised
             person."

19. Then, at para 24, the judge noted that  Dr  Longman's  report  provided
    "strong evidence to support his claim that he was injured in the manner
    described".

20. Further, the judge accepted that the appellant was a vulnerable witness
    for the purposes of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of  2010,
    noting that:

         "With regard to the Appellant's ability to give evidence, she  said
         that he showed great difficulty speaking of events in Ethiopia  and
         because visibly agitated when these  subjects  arose.   She  states
         that these difficulties need to be borne in mind in  further  legal
         proceedings.   I  have  taken  account  of  these  observations  in
         assessing the Appellant's evidence."

21. Mr Neale placed reliance upon the judge's conclusions in paras 21-24 as
    the background to his submissions in relation to the  specific  grounds
    relied upon.  In particular, to adopt his phrase, he submitted that  it
    was a "finely balanced case" given the acceptance of the  injuries  and
    that the appellant suffered from PTSD.  He did not, of  course,  accept
    that  the  judge  had  properly  taken  into  account  the  appellant's
    vulnerability in assessing his evidence.

22. Turning then to the specific grounds; ground 1 relates to  the  judge's
    reliance upon a discrepancy or confusion in the appellant's evidence at
    questions 12 and 13 of his asylum interview.  At  para  28,  the  judge
    said this:

         "In his asylum interview his answer to question 12 if he  had  been
         arrested in Ethiopia is confused.  He says 'frequently"  they  took
         him and put him Kebele prison and would harass and  beat  him.   He
         said that first they caught him and beat him and put him in  prison
         and the second time they caught him to confess the party his father
         belonged to.  In answer to question 13 he said he had been arrested
         twice."

23. Mr Neale relied upon the  verbatim  transcription  of  the  appellant's
    answers in respect of  questions  12  and  13  at  A34  -  A35  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  He submitted that the appellant had not said  that
    he had been "frequently" arrested or detained.   His  answer  was  more
    detailed as set out at A34.   Mr Neale accepted that he had said: "yes,
    every time they would detain me, they would beat me in  Kebele  Prison,
    means every time."  But, Mr Neale submitted that it was clear  that  in
    answer to question 12 he had said: "they arrested  me  one  time,  when
    they came again to arrest me I escaped."

24. Likewise, Mr Neale submitted that in question 13 the appellant had made
    clear that he had only been detained once and that the second time they
    had come for him he had escaped while they were taking him  to  prison.
    The answers were as follows:

         "I was detained once, the second time I escaped before I was  taken
         to prison.  I escaped while they were taking me to prison  ...  the
         first time they detained, put me in Kebele Prison and beat  me  for
         two days ... I was detained once.  I was  released  on  the  second
         day, they could not find any  evidence  on  me.   ...   I  was  not
         detained more than two times.  It was once that I was detained."

25. Mr Richards submitted that the judge  had  not  been  referred  to  the
    verbatim  transcription  and  Mr  Neale  (who  did  not  represent  the
    appellant in the First-tier Tribunal) was unable to assist  on  whether
    it had.  Even if that were the case,  I  do  not  accept  Mr  Richard's
    submission that the judge could not be expected to have taken  it  into
    account.  Whilst a judge cannot be expected to trawl  through  hundreds
    of pages of background material, to which a representative did not draw
    a judge's attention,  that  is  not  this  case.   Here,  the  relevant
    material including the appellant's witness statement, the expert report
    of Dr Longman  and  the  transcription  of  the  asylum  interview  are
    contained in 39 pages at the beginning of the appellant's bundle.   The
    judge clearly made reference to the witness statement of the  appellant
    in  her  determination  and  also  the  report  of  Dr  Longman.    The
    transcription of the asylum interview followed those documents.  In  my
    judgment, it casts a somewhat different complexion upon the appellant's
    answers as to the number of times  he  was  arrested  and/or  detained.
    Whilst the appellant does say "every time they would detain me" at  the
    outset of his answer, the confusion appears  to  be  lifted,  in  short
    time, in both question 12 and 13 when he maintains that he was arrested
    and detained once and that he escaped the second time that they  sought
    to arrest him.  In my judgment, the judge's failure to grapple with the
    appellant's answers to questions 12 and 13 of his asylum interview  set
    out at A34 - A35 was an error.  Whether it was a material error, is  an
    issue I shall return to shortly.

26. Turning now to ground 2, this contends that  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    place weight upon inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence given  in
    his screening interview and  subsequently.   In  JA  (Afghanistan)  the
    Court of Appeal did, as Mr Neale submitted,  caution  against  reliance
    upon what was said in a screening interview which,  unlike  the  asylum
    interview, is unrecorded and therefore its accuracy cannot be  checked.
    At [24], Moore-Bick LJ (with whom Gloster  and  Vos  LJJ  agreed)  said
    this:

         "[A Tribunal] does, however, have an obligation  to  consider  with
         care  how  much  weight  is  to  be  attached  to  [the   screening
         interview], having regard to the circumstances  in  which  it  came
         into existence.  That is particularly  important  when  considering
         the significance to be attached to answers given in the  course  of
         an interview and recorded only by the person  asking  questions  on
         behalf of the Secretary of State.  Such evidence  may  be  entirely
         reliable,  but  there  is   obviously   room   for   mistakes   and
         misunderstandings, even when the  person  being  questioned  speaks
         English fluently.  The possibility of error  becomes  greater  when
         the  person  being  interviewed  requires  the   services   of   an
         interpreter, particularly if  the  interpreter  is  not  physically
         present.  It becomes greater still if the person being  interviewed
         is vulnerable by reason of age  or  infirmity.   The  written  word
         acquires a degree of  certainty  which  the  spoken  word  may  not
         command.  The 'anxious scrutiny' which all claimants for asylum are
         entitled to expect begins  with  a  careful  consideration  of  the
         weight that should properly be attached to answers given  in  these
         interviews.  ... the decision-maker would need to bear in mind  the
         age and background of the applicant, his limited command of English
         and  the  circumstances  under  which  the  initial  interview  and
         screening interview took place."

27. At [25], Moore-Bick LJ continued:

         "In my view the common law principle of fairness ...  requires  the
         Tribunal to consider with care the extent  to  which  reliance  can
         properly be placed on answers given by the appellant in his initial
         and screening interviews ...."

28. In this appeal, the judge relied upon a number of discrepancies in  the
    appellant's evidence between his screening  or  initial  interview  and
    subsequently.

29. At para 28, she identified the appellant's  failure  at  his  screening
    interview to refer to the fact that he had been  detained  or  involved
    with or been accused of involvement with a political organisation:

         "28. The Respondent did not accept  that  the  Appellant  had  been
             arrested on the same occasion as his father and detained for 2
             days.  The Appellant was asked the basis of his  asylum  claim
             at question 30 of the initial  interview  and  said  that  his
             father was killed by the opposition.  He said he could not  go
             back due to the bad situation and because he had no way to  go
             back to.  He was asked at question 35 whether he had ever been
             detained, either in the UK or any other country or in  another
             country for any reasons and he is recorded  as  answering  no.
             He was also asked at question 36 if he had ever been  involved
             with  or  accused  of  being  involved  with   any   political
             organisation to which he also is recorded as answering no."

30. At paras 29 - 30, the judge dealt with the appellant's  explanation  of
    why he had not mentioned these matters  in  his  initial  interview  as
    follows:

         "29. The Appellant response in para 25  of  his  witness  statement
             that was asked by the interpreter  on  the  phone  if  he  was
             arrested in Sudan and so he replied no, he barely  managed  to
             escape.  He states that he did not meet  with  his  solicitors
             after his screening interview and it was not read back to him.
              He had not seen his solicitor to discuss his first and second
             interviews and called him to see him after the  interview  but
             he never got back to him.  He states that he did not even know
             his asylum claim had been refused and only found out  when  he
             went to London to participate  in  a  peaceful  protest.   The
             Appellant says in paragraphs 26 and 27 that  he  was  in  fact
             asked whether  he  was  involved  in  national  defence  army,
             police, government and never asked if he was  involved  in  an
             opposition party.  He further says that he was not asked if he
             had friends or family in an opposition group.

         30.  The Appellant has not produced any evidence to  show  that  he
             complained that his solicitor failed properly to represent him
             and failed to take instructions on the screening interview  or
             substantive interview or that he complained about the accuracy
             of the interpretation.  The first time  this  explanation  has
             been put forward is  in  this  witness  statement.   Whilst  I
             accept  that  they  may  be   mistranslations   in   screening
             interviews there is no mention in it that  the  Appellant  was
             involved in a political organisation,  arrested  and  detained
             not merely in answer to the two specific  questions  but  also
             when he was asked to describe briefly all the reasons  why  he
             could not return home.  Instead he mentioned  that  he  was  a
             Christian in a Muslim country in Sudan and that he had no  one
             in his own country.  This is, I find a material omission."

31. At para 31, the judge referred to the fact that the appellant  had  not
    mentioned in his initial interview that he had been a member of G7  and
    failed  to  mention  the  he  had  friends  or  relatives  working  for
    opposition groups when his claim was that a friend, who was a member of
    G7, had recruited him:

         "31. The Respondent also contends  that  the  Appellant  is  not  a
             member of Ginbot 7 as claimed by him.  I have found  that  his
             failure to mention this in his initial interview and  to  have
             subsequently addressed  this  is  a  material  omission.   The
             Appellant also said in his screening interview that he did not
             have friends or relatives working for opposition groups  which
             is inconsistent with his claim that he has a friend called [N]
             who is a member of G7 and recruited him to  the  organisation.
             The  Appellant  states  in  his  witness  statement  that  the
             question was not interpreted correctly and had  it  been  read
             back to him he would have corrected it.  He says he was  asked
             about his problems in Sudan in  his  screening  interview  and
             that he did not have a legal permit  so  he  had  difficulties
             with his employer but that this was not  the  main  reason  he
             left Sudan.  The reason was because the  Sudanese  authorities
             in collaboration with the Ethiopian authorities were targeting
             Ginbot 7 members.  Again, I do  not  accept  for  the  reasons
             given above  that  all  of  the  questions  in  the  screening
             interview were translated so  badly  that  the  Appellant  was
             unable to explain why he was unable  to  return  to  his  home
             country."

    Likewise, at para 35 the judge identified the  appellant's  failure  to
    refer to the fact in his screening interview that he had been  arrested
    with other members of G7 in 2014:

         "35. It is the Appellant's account that he was arrested with  other
             members of G7 between 11 September 2014 and 10  October  2014.
             The Appellant's evidence in relation to this  event  has  been
             inconsistent as between his screening and his asylum interview
             and for the reasons given.  I do not  accept  his  explanation
             for this."

32. The Court of Appeal in JA (Afghanistan) emphasised the need for caution
    and "careful consideration" of what weight should be given  to  answers
    in an unrecorded  screening  interview.   In  this  appeal,  the  judge
    carefully considered the appellant's explanation  that  he  had  wholly
    omitted reference to central  parts  of  his  claim,  for  example  his
    involvement with G7 and arrest and detention in Ethiopia.  This was not
    a case where the judge 'picked through' the detail of  the  appellant's
    answers in, on the one hand his screening interview, and on  the  other
    hand in his asylum interview.  It was not simply a lack  of  detail  in
    his screening interview that led the judge to doubt the veracity of his
    account.  It was the omission of central parts of his claim.  The judge
    dealt with the appellant's explanation in his witness statement and, at
    paras 29-30, gave reasons why she did not  accept  that  the  omissions
    were explicable.  In my judgment, the judge adequately considered  what
    weight to attach to the omissions from the appellant's evidence in  his
    screening interview given his claimed fear (based upon past events)  in
    Ethiopia.  Mr Neale pointed out that there were errors in the screening
    interview including the appellant's name, date of  birth  and  town  of
    birth.  It is difficult, however, to conclude that the  omissions  from
    the screening interview relied upon by the judge could be  the  product
    of transcription error.  It is not the case of  a  wrong  or  misplaced
    word being found in the screening interview but rather  the  wholescale
    omission in respect of questions which  were  designed  to  elicit  the
    central aspects of the appellant's claim upon which he now relies.   In
    the result, ground 2 is not made out.

33. In relation to ground 3,  Mr  Neale  relied  upon  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was a vulnerable witness and, although he accepted  that  the
    judge noted this in para 24 of the  determination,  he  submitted  that
    there was very little to suggest that she had taken this  into  account
    in assessing the appellant's evidence.  He drew  my  attention  to  the
    UNHCR publication "Beyond Proof. Credibility Assessment  in  EU  Asylum
    Systems" (May 2013) and that the appellant's  vulnerability,  including
    that he suffered from PTSD, were matters that  had  to  be  taken  into
    account in assessing whether his recall of.

34. In response, Mr  Richards  relied  on  the  fact  that  the  judge  did
    explicitly treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness including noting
    that he suffered from PTSD.

35. There is,  in  my  judgment,  no  merit  in  this  ground.   The  judge
    specifically dealt with the appellant's mental  health,  accepting  the
    diagnosis of PTSD made by Dr Longman (see para  23).   Thereafter,  the
    judge noted in para 24 the difficulties stated by Dr Longman  that  the
    appellant had in speaking about events in Ethiopia.   At  para  24  the
    judge noted that she  had  "taken  account  of  these  observations  in
    assessing the appellant's evidence".

36. Further, at para 27 the judge recorded that:

         "... There  are  aspects  of  his  evidence  that  I  do  not  find
         explicable either by reference to the background  situation  or  to
         difficulties with memory which could be  attributable  to  being  a
         victim of torture."

37. The judge then went on to identify a number  of  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's evidence (to which I have  already  made  reference).   Her
    reasoning is balanced.  There were aspects of the appellant's  evidence
    and his explanations which she did accept.  For example,  she  accepted
    his explanation concerning his evidence, said to be  inconsistent  with
    the background evidence, about the basis of G7 and its headquarters and
    its aims (see paras 32 and 34).

38. In my judgment, the judge was meticulously cautious to have  regard  to
    the appellant's mental health and that he was a  vulnerable  person  in
    assessing his evidence.  It was, in my judgment, open to the  judge  to
    find that the discrepancies in his evidence were not the product of his
    vulnerability  or  mental  health  and  so  could  be  relied  upon  as
    inconsistencies relevant to  an  assessment  of  the  veracity  of  his
    account.  Accordingly, I reject ground 3.

39. Ground 4 challenges the judge's reasoning in para 33 which  is  in  the
    following terms:

         "33. The Appellant has also not joined Ginbot 7 in the UK  when  he
             was interviewed.  There is an email at A36  of  his  interview
             which welcomes him to  Ginbot  7  dated  11  July  2016  which
             informs him his application has been successful.  There is  no
             evidence to show what process  if  any,  he  went  through  to
             obtain membership.  Further the email does not confirm that he
             was a member in Ethiopia or Sudan nor is there any evidence to
             show that he sought such confirmation.   There  are  also  two
             photographs of him at a demonstration.  The  Appellant  states
             in his witness statement that he could not participate earlier
             because he had been  ill  and  had  TB.   He  states  that  he
             participated in  four  protests  between  2  May  2016  and  9
             September 2016.  The refusal letter is dated 7 April 2016.  At
             the beginning of the asylum interview on 4 April 2016 he  said
             he was fit and well and end of the interview said he was  very
             well.  In his screening interview in October 2015 he  said  he
             had a cough.  I accept that he had tuberculosis.  However,  he
             has not produced any medical evidence  to  show  that  he  was
             unable to approach the organisation in [the] UK prior  to  the
             refusal of his claim."

40. Mr Neale submitted that it  was  wrong  for  the  judge  to  doubt  the
    veracity of the appellant's claim on the basis that  he  had  not  been
    involved with G7 in the UK prior to the refusal  of  his  asylum  claim
    because he had provided an explanation, namely that  he  suffered  from
    tuberculosis.  He submitted that it was difficult to see why the  judge
    should expect the appellant to take part in  G7  activities  given  his
    health.   He also relied upon Dr Longman's report where at  para  6.3.1
    she said that the appellant has a tendency to downplay his symptoms.

41. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had not expected the appellant  to
    take part in demonstrations while suffering from  tuberculosis,  rather
    she had taken into account his failure to approach or make contact with
    G7 in the UK prior to the refusal of his claim.

42. In my judgment, Mr Richards is correct, as is made plain by  the  final
    sentence of para 33 of the  judge's  determination.   Whilst  it  might
    conceivably be unreasonable to expect the appellant  to  take  part  in
    demonstrations if he suffered from TB  (although  even  that  might  be
    debatable), it was entirely open to the judge to take into account that
    he had not even approached  or  made  contact  with  G7  prior  to  the
    decision to refuse him asylum  and  that  his  tuberculosis  could  not
    provide a satisfactory explanation for that.  As the judge pointed out,
    there was no medical evidence to support a contention that tuberculosis
    would have prevented him doing so.  I accordingly reject ground 4.

43. In the result, therefore, the only error that  is  discernable  in  the
    judge's decision concerned that part of para 28 when  she  relied  upon
    the confusion or  apparent  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  asylum
    interview at questions 12  and  13  without  taking  into  account  the
    transcription of the full interview.  That error, however, was  not  in
    my judgment material  to  her  adverse  credibility  finding.   In  her
    balanced reasons, she gave a number of  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
    appellant based upon sustainable discrepancies  between  his  screening
    interview and his subsequent evidence and also  his  failure  to  claim
    asylum in a safe third country prior to arriving  in  the  UK  and  his
    failure to contact G7 in the UK (if  he  were  genuinely  a  supporter)
    prior to the refusal of his asylum claim.  Those remaining  sustainable
    reasons more than adequately provide sufficient support for the judge's
    adverse  credibility  finding,  even  taking  into  account  what   she
    describes as the "strong  evidence"  from  Dr  Longman  supporting  his
    account that he was injured as claimed.

44. For these reasons, therefore, the judge did not materially err  in  law
    in reaching her adverse  credibility  finding  and  so  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.

45. That then leaves the final ground and the Art 3 (or Art 8) claim  based
    upon a claimed risk to the appellant of committing suicide on return to
    Ethiopia.  Mr Richards did not seek to argue that  the  judge  had  not
    erred in law by failing to consider the Art 3 claim which was raised in
    the submissions (and skeleton argument) before  the  judge  and  in  Dr
    Longman's report.  Mr Richards submitted, instead, that that error  was
    not material.  He submitted that paras 6.3.6 and 6.3.7 of Dr  Longman's
    report could not lead a judge to find in the appellant's favour.

46. By contrast, Mr Neale submitted that paras 6.3.6  and  6.3.7  contained
    credible medical evidence that there would  be  an  increased  risk  of
    suicide to the appellant on return.

47. Paragraph 6.3.6 and 6.3.7 of Dr Longman's report are in  the  following
    terms:

         "6.3.6   [The appellant]  denied  any  current  suicidal  plans  or
             previous attempts at deliberate self-harm or suicide.   In  my
             opinion [the appellant] is currently at moderately low risk of
             suicide.  Although he denied current suicidal plans he  has  a
             number of factors known to increase suicide  risk,  including:
             ongoing 'stressor' factors (his anxiety about his asylum  case
             and family back home); being male  (men  are  three  times  as
             likely as women); being unemployed;  significant  life  events
             (traumatic experiences reported in Ethiopia);  mental  illness
             (likely PTSD and depression) (Mitchell & Dennis, 2006).

         6.3.7    In my opinion [the  appellant's]  risk  of  suicide  would
             increase if attempts were made to remove him from the  UK,  or
             if he were actually deported to Ethiopia.  In response to such
             events, it is my view that his mental state would be likely to
             deteriorate significant as his fear of being killed would  act
             as a major 'stressor'."

48. In J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629, the Court of Appeal held that Art 3 of
    the ECHR may be breached if there is  a  real  risk  of  an  individual
    committing suicide as a foreseeable consequence of  his  removal.   The
    court recognised that the Art 3 threshold was  particularly  high  (see
    [28]).  The court recognised that regard must be had to any  reasonable
    steps which would be taken to remove or reduce any risk of suicide both
    during the process of removal and in the country of origin.

49. In this appeal, both before the  judge  and  before  me,  reliance  was
    placed solely upon paras 6.3.6 and 6.3.7 of Dr  Longman's  report.   In
    para 6.3.6, she reports that the appellant denied  having  any  current
    suicidal plans and that any risk of suicide was "moderately  low".   In
    para 6.3.7, she identified that circumstances might increase that  risk
    such as the fear of his being killed on  return.   Of  course,  as  the
    judge found, any such risk would not be objectively well-founded.  That
    is  not  because  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  fear  which  is  not
    objectively well-founded but because it was  not  established  that  he
    genuinely had a fear based upon his past  involvement  in  politics  in
    Ethiopia.  The "major stressor" identified by Dr Longman in para  6.3.7
    is, therefore, not established.

50. I was not referred to any material, relied upon before the judge or  to
    be relied before me,  in  relation  to  what,  if  any,  mental  health
    services would be available to the appellant in Ethiopia to support him
    if he developed suicidal ideation or plans or which would be  available
    to deal with his PTSD.  On the basis of Dr Longman's report, as  relied
    upon before me, and in the absence of any evidence that there would  be
    a lack of support for the appellant in Ethiopia, I do not  accept  that
    the appellant had any  prospect  of  establishing  the  high  threshold
    required for Art 3 (or indeed Art 8)  based  upon  a  claimed  risk  of
    suicide.  The claim was, in my view, bound to fail and  had  the  judge
    considered it she would inevitably have dismissed the appeal under  Art
    3 9and Art 8).  Her failure to  consider  Art  3  was,  therefore,  not
    material.

Decision

51. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of a  material  error
    of law.  The decision stands.

52. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             31 October 2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                                             31 October 2017

