
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03454/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th November 2017                         |On 8th January 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

                          MR IBRAHIM BAKHTAN HAMED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Patel, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal Mr Ibrahim Bakhtan  Hamed  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge P.J. Holmes who, in a decision promulgated on
    the 20th March 2017,  dismissed  his  appeal  against  refusal  of  his
    Protection Claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was born on the 25th May  1988.
    He claimed to be a member of the Messiriya tribe who had been  detained
    and was still wanted by the Sudanese authorities in connection with his
    involvement in printing and distributing  anti-government  leaflets  to
    students. The credibility of that  claim  was  in  issue  before  Judge
    Holmes. It was supported by a country expert, Mr Peter  Verney.  First-
    tier Tribunal E.B. Grant gave permission to appeal on the  ground  that
    Judge Holmes had arguably "erred in law in his treatment of the  expert
    evidence".

 3. Judge Holmes  acknowledged  (at  paragraph  17)  that  Mr  Verney  was,
    "appropriately qualified and experienced to provide an expert  report",
    and that his report complied  with  the  formalities  required  by  the
    relevant practice direction. He also noted that Mr Verney's opinion was
    partially based upon an  interview  that  he  had  conducted  with  the
    appellant and that a transcript of that interview  had  been  helpfully
    incorporated within his report. Judge Holmes nevertheless made a number
    of criticisms of  Mr  Verney's  report,  which  may  be  summarised  as
    follows:

   i) failing to cite the sources of information upon which his opinion  was
      based;

  ii) indulging in speculation based upon unsubstantiated assumption;

 iii) basing his conclusions upon the account given by the appellant  during
      his interview with Mr Verney without noting the key respects in  which
      it was at odds with the account that he had  given  in  his  interview
      with the Home Office;

  iv) accepting that, in his interview with the Home Office,  the  appellant
      had demonstrated knowledge of the tribe to which he claimed to  belong
      when he had in fact demonstrated his ignorance of it and had had to be
      prompted by the Home Office interviewer in respect thereof;

   v) failing to note that the nature of the appellant's claim  had  changed
      from one based upon anti-government political  activities  during  his
      interview with the Home Office to one based upon his claimed ethnicity
      (non-Arabic Darfuri) during his interview with Mr Verney.

    The judge  illustrated  his  criticisms  of  Mr  Verney's  report  with
    numerous examples, which it is unnecessary for me to rehearse.

 4. Paragraph 4 of the grounds of appeal notes  that  whilst  Judge  Holmes
    criticised the report of  Mr  Verney  as  "inadequately  reasoned",  he
    nevertheless acknowledged that Mr Verney  was  appropriately  qualified
    and experienced to give an expert opinion about the matters  in  issue.
    Paragraphs 5 and 6 of  the  grounds  provide  details  of  Mr  Verney's
    credentials in that regard which, they suggest, Judge Holmes "failed to
    take into consideration". Paragraph 7 quotes Mr  Verney's  conclusions.
    Paragraph 8 argues that, "in light of these conclusions,  coupled  with
    Immigration Judge Holmes' own comments about the expert being  suitably
    qualified", the judge, "materially erred in failing to attach  adequate
    weight to the findings of the expert". Miss Patel essentially  repeated
    those grounds during her oral submissions.

 5. It is noteworthy that the grounds do not contain any criticism  of  the
    reasons given by the judge for attaching little weight to  Mr  Verney's
    report. Rather, they appear to imply that  Mr  Verney's  expertise  was
    such that the judge ought simply to have accepted  his  conclusions  at
    their face value. I disagree. The  judge  was  not  obliged  to  attach
    weight to the opinion of the expert on account of his expertise  alone.
    The fact that Mr Verney is an expert in his field does of  course  mean
    that it was incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  explain  why  he  was  not
    attaching  significant  weight  to  his  opinion.  That,  however,   is
    precisely what Judge Holmes did in  the  course  of  his  detailed  and
    cogent analysis of Mr Verney's reasoning of which no specific criticism
    is made. I therefore conclude that Judge did not make any error of law,
    material or otherwise.

Notice of Decision

 6. The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Judge Kelly                             Date:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

