
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03389/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by SKYPE)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2020                      |On 28 July 2020                      |
|Dictated: 18 June 2020               |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     LV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                             Anonymity Direction

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings. Liberty to apply.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, instructed by MTC & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born in 1984.  He appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State,
    dated  3  April  2019,  refusing  his  application  for   international
    protection.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgation on  20
    May 2019, dismissed this appeal.

 2. By way of a decision of the 27 August 2019, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bristow granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The  appeal
    subsequently came before Upper Tribunal Judge Lane at a  hearing  of  3
    October 2019 who,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  10  October  2019,
    dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant  was   neither   present   nor
    represented at the hearing of 3 October. In a decision of the  2  March
    2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Lane set aside his earlier decision pursuant
    to rule 43 of the Tribunal (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, having accepted
    that neither the appellant nor his legal representatives  had  received
    the Notice of Hearing for the 3 October 2019.

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Lane further directed that the  appeal  be  listed
    for a fresh hearing before another judge of the  Upper  Tribunal,  thus
    the matter now comes before me.

 4. At the outset of the hearing  I  established  that  both  parties  were
    content for the matter to be heard via the medium of Skype. The parties
    further confirmed at the end of  the  hearing  that  neither  had  been
    hampered by the hearing taking place via this medium.

Appellant's protection claim

 5. It is prudent to set out the basis of the appellant's protection  claim
    in some detail, in order to provide context for what follows.  In  this
    regard, I can do no better than recite  the  following  summary,  taken
    from the First-tier Tribunal's decision:

         "17. The Appellant states that he  was  born  in  Palayangodo,  Sri
             Lanka.  He is from a Sinhalese, a Buddhist family.  He  states
             he has two brothers and two sisters.  His father is  deceased.
             His mother remains in Sri Lanka.

         18.  The Appellant states  that  he  attended  Sri  Sumangala  Boys
             School and completed his education up to A  level.   Following
             completing his  education  he  worked  for  a  company  called
             Tradesmann SL Limited from 2005 to 2010.  He joined as a clerk
             and was thereafter promoted to the position of  administrative
             executive.

         19.  The Appellant states that he came to the United  Kingdom  with
             his wife on 11 July 2010 as a dependant on her  student  visa.
             On 26 June 2014 the Appellant states  that  he  and  his  wife
             returned to Sri Lanka to  visit  his  mother  and  his  wife's
             parents.  They stayed for the most part at his mother's home.

         20.  The Appellant states that three days after his arrival in  Sri
             Lanka on the night of 29 June 2014 he had gone out for  dinner
             with friends.  His wife was staying at her own  family's  home
             that night.  He returned home and it was only himself and  his
             mother that were in the house.  He states at 1.30  am  in  the
             morning on 30 June 2014 he was woken up with someone  knocking
             at the door. His mother opened the door to find  approximately
             five men dressed in plain clothes who identified themselves as
             police. The Appellant was asked to answer  questions  and  was
             invited to go with the men to the nearest police station.  Nor
             further explanations were forthcoming.

         21.  The Appellant states he was taken by the men  in  a  jeep.   A
             blindfold was put over his eyes.  He states the journey lasted
             around  2-2�  hours.   He  was  led  into  a  building.    His
             fingerprints were taken, and he was photographed.   He  states
             he was then blindfolded again for a second  time  and  led  to
             another room.  When the blindfold was removed on that occasion
             he appeared to be within a cell like room.  He was  questioned
             there.   He  was  shown  a  photograph  and   recognised   the
             individual as someone he knew as Suresh Kumar.  The  Appellant
             indicated that he did know  the  person.   In  the  photograph
             Suresh was dressed in an LTTE uniform. The Appellant states he
             had now known of this man's involvement in the LTTE.   He  had
             known Suresh because he used to work in the  same  company  as
             the Appellant.  He worked in a sales role.

         22.  The Appellant states that he had rented a room in his mother's
             home to Suresh.  He had lived in the Appellant's  family  home
             from February 2008 until September 2008.  He had left suddenly
             both from the Appellant's home and from the company  they  had
             worked for.  This background explanation was provided to those
             who were interviewing the Appellant.  The Appellant states  he
             was questioned further, and his interviewers began shouting at
             him and hitting him.

         23.  The Appellant states that he was interrogated over the next 20
             days.  He was questioned approximately twice a day.  He states
             that when questioned there were between 3-6 men in  the  room.
             As part of the torture, the Appellant states he  was  urinated
             upon, sexually assaulted and raped.

         24.  The Appellant states that on the day he was able to escape  he
             was told to sign four blank pieces of paper.  He states he did
             so and was then blindfolded and taken outside to a vehicle and
             driven for 2-3 hours and left by the side  of  the  road.   He
             claims that the first voice he heard was his wife's uncle  who
             removed  his  blindfold.   He  States  his  wife's  uncle  had
             organised his release by paying a bribe of 20 lakh rupees. His
             wife's uncle is a wealthy man who owns a  hotel  and  who  has
             connections with politicians.  The Appellant  states  that  he
             was reunited with his wife's uncle of 20 July 2014.

         25.  The Appellant states he was thereafter reunited with his  wife
             and stayed at her uncle's hotel overnight.  He states that  in
             the  morning  his  wife's  uncle  took  them  to  the  airport
             accompanied by a Buddhist monk.  The Buddhist monk was able to
             ensure that they were able to leave the country safely without
             being stopped.  The Appellant states that he was advised  that
             it would not be safe for him  to  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   He
             returned back in the United Kingdom on 22 July 2014.

         26.  The  Appellant's  asylum  claim  is  based  upon  his  imputed
             political opinion.  He has a convention reason for his  asylum
             claim.

         27.  In the alternative, the Appellant relies upon  his  Article  2
             and 3 rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.

         28.  The Appellant also relies upon his Article 8 rights under  the
             European Convention on Human Rights."

First-tier Tribunal's decision

 6. Underpinning the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the  appeal
    on protection grounds is its conclusion  that  the  appellant  did  not
    provide a credible account of the events which led to him  leaving  Sri
    Lanka.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal sets out its rationale within paragraphs 36  to
    51 of its decision, which broadly fall into four categories:

          i) First, inconsistencies as between the evidence  given  by  the
             appellant  and  that  given  by  his  wife,  which  were   not
             satisfactorily explained (see, for example,  paragraph  38  of
             the First-tier Tribunal's decision);

         ii) Second,  internally  inconsistencies  within  the  appellant's
             evidence (see, for example, paragraphs 39, 41, 42  and  49  of
             the First-tier Tribunal's decision);

        iii) Third, numerous aspects of the appellant's account were  found
             not to be plausible (see, for example, paragraphs 40,  43,  46
             and 50); and,

         iv)  Finally,   the   absence   of   corroborative   evidence   in
             circumstances where it was reasonable to obtain such  evidence
             (see, for example, paragraphs 44  and  45  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal's decision).

Grounds of appeal

 8. I next turn to the grounds of challenge to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision,  which  are  summarised  in  the  following  terms   in   the
    application for permission to appeal:

         "3.  Permission is sought on the grounds that the  Judge  made  the
             following material errors of law:

               i)  Failing  to  consider  country  guidance  and   objective
                  evidence relating to the Appellant's ability to  exit  Sri
                  Lanka legally;

              ii)  Placing  too  much  weight  on  a  discrepancy   in   the
                  Appellant's Screening Interview;

             iii) Failing to consider the Joint Presidential Guidance No.  2
                  of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and  sensitive  appellant
                  guidance when determining the Appellant's credibility."

Decision and reasons

Ground (i)

 9. The first ground of challenge focuses on paragraph 46 of the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision, which reads:

         "46. The Appellant and his wife were able to leave Sri Lanka  again
             in July 2014 on their own passports without being stopped.  It
             is not claimed that the  Appellant's  wife's  uncle  used  any
             influence to ensure that this happened.  The basis upon  which
             it is stated that this was achieved was due to the  fact  that
             the Appellant and his wife  were  accompanied  by  a  Buddhist
             monk.  I do not accept that given the background  claims  made
             by or on behalf of the Appellant that he would  have  been  so
             easily able to leave Sri Lanka through a main airport  in  the
             way  which  he  suggests.   This  undermines  the   background
             claims."

10. Ms Asanovic submitted that such rationale is  fundamentally  flawed  as
    being either inconsistent with  the  conclusions  in  country  guidance
    decision of GJ [2013] UKUT 319 or for lack of  reasons  explaining  why
    the guidance given in GJ is not of application.

11. In response, Mr Kotas asserted that the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning
    process was clear. The appellant  had  never  stated  that  bribery  or
    influence had been used to enable his unhindered travel through Colombo
    Airport and, as a  consequence,  the  guidance  given  in  GJ  was  not
    applicable.

12. I prefer the submissions of Ms Asanovic and conclude  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law in the approach taken in paragraph 46 of its
    decision.

13. It is important, first, to set paragraph 46 in the context of both  the
    appellant's, and  the  background,  evidence.  Taking  the  appellant's
    evidence first, at paragraph 24 of its decision the First-tier Tribunal
    summarises such evidence thus: "The Appellant states he was  thereafter
    reunited with his wife and stayed at her uncle's hotel  overnight.   He
    states that in the morning his wife's uncle took them  to  the  airport
    accompanied by a Buddhist monk.  The Buddhist monk was able  to  ensure
    that they were able to leave the country safely without being stopped."
    It is, also, noteworthy that in answer to Question 159  at  his  asylum
    interview the appellant stated: "I  am  sure  my  uncle  and  the  monk
    organised my safe exit".

14. Turning then to the background evidence. Mrs Asanovic draws support for
    her submissions from the following passages in GJ:

        146. "Approximately thirty of Mr Punethanayagam's 3,000 clients had
             contacted him after having left  Sri  Lanka  when  of  adverse
             interest, using  bribery.   He  did  not  say  when  that  had
             occurred.   Information  from   Mr   Punethanayagam's   client
             database about the use of bribery was as follows:

             "26. ... The paramilitary groups, working alongside  the  SLA,
                  assist the escape of detainees in order to  extort  money.
                  In my practice, I have come across several cases where the
                  families use bribery  as  a  last  resort  to  secure  the
                  release of a detainee with the assistance  of  members  of
                  the security forces or paramilitary groups.

             27.  The bribery is very common in the IDP camps  as  well  as
                  the detention centers from which even known  LTTE  leaders
                  have managed to escape on  payment  of  bribes.  Hence  it
                  cannot be argued that only people of low interest  to  the
                  authorities are able to secure  their  release  through  a
                  bribe. In my opinion, it is plausible  that  the  detainee
                  was released following the payment of a bribe, even if  of
                  significant adverse interest to  the  authorities.  It  is
                  unlikely that the  person  who  accepts  the  bribe  would
                  access the detainee's record and change them  as  released
                  or no longer wanted. Hence such cases  would  normally  be
                  recorded as escaped from detention in the database of  the
                  Police. Subsequently an absconder action will be commenced
                  and the detainee's details would be passed to the National
                  Intelligence Bureau.

             28.      It is possible to leave  the  country  using  bribery
                  with the help of  an  agent.  The  security  officers  and
                  immigration officers at the international airport  are  no
                  exception to the widespread bribery and corruption in  Sri
                  Lanka. It is always possible for a person to use influence
                  or bribery  to  get  through  the  airport  without  being
                  detained as an LTTE suspect.  I  have  been  contacted  by
                  approximately 30 clients who managed to flee  the  country
                  via  the  international  airport  whilst  in  the  adverse
                  interest of the authorities and  I  provided  evidence  in
                  their asylum cases in the UK, Canada, France,  Norway  and
                  Australia. Therefore leaving through  the  airport  either
                  with his/her own  passport  or  false  identity  does  not
                  necessarily indicate a lack of interest on the part of the
                  authorities."

             ...

        275. Mr Anton Punethanayagam's evidence is that of  a  practitioner
             who has dealt with 3000 cases of  detainees,  in  Colombo  and
             Vavuniya.   His  evidence  on  the  process  of  bribery   was
             particularly useful.  We  did  not  have  the  opportunity  of
             hearing him give oral evidence, and some of his evidence  goes
             beyond what he can be taken to  know  himself  but  where  his
             evidence concerns the criminal  processes  in  Sri  Lanka,  we
             consider that it is useful and reliable.  We  take  particular
             account of his  view  that  the  seriousness  of  any  charges
             against an individual are not determinative of whether a bribe
             can be paid, and that it is  possible  to  leave  through  the
             airport  even  when  a  person  is  being  actively   sought."
             (emphasis added)

15. The significant feature to be drawn from the above  cited  passages  is
    that an unhindered exit through Colombo airport can be secured even for
    those who are of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities. The First-tier
    Tribunal did not draw attention to  any  other  background  information
    which cast doubt on  the  ongoing  applicability  of  the  above  cited
    passages.

16. As already identified,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    appellant, if of interest to the Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  claimed,
    could not have exited Sri Lanka unhindered through Colombo  airport  in
    the manner alleged. Plainly,  given  the  conclusions  in  GJ  and  the
    appellant's evidence, such a finding requires cogent reasoning.  As  Mr
    Kotas identified, the First-tier Tribunal conclusion is founded on  the
    fact that the appellant did not asserted that his wife's uncle had used
    any influence to ensure an unhindered exit.

17. In my view this reasoning process falls far short of explaining why the
    appellant's account of being able to  exit  Sri  Lanka  unhindered  was
    thought to be implausible in light of the terms of his evidence and the
    evidence set out in GJ. On the face  of  it,  the  appellant's  account
    accords entirely with the  conclusions  in  GJ  and  is  certainly  not
    inconsistent with those findings. Contrary to the finding of the First-
    tier Tribunal, it is difficult to understand what the  appellant  could
    have meant by his evidence, other than that influence (or bribery)  was
    used to secure his exit from the country.

18. In these circumstances, I find that the First-tier erred in treating as
    a matter adverse to the appellant's credibility the fact  that  he  was
    "so easily able to leave Sri Lanka through the main airport in the  way
    that he suggest[ed]".

Ground (ii)

19. The second ground of challenge is directed to the conclusions found  in
    paragraph 40 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, which reads:

         "40. I have had regard to the terms of  the  Appellant's  screening
             interview.  The disclosures made at such time do  not  require
             to  be  detailed  but  should  provide  a  platform  for   the
             Appellant's subsequent  evidence.   The  Appellant's  detailed
             claim as developed now is that he was shown  a  photograph  of
             his former work  colleague  Suresh  wearing  clearly  an  LTTE
             uniform.  Accordingly, on the basis of his main evidence,  the
             Appellant's interviewers clearly knew that Suresh was a member
             of the LTTE.  Despite this interestingly the Appellant at  the
             time  of  his  screening  interview  indicated  that  he   was
             interrogated and that those questioning  him  "...  wanted  to
             know if he belonged to the LTTE".  There would be no need  for
             his questioners to ask if Suresh was  a  member  of  the  LTTE
             given the photograph which the Appellant says was produced  to
             him.  This undermines the Appellant's credibility."

20. Ms Asanovic submitted that judges of the First-tier Tribunal must  have
    regard  to  the  fact   that   there   is   room   for   mistakes   and
    misunderstandings in  a  screening  interview,  something  the  instant
    Tribunal did not have in mind.  She  also  observes  that  the  alleged
    inconsistency was not put to the appellant during  the  course  of  his
    substantive interview, nor was it a point taken  by  the  Secretary  of
    State. Both of these submissions are indisputably correct.

21. Mr Kotas asserted in response that the First-tier Tribunal was alive to
    the circumstances under which the screening interview took  place,  and
    that it was entitled to conclude as it did.

22. It is useful, at this stage,  to  set  out  what  is  said  to  be  the
    offending answers given by the  appellant  during  the  course  of  his
    screening and substantive interviews:

         At question 4.1 of the screening interview the appellant was asked:
         "Please BRIEFLY explain ALL of the reasons why you cannot return to
         your home country." (emphasis in original)

         In answer the appellant stated: "I am scared for my life from maybe
         CID because they are the people who came to my house  and  arrested
         me and they questioned me about  a  guy  that  was  working  in  my
         company and who was boarding in my house.  That guy is from  Jaffna
         and they wanted to know if he belongs to the LTTE."

    During his substantive asylum interview:

         The appellant was asked, at question 57: "Can you talk  me  through
         what happened on the day that you were kidnapped?"

         He replied, inter alia: "...They mentioned a Tamil name  and  asked
         me what involvement I have with that person.  I have never heard of
         that name, I have no idea.  They showed me a  photograph  but  that
         person I recognised him.  I used to know him as Suresh Kumar.  That
         is what I used to know him as.  Then I told them how  I  knew  this
         guy, Suresh. ... In the picture he was  wearing  an  LTTE  uniform.
         How I knew him, he used to work with the same company  I  used  to.
         He joined there in 2008. ..."

23. The only rationale that can be drawn from paragraph 40  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal's  decision  is  that  it  found  it  to  be  inherently
    implausible that a Sri Lankan army interviewer would ask the  appellant
    whether  Suresh  was  an  LTTE  member  in  circumstances   where   the
    interviewer already held a picture of a person believed  to  be  Suresh
    wearing an LTTE uniform.

24. In my view, the First-tier Tribunal erred  by  unlawfully  closing  its
    mind to the possibility of their being a rational explanation as to why
    the Sri Lankan authorities might ask the appellant whether  Suresh  was
    involved with the LTTE despite having a photograph of him  in  an  LTTE
    uniform.

25. One possible explanation is that the Sri Lankan army interviewer  asked
    the appellant whether Suresh was in the LTTE, in advance of showing him
    the photograph, in order to  ascertain  whether  the  appellant  was  a
    person who  would  willingly  share  information.  It  is  a  perfectly
    plausible inference that the appellant's response to this initial  line
    of questioning would inform the  questions  and  questioning  technique
    used thereafter. Whilst postulating  such  a  possible  explanation  is
    necessarily speculative, because one can never know what is in the mind
    of a Sri Lankan army interviewer, it demonstrates the  inherent  danger
    of  founding  conclusions  on  speculation  and,  in   particular,   on
    speculation about circumstances which are about as far removed from day
    to day life in the UK as it is possible to imagine.

26. For these reasons, I also find that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    its approach, and conclusion, in paragraph 40 of its decision.

Setting aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision

27. I have concluded above that it has been established that the First-tier
    Tribunal erred in its approach and conclusions, both  in  paragraph  40
    and 46 of its decision. I need not consider the third ground raised  in
    the  appellant's  challenge   because   I   am   satisfied   that   the
    aforementioned errors are such that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    must be set aside.

28. In coming to this conclusion, I have borne in mind  that  an  Appellate
    Court should be very cautious in overturning findings of fact made by a
    first instant judge.  This is because first instant  judges  have  seen
    witnesses and considered the whole sea of  evidence  (see  for  example
    Terzaghi [2019] EWCA Civ 2017 at [45]).  I have also  taken  cognisance
    of the fact that the errors identified above relate only to  two  of  a
    multitude  of  reasons  given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for   its
    conclusion that the appellant had failed to provide a credible  account
    of the events which led him to flee Sri Lanka.

29. However, the First-tier Tribunal does not ascribe any particular weight
    to  the  individual  reasons  given  for  its  overarching  credibility
    finding. The errors identified above each relate to events which cannot
    be described as peripheral to  the  appellant's  account;  indeed,  the
    events at the detention facility are core to  the  risk  the  appellant
    claimed he will be faced with  upon  return.  In  light  of  this,  and
    reading the decision as a whole, I  am  unable  to  say  that  had  the
    aforementioned errors not been made by the First-tier Tribunal it would
    in any event have rejected the truth of the appellant's  evidence.  For
    this reason, I conclude that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    must be set aside in its entirety.

30. Although I make no particular finding on ground (iii),  because  it  is
    not necessary for me to do so, I do observe  that  there  was  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal supporting the fact that  the  appellant
    should be treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness  and,  consequently,  the
    Tribunal ought to have, but  did  not,  turn  its  mind  to  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance No. 2 of 2010.

31. The decision on appeal must be re-made afresh. No findings of fact  are
    preserved. In such circumstances, I conclude that it is appropriate for
    this appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  determined
    by a judge other than Judge Mill.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.


Signed                              Date 17 July 2020
Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
