
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03945/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 October 2018                             |On 25 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                    [a a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Deo Volente
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr R Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan  and  a  Shia  Muslim.   On  21
    March 2016 the respondent refused  his  application  for  international
    protection based on his claim to be at real risk of harm from  his  own
    family who opposed his  marriage  to  a  Sunni  Muslim  of  Philippines
    nationality and also from her family who opposed her marriage to a Shia
    Muslim.  In a decision sent on 22 June 2018, Judge Thomas of the First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed his appeal.  Whilst  accepting  that  the
    appellant's  father  had  beaten  him  in  Saudi  Arabia  and  that  in
    consequence the appellant would be at risk in his home area, the  judge
    did not accept that in Pakistan the father had any influence  or  links
    beyond his home area and hence concluded in paragraphs 28 and  29  that
    the appellant and his family could  safely  relocate  within  Pakistan.
    With reference to the same paragraphs, the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant would not face very significant obstacles to  integration  in
    Pakistan.  At paragraphs 28-29 the judge stated:

         "28. Given there is general sufficiency of protection generally  in
             Pakistan, it is necessary to consider if  internal  relocation
             is an option for this Appellant.  I accept that the  Appellant
             left Pakistan as a child and would not be  familiar  with  the
             country.   He  does  however  speak  Urdu  and  English,  both
             official languages of Pakistan.  He is well educated with work
             experience.  He has no health issues.  He is  a  Shia  Muslim,
             who could easily engage in society and religious practice.  He
             will be familiar with Pakistan culture having been raised in a
             Pakistan family.  He has the necessary  cultural,  linguistic,
             practical and social skills to establish a  life  anywhere  in
             Pakistan.  The  Appellant's  children  would  be  entitled  to
             Pakistan  citizenship   through   birth   or   descent.    The
             Appellant's  wife  is  a  Philippine  national  who   has   no
             immigration  status  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Pakistan  law
             provides for citizenship through marriage between  a  Pakistan
             and foreign  national.   The  Appellant's  marriage  would  be
             recognised in Pakistan and there is no evidence to  show  that
             his wife could not gain entry to Pakistan  to  live  with  the
             Appellant and their children.  His wife is a nurse and  speaks
             English, which is a language used in Pakistan.  She is a Sunni
             Muslim, so  would  be  familiar  with  those  aspects  of  the
             religious culture in Pakistan.  She was able to relocate  from
             the Philippines to Saudi Arabia and to  the  UK,  so  has  the
             social skills and ability to adapt.  It would be open  to  her
             to accompany the Appellant voluntarily  to  Pakistan  to  live
             with him and their  children  there.   There  are  established
             medical and educational  services  throughout  Pakistan.   The
             Appellant and his wife could secure employment in Pakistan  to
             sustain their family unit.  In  addition  to  my  findings  in
             paragraph 28 above, the Appellant  has  not  proved  that  his
             father  has  the  ability  or  the  incentive  to  locate  him
             throughout  Pakistan.   Given  these  circumstances,   it   is
             reasonable and not unduly harsh for  this  Appellant  and  his
             family to relocate elsewhere in Pakistan.


         29.  On the totality of the evidence, I find that the Appellant has
             not proved that he has a well-founded fear of  persecution  or
             serious harm in Pakistan, so he  is  not  a  refugee  and  not
             entitled to humanitarian protection."

2.   The appellant's grounds of appeal are two-fold.  It is  submitted  that
    the judge materially erred in law in:

    (1)  failing to conduct a proper assessment of the  issue  of  internal
         relocation, bearing in mind he  had  found  at  paragraph  27  that
         "local police are less likely to  be  involved  in  honour  matters
         which are considered as a family issue"; and that the judge  failed
         to consider that in order to internally relocate the appellant  and
         his family members would need to  obtain  a  Computerised  National
         Identity Card (CNIC) as proof of  their  identification,  essential
         for them to obtain government service and other facilities; and


    (2)  failing to consider that the appellant, having left Pakistan as  a
         child, would have no real ties there and thus that there  would  be
         very significant obstacles to his integration there.


3.   As a further aspect of (2), the grounds contend that the judge  wrongly
    failed to identify the basis for his finding that Pakistan law provides
    for citizenship through marriage between  a  Pakistan  national  and  a
    foreign national and  wrongly  concluded  that  the  couple  and  their
    children could reasonably resume their family life in Pakistan.

4.   I reject Ground (1).  It is clear from paragraph 27 that the judge  was
    first of all satisfied that the appellant and his family  could  safely
    relocate within Pakistan, even assuming his father was as claimed now a
    Shia leader in the appellant's home area.  The grounds fail  to  impugn
    that finding.  To the extent that they seek  to  rely  on  the  judge's
    acceptance that "local police are less likely to be involved in  honour
    matters ...", that comment was clearly made in  the  context  of  there
    being a general sufficiency of protection in Pakistan.   The  appellant
    seeks to support Ground 1 by reference to  Section  3  of  the  Country
    Policy and Information Note of June 2017, but the  latter  makes  clear
    that the risks arising from honour crimes are limited to certain  areas
    of Pakistan only.  The appellant produced  no  evidence  to  show,  for
    example, that there would be  a  real  risk  from  family-based  honour
    crimes, against which the police would not protect, in Pakistan's major
    cities. To the extent that the grounds contend  (by  reference  to  the
    same document) that the judge failed to  carry  out  an  individualised
    assessment, that is clearly incorrect as regards  risk  of  persecution
    outside  the  appellant's  home  area  (paragraph   27   rejected   the
    appellant's claim that his father's family could pursue him outside  of
    his home area); and it is  also  incorrect  as  regards  the  issue  of
    reasonableness  of  return,  which  was  dealt  with,  with  particular
    attention to the appellant's individual circumstances, at paragraph 28.

5.   As regards the point raised in the grounds concerning  the  CNIC,  this
    was not a point raised by the appellant in his grounds of appeal to the
    FtT nor was it raised by his representatives at the  hearing.   In  any
    event, in  the  CPIN  in  Pakistan  Background  Information,  including
    effectiveness of protection and internal relocation, June 2017, what is
    said at paragraph 14.2.3 is that  "[a]t  least  87  million  people  in
    Pakistan have CNICs ..." and that they are "the most common and  widely
    used form of identification"; it does not state that they are essential
    in order to access services.  Further I take  judicial  notice  of  the
    fact that the current population of Pakistan is most commonly estimated
    as around 201 million, which means they are used by significantly  less
    than half of the population. This aspect to Ground (1) wholly fails  to
    establish that lack of a CNIC would significantly affect the  appellant
    and his family's ability to relocate within Pakistan.

6.   Turning to Ground (2),  whilst  still  on  the  subject  of  background
    information set out in CPIN, the appellant is simply wrong.  to  assert
    that the judge's finding that the appellant's wife  would  be  able  to
    gain lawful admission in Pakistan  was  unsupported  by  any  evidence,
    since the judge's statement at paragraph 28 is  almost  word  for  word
    what is stated at 14.1.2 of the same background country document.   The
    appellant produced no evidence to the contrary.  The  failure  of  this
    aspect of Ground (2) also fatally undermines the  appellant's  argument
    that the family would be split to the detriment of the  best  interests
    of the children.  On the evidence before the  judge  it  would  not  be
    split.

7.   I see no force in the appellant's contention that the judge  failed  to
    take into account or to take sufficient account of the  fact  that  the
    appellant had lived almost  all  his  life  outside  Pakistan  (in  the
    Philippines and in Saudi).  The judge was  clearly  cognisant  of  this
    history, as the second and third lines of paragraph 28 make clear.   It
    was entirely open to the judge to find later on in the  same  paragraph
    that the  appellant  would  nevertheless  be  "familiar  with  Pakistan
    culture" and that he spoke Urdu.

8.   For the above reasons I find  that  the  grounds  fail  to  identify  a
    material error of law and that accordingly  the  decision  of  the  FtT
    judge to dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.

9.   No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 20 October 2018

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


