
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03284/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 4 August 2016                              |On 8 August 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                                    M.K.
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. De Ruano
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Afghanistan, arrived in the  United
      Kingdom in April 2014 and was admitted as  a  student  with  leave  to
      remain until 30 October 2015. Having returned  to  Afghanistan  on  19
      September 2014 she travelled back to the United Kingdom arriving there
      on 1 October 2014. Not long after that, on 18 May  2015,  she  claimed
      asylum on the basis that should she return to Afghanistan she will  be
      forced into an unwelcome marriage and subjected to other  mistreatment
      at the hands of relatives.

   2. The  parties  are  aware,  of  course,  of  the  full  detail  of  the
      appellant's claim and for present purposes the following summary  will
      suffice, which I take from the appellant's witness statement. In doing
      so, it has to be recognised that  there  are  some  difficulties  with
      chronology but I do not see that  very  much  turns  upon  identifying
      precisely the correct dates for the various events described.


   3. The appellant was born into a large family.  This  was  a  traditional
      patriarchal family in which the prospects  for  girls  were  generally
      limited to an early marriage. She had 8 sisters and 3 brothers. All of
      her sisters were married at an early age but the appellant, after  she
      had moved with her parents from their village home to Kabul, was  able
      to go to school and then college and university in pursuit of  further
      education. She was then able to go to work.


   4. In about 2013 her father demanded that she be married to a  man  named
      [HF] and a Nikah was arranged. The appellant was against this for many
      reasons, not least because [HF] wanted her to give up  her  work.  She
      described being assaulted and ill-treated by this man which led to her
      making a complaint to police. When her father and brothers  found  out
      about this she was locked in  the  house  and  beaten.  Realising  her
      predicament in Afghanistan, she applied online to join a course at the
      London School  of  Commerce  to  study  for  a  Masters'  degree.  Her
      application was successful and with her mother's help  she  secured  a
      visa and then travelled to the United Kingdom.


   5. In early July 2014 she heard from her mother that  she  was  sick  and
      that her father's health condition was also "really  bad".  She  asked
      the appellant to come back  to  Afghanistan  to  see  her  father  and
      assured the appellant that those who sought to do her harm  would  not
      be informed of her visit. However,  when  she  arrived  in  Kabul  her
      brother, who was angry she had left without permission, beat  her  and
      locked her in a room and said she would be killed. The  following  day
      she received a further beating from another brother  after  which  her
      mother took her to hospital.  After  this  members  of  her  husband's
      family, who had learned of her visit, came to the house  for  her  but
      were denied entry.  This  caused  a  violent  clash  between  the  two
      families with threats being made to the appellant's life  because  she
      had violated the honour of the other family. In order to  avoid  being
      forcibly restored to her husband, the appellant's mother arranged  for
      the appellant to get access to her passport, escape from the house and
      get a taxi to the airport where she took a flight back to  London.  If
      she returns to Afghanistan the appellant says that she will be killed.



   6. The judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  refusal  of  her
      asylum claim because he did not accept that she had given  a  truthful
      account of her experiences in Afghanistan and he did not accept to  be
      true her account of events at the core of her claim.


   7. In granting permission to appeal, Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Macdonald said:


           "The grounds of application identify  what  are  said  to  be  a
           number of factual errors by the judge which, taken cumulatively,
           might translate into an arguable error of law."


   8. The grounds are certainly wide ranging in the scope of the  challenged
      raised and in his oral submissions Mr De  Ruano  made  clear  that  he
      relied upon all of those grounds. Therefore I shall  address  each  in
      turn.


   9. Mr De Ruano opened his oral submissions by drawing  attention  to  the
      fact that the judge said, at paragraph 13 of her  decision,  that  the
      account  given  by  the  appellant  has   been   "broadly   internally
      consistent". It is to be noted that  the  judge  said  also  that  was
      something that she would bear in mind, adding  that  there  were  some
      issues of inconsistency and plausibility. In recognising that  tension
      in the evidence  the  judge  embarked  upon  her  examination  of  the
      evidence in precisely the correct manner.


  10. The first complaint raised in the grounds concerns what the judge made
      of the appellant's evidence of having been taken to  the  hospital  in
      Afghanistan after having been beaten by her brothers. The judge  said,
      at paragraph 15:


           "... She was advised to undergo a CT scan but  at  her  family's
           insistence permission was given to take her home... I also  note
           that there is no explanation as to  why,  having  taken  her  to
           hospital semi-conscious, the appellant's mother and sister would
           then take her home against the medical advice that she  required
           a CT scan."


      In Mr De Ruano's submission that  reasoning  discloses  error  of  law
      because, on his instructions provided by the appellant  subsequent  to
      the hearing, that hospital had no CT scan equipment and so  that  scan
      could not have been carried out there an then. His point  is  that  if
      this concern had been put to the appellant, that  is  what  she  would
      have said. As it was not, she has not had the opportunity to correct a
      misunderstanding by the judge of the true position. However, the judge
      is not here making a credibility finding. She is doing  no  more  than
      making clear what she makes of the evidence as she discusses  it.  She
      is doing no more than recording that there is a  lacuna  here  in  the
      evidence and nothing offered to fill it. It cannot  possibly  be  said
      that this was  a  determinative  finding  or  one  that  was  even  of
      significance to the outcome of the appeal. In any event, the  evidence
      of the appellant as set out in her witness statement was that although
      her mother took her to the hospital "... they did  not  even  complete
      the treatment before they got me back home."

  11. Similarly, at paragraph 16 the judge observed that a number of details
      were missing from a police document. The  grounds  complain  that  the
      judge has not had regard to what the appellant has said about that  in
      her witness statement, which amounts to: "well that's just how  it  is
      in Afghanistan", but again, the judge is simply making an  observation
      that the document has not been fully completed and  does  not  suggest
      that she places any particular weight upon that.


  12. At paragraph 17 the judge does make a finding  of  some  significance.
      She said of the circumstances that the appellant  said  motivated  her
      decision to visit her parents in 2014:


           "A further hospital letter relates to the appellant's father and
           is from the Orthopaedic and Traumatology specialist. It is dated
           May 2014 and notes that it was a re-visit post operation on  the
           right hip. Total rest at home for two months is noted. I do  not
           find this particularly supportive of the appellant's claim  that
           her father was very ill, and certainly not  of  a  nature  which
           might cause her to feel compelled to return after the  incidents
           she describes."


      The complaint raised about this is that the appellant's father was not
      the sole focus of the visit as she went to see her mother as well.  Mr
      De Ruano submits that the judge erred in failing  to  have  regard  to
      what the appellant has said about this in her witness  statement,  but
      there as well she was saying that her mother asked her  to  return  to
      visit her father because his health condition was  "really  bad".  The
      fact of the matter is that the judge was plainly entitled to find that
      the nature of the father's medical condition came nowhere  even  close
      to making credible that her mother, if events had been  as  described,
      would try to persuade her daughter to return and  face  a  risk  of  a
      repetition of the serious ill-treatment she said had  previously  been
      meted out to her, especially as the mother herself had  taken  a  real
      risk  in  facilitating  the   appellant's   earlier   departure   from
      Afghanistan, unauthorised by her father.


  13. There is nothing at all in  the  challenge  to  paragraph  19  of  the
      decision of the  judge.  Here,  the  judge  observes  that  there  are
      inconsistencies between the chronology of events as  set  out  in  the
      report of Professor Hale and that  set  out  in  the  appellant's  own
      evidence. As the grounds themselves recognise, the  judge  made  clear
      that this may have been an error by the author of the report,  not  to
      be held against the appellant.


  14. At paragraph 21 of her decision, the judge explained that she detected
      a difficulty in the appellant's evidence in that, given her account of
      a strictly traditional family with women being completely  subservient
      to the men of the family, with "girls are not allowed to talk and  she
      had to listen to her brothers and  father",  as  the  menfolk  of  her
      family disapproved of her ambition to  pursue  further  education  and
      then to go out to work, the judge observed:

           "In my view, no credible explanation has been given as  to  how,
           in the context of this background, the appellant was allowed  to
           study, go to university and gain a bachelor's degree in business
           and then obtain employment as  a  financial  controller  with  a
           construction company earning "a good salary". The appellant  has
           stated that her mother argued for her to be allowed to study and
           the money she was earning contributed to the household. However,
           I still find that inconsistent that the appellant  was  able  to
           save a large part of her salary in secret towards obtaining  her
           visa, stating in the medical report that she had held  back  70%
           of her salary."

      Mr De Ruano submits that the judge should not have taken that view  of
      the evidence because the appellant has set  out  in  her  evidence  an
      adequate explanation to rebut the apparent contradiction  implicit  in
      this. But that expression of disagreement comes nowhere even close  to
      identifying an error of law. It was for the judge to make what she did
      of the evidence and she was unquestionably entitled, for  the  reasons
      given, to find this aspect of  the  appellant's  evidence  lacking  in
      credibility.

  15. Nor did the judge find credible the appellant's explanation of how she
      managed to make two trips to Islamabad in order to secure her visa  to
      come to the United Kingdom without her father and brother being  aware
      of that. The judge considered the explanation offered, the pretence of
      visiting a sick relative, but rejected it as incredible. Mr  De  Ruano
      submitted that the judge had  overlooked  the  reason  given  for  the
      appellant having a passport, that  being  an  earlier  trip  with  her
      mother for medical treatment, but that is to miss the point being made
      by the judge. It was surprising not that  the  appellant  possessed  a
      passport at all but that she had access to it, given all that she  had
      said about the male dominated controlling  environment  in  which  the
      family operated.


  16. At the heart of the reasoning that led the judge to reject  as  untrue
      the claim of an abusive, disapproving family that sought to  ill-treat
      the appellant and to force her into an unwanted marriage were two  key
      matters. First, the account of the appellant's  education,  employment
      and ability to keep most of her own money simply did not sit with  her
      family being one that thought of and acted towards girls and women  as
      the appellant claimed they did.  Secondly, the judge found it  lacking
      in all credibility and incapable of belief that had the appellant been
      beaten and threatened as she had claimed by  her  father  and  brother
      that she would have risked not just more of  the  same  treatment  but
      also forfeiting her opportunity to study  in  the  United  Kingdom  by
      returning to her family and the possibility of being returned  to  her
      husband, who had made it clear that she should not continue  to  work,
      let alone travel alone to the United Kingdom to study, when the reason
      for doing so plainly did not demand that she did.

  17. The grounds complain that the judge did not adequately engage with the
      appellant's detailed  account  of  the  steps  she  took  to  minimise
      exposure to risk during her visit and that these concerns of the judge
      should have been put to the appellant for her to comment. However, the
      judge has had regard to all of  the  evidence  and  has  given  clear,
      cogent and legally sufficient reasons for arriving at findings of fact
      that were plainly open to her on that evidence.

  18. In short, the conclusions of the judge are simply unassailable. It was
      not necessary for her to deal specifically with every  aspect  of  the
      evidence and to engage with every detail of the  appellant's  account.
      What was required of the judge is that she  explain  clearly  why  she
      reached the conclusion she did and that  is  precisely  what  she  has
      done.

  19. Thus, the other points raised in the grounds, lead nowhere. The  judge
      was plainly entitled to find surprising that a lengthy email from  the
      appellant's sister omitted any mention of the  single  most  important
      aspect  of  the  claim,  the  appellant's  visit  in  2014,  and   the
      observation that the appellant had not sought  medical  treatment  for
      the  issues  she  disclosed  to  Professor  Hale  was  not  in  anyway
      problematic.

  20. The suicide risk now asserted in the  grounds  was  not  raised  as  a
      discrete ground of appeal and there was no reason  for  the  judge  to
      address that in her decision.

  21. For these reasons I am entirely satisfied that the judge made no error
      of law and so there is no proper basis upon which her decision may  be
      disturbed.

Summary of decision:

  22. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a no material error  of  law
      error of law


  23.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


  24. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mace is to stand.


                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 5 August 2016

