



         [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03370/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester CJC                                    Decision &
Reasons Promulgated
On 10 April 2018                                                     On 13
April 2018


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                             MOHAMMED BOUDOUAIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Greer, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. In its decision dated 7 June 2018, the First-tier Tribunal made  clear
      findings of fact in support of its conclusion  that  upon  removal  to
      Algeria the appellant would face inhuman and degrading treatment, such
      that the appeal was allowed pursuant to Article 3 of the ECHR.


   2. The appellant has appealed against the decision to dismiss the  appeal
      on humanitarian protection ('HP') grounds.  There was no cross-appeal.


   3. At the beginning of the hearing before me both representatives  agreed
      with my provisional decision that that  the  decision  dismissing  the
      appeal on HP grounds contains an error of  law.   Mr  Bates  expressly
      accepted that the unappealed  findings  of  fact  are  such  that  the
      appellant faces serious harm in Algeria and is entitled to HP.


   4. Both representatives therefore entirely agreed with the following:


   1) The First-tier Tribunal decision is set aside because it  contains  an
      error of law in its approach to the appeal on HP grounds.


   2) The decisions to dismiss the appeal under the Refugee  Convention  but
      allow the appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR, given  the  findings  of
      fact, are not infected by any error of law.


   3) I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on HP grounds.


   4) It follows that the appeal is allowed on HP and Article 3 grounds, but
      dismissed on Refugee Convention grounds.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 April 2018
