
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03015/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Manchester,  Piccadilly                              Decision   &
Reasons Promulgated
On  the  14th  September  2017                                      On  19th
September 2017

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                              MR SAMI SALEHZADA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Malik promulgated on the 3rd January 2017, in which she
      dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.




   2. The full reasons for Judge Malik's decision are a matter of record and
      are set out within her decision and  are  therefore  not  repeated  in
      their entirety here, but in summary, Judge Malik did not  accept  that
      the Appellant had been approached by 3 KDPI  men  wearing  traditional
      Kurdish clothes and who were carrying Kalashnikovs with hand  grenades
      around their belts, during the daytime. Judge  Malik  did  not  accept
      that the Appellant had been asked by them to show them the way to  the
      Al-Watan village, on a route where they would not be seen by  anybody.
      Judge Malik also did not accept that he had then taken them to the Al-
      Watan village, but  on  walking  back  to  Mirawa  the  Appellant  was
      approached by Mala Kiram, who was said to work as a Jash man  for  the
      Iranian authorities.  Judge Malik also did  not  accept  that  if  the
      Appellant's own father had been  subjected  to  ill-treatment  by  the
      authorities as claimed for his perceived KDPI involvement and did  not
      accept that if there  had  been  pre-existing  animosity  between  the
      Appellant and Mala Kiram that the Appellant would have returned to his
      uncle's home in his home village, or that if he did so, he  would  not
      have disclosed immediately to his uncle what had happened to him.  The
      Judge therefore found the Appellant's account to be incredible and did
      not accept that the Appellant had experienced any difficulties in  his
      home country or that he would be at risk upon return.  She found  that
      the Appellant's claim to have left Iran illegally not to be  true  and
      did not accept that either as  a  result  of  being  a  failed  asylum
      seeker, irrespective as to whether he had left illegally or not, or as
      a result of his ethnicity as a Kurd that he would be at any additional
      risk. She found that he could contact his family in Iran to obtain  ID
      documentation such that a Laissez Passer  could  be  obtained  in  due
      course.  She therefore rejected the Appellant's asylum appeal  and  on
      the same reasoning dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  on  humanitarian
      protection and Human Rights grounds.

   3. The Appellant now seeks  to  appeal  against  that  decision  for  the
      reasons set out within the Grounds of Appeal.  This again is a  matter
      of record and is therefore not repeated in its entirety here,  but  in
      summary, it is argued  that  the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
      Appellant was  "an  incredible  witness"  and  that  his  account  was
      "incredible".  It is argued that the judge has not  taken  account  of
      the country evidence before her, with reference to Kurdish  opposition
      in general and the KDPI in particular.  It is said that then judge  is
      using "incredible" as a synonym for  "implausible",  in  circumstances
      where the Respondent's refusal letter alleged no inconsistences within
      the Appellant's account and  the  judge  did  not  find  any  internal
      inconsistences.  It is said that she made no reference to any  country
      or other evidence which could entitle her to draw the inferences  made
      and that following the case of HK v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department [2006] EWCA Civ  1037,  in  asylum  cases  even  though  an
      Appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely that does not  mean  it
      is untrue and the ingredients of the story, and the story as a  whole,
      have to be considered  against  the  available  country  evidence  and
      reliable expert evidence  and  other  familiar  factors  such  as  the
      consistency with what the Appellant has said before,  and  with  other
      factual evidence.

   4. In the second ground of appeal it is argued that the judge  materially
      erred by failing to consider material evidence and failing to  make  a
      finding on the material fact regarding the alleged past  ill-treatment
      and the subsequent death of the Appellant's father.  It is argued that
      the judge found that the Appellant would not be  of  interest  to  the
      authorities upon return as an undocumented Iranian national of Kurdish
      ethnicity, but that the judge failed to take account  of  the  country
      evidence reporting an increased rate of executions,  the  majority  of
      whom were Kurdish, and  the  resumption  in  February  2016  of  armed
      resistance by the KDPI.  It is argued that these are material  errors.



   5. Permission to appeal was originally  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Froom on the 3rd April 2017, and thereafter, renewed grounds for
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal were put  in  on  the  19th
      April 2017, in which it was said that it remained  arguable  that  the
      judge materially erred in respect of her findings that  the  Appellant
      was an incredible witness and that she had not taken  account  of  the
      specific evidence regarding the Kurdish opposition in general and  the
      KDPI  in  particular  and  that  the  finding  that  the  account  was
      incredible had to be considered against the available country evidence
      and that in the case of SSH and  HR  it  was  said  that  undocumented
      returnees "would have to engaged in the same process" and that even  a
      person returned to Iran on a Laissez Passer would  be  questioned  and
      that the judge made an error in finding that there was  no  reasonable
      evidence to suggest that his ethnicity as a Kurd would  place  him  at
      additional risk.

   6. Permission  to  appeal  was  then  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      McWilliam on the 11th May 2017 in which he found that it was  arguable
      that the judge did not take into account the background evidence which
      was before her, as identified in the renewed grounds.

   7. It was on that basis that  the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   8. In reaching my decision  I  have  fully  taken  account  of  the  oral
      submissions made by Dr Mynott and by Mr McVeety. In summary, Dr Mynott
      repeated his submissions that the judge failed to consider the country
      evidence and erred in finding that the Appellant was  an  "incredible"
      witness and that she erred in finding that members of the  KDPI  would
      not  walk  around  openly  carrying  Kalashnikovs  and  wearing   hand
      grenades.  He took me specifically to various  paragraphs  within  the
      Country Information and Guidance on Iran: Kurds and Kurdish  political
      groups from the  19th  July  2016  contained  within  the  Appellant's
      bundle, and referred me specifically to paragraph 5.2.10 which  stated
      that:

      "Asharq Al-Awsat report  in  January  2016  that  "Kurdish  opposition
      sources in Iran have revealed yesterday that  the  executions  carried
      out by the Iranian regime against the Kurds and other  components  are
      increasing  annually,  indicating  that  during  the  past  9  months,
      according to the Iranian calendar, Iran executed more than 750 people,
      the majority of whom were Kurdish"".

      He also referred to paragraph 7.1.4 which stated that:

      "In February 2016, Kurdish 24 reported  that  the  KDPI  announced  in
      February that  "they  will  resume  armed  resistance  against  Iran".
      KDPI's official Twitter account quoted the party's  general  secretary
      Mustafa Hijri making that announcement.  "Last night [February 25th] a
      successful operation was carried out against an Iranian Basij military
      base in Majid Zan, in the city of Bukan" KDPI tweeted"

      and he referred me to page 157  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  and  the
      document entitled  Refugee  Documentation  Centre  (Legal  Aid  Board,
      Ireland),  "Iran  Treatment  of  Party   Democratic   Kurdistan   Iran
      supporters/leaflet  distributors"  from  18th  May   2016,   and   the
      penultimate paragraph on that page which read:

      "In May 2016 Business Insider states that: "The  KDPI  -  a  left-wing
      Kurdish nationalist group formed in 1945 - announced on 20th  February
      2016 that it was restarting its "armed resistance against the  Islamic
      Republic of Iran" and claimed an attack against a Basij  base  in  the
      village of Majid Khan.  The  group  waged  deadly  insurgency  against
      Iranian authorities from 1989 to 1996, after  which  it  maintained  a
      peaceful policy until it purportedly engaged  Iranian  troops  in  the
      fall of 2015" (Business Insider (5 May 2016) Iran is facing  a  "wide-
      scale armed uprising" as Kurdish insurgents have started targeting the
      Revolutionary Guard".

   9. He argued that the judge had failed to take specific account  of  that
      evidence in  reaching  her  decision  which  he  argued  was  relevant
      regarding the Appellant's credibility.




  10.  In respect of  the  second  ground  of  appeal  he  argued  that  the
      Appellant would be at a real risk  of  persecution  from  the  Iranian
      authorities as an undocumented national of Kurdish ethnicity and is at
      real risk of questioning in interrogation and the risks have increased
      over the past year or so.  He said he was not questioning the  finding
      of the judge that the Appellant's exit was not illegal, but said  that
      was not determinative and that undocumented returnees  face  the  same
      process and that the judge had failed to  take  account  of  the  same
      paragraphs regarding risk upon return, which he said showed there  was
      an elevated risk of return now for Kurds.  However he  conceded  there
      was no direct evidence on the question of the treatment of Kurds  upon
      return.  He argued that the Country Guidance case of SSH  and  HR  had
      not dealt specifically with the case of Kurds at paragraph 34  of  the
      Judgment, but argued that  there  had  been  a  deterioration  in  the
      country conditions.

  11. In his closing submissions on behalf of  the  Respondent,  Mr  McVeety
      submitted that the Country Guidance case of  SSH  did  deal  with  the
      situation of people who were Kurdish as the lead Appellant  there  was
      Kurdish and they would not have returned him had he been at  risk  and
      that at paragraph 34 on page 67 of the bundle  although  the  Tribunal
      had not been asked to consider the position of Kurds, the Tribunal had
      done so, given that one of the Appellants was a Kurdish  national  and
      the Tribunal said that there was no evidence to show that Kurds  would
      be at risk, and that the evidence  presented  by  the  Appellant  only
      showed that there had been a resumption of armed  hostilities  by  the
      KDPI.  He argued that this was not  a  reason  to  go  behind  Country
      Guidance.

  12. In respect of the first ground of appeal, Mr McVeety argued that there
      was nothing in the background evidence sought to  be  relied  upon  to
      show that members of the KDPI would walk around in the  open  carrying
      Kalashnikovs or wearing hand grenades, and that if the KDPI wanted  to
      operate under the radar, they would not walk around openly in an  area
      where they were likely to be caught and that the judge's  findings  in
      that regard were open to her.  He argued that it was open to the judge
      to find that they would not have been so brazen  to  walk  about  with
      guns, but then ask to take a secretive path so as not to come  to  the
      attention of anyone and that the judge was entitled to find there  was
      an inconsistency in that  regard.   He  argued  that  the  judge  made
      findings which were open to her on the evidence and that the  evidence
      sought to be relied upon by the Appellant simply showed the resumption
      of armed hostilities and did not indicate the Appellant's account  was
      credible.

  13. Both parties agreed that if there was a material error of law the case
      should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  14. In his oral submissions, Dr Mynott argued that the judge had not taken
      account of 3 paragraphs of the background Country Information set  out
      above, namely paragraphs 5.2.10 regarding executions  carried  out  by
      the Iranian regime  against  the  Kurds  having  increasing  annually,
      paragraph 7.1.4 regarding the KDPI announcing in  February  that  they
      would resume armed resistance against Iran and  there  having  been  a
      successful operation carried out in an Iranian Basij military base  in
      Majid Zan, and page 157, in respect  of  the  evidence  regarding  the
      restart of the armed resistance by the KDPI and the  armed  attack  on
      the Basij basis reported by Business Insider.

  15. However it is clear that each of those paragraphs contained within the
      Appellant's bundle have actually been marked with a highlighter within
      the bundle by Judge Malik, and although therefore she has not set  out
      those paragraphs  in  her  decision,  I  find  that  she  has  clearly
      considered the same, in reaching her decision.  It  is  not  incumbent
      upon a First-tier Tribunal Judge to set out every piece of evidence to
      which they have been referred in their decision unless that  piece  of
      evidence is specifically  relevant  to  the  findings  that  they  are
      making.  Even though that  evidence  showed  that  there  had  been  a
      resumption of armed hostilities by the KDPI and the attack on a  Basij
      base in the village of Majid Khan, and was  part  of  the  background,
      that evidence was not directly relevant to the judge's  findings  that
      it was incredible  that  the  KDPI  men  wearing  traditional  Kurdish
      clothes would openly carry Kalashnikovs,  with  hand  grenades  around
      their belts during the daytime, even if they were in  a  predominantly
      Kurdish area due to the risk that placed them  in  if  they  had  been
      observed by the authorities,.  Nor was it  directly  relevant  to  her
      finding that if they did not fear attracting attention that they would
      have then asked to take a more discreet route from Mirawa to  Al-Watan
      and asked the Appellant to act as their guide.  Nor  was  it  directly
      relevant to the judge's findings that the men who could not have known
      who the Appellant was when they approached him, such that  they  would
      declare their KDPI involvement to him  and  then  when  they  had  not
      further need of the Appellant's services merely let him return to  his
      home village.

  16. Nor was that background evidence  directly  relevant  to  the  judge's
      findings at [21] and [22] that the Appellant would not  have  returned
      to his uncle's home thereby potential placing his uncle and family  in
      danger and that he would not have told his uncle immediately what  had
      happened.  Although part of the background, I do  not  find  that  the
      evidence referred to by  Dr  Mynott,  specifically  impacts  upon  the
      findings by First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik in those regards.  She has
      therefore clearly taken account of that evidence,  but  was  not  duty
      bound to repeat it, when making those findings.

  17. However, even if I am wrong in that regard, I cannot  see  that  Judge
      Malik would have made any  different  findings,  given  her  reasoning
      between [20] and [22], even if she  had  specifically  set  out  those
      paragraphs referred to by  him  in  her  decision,  I  find  that  the
      decision reached by her on those issues would have been the same,  and
      for the same reasons, as the evidence produced by him did  not  impact
      upon that reasoning whatsoever. Even if she was  therefore  in  error,
      which I do not accept, such error is not material.

  18. Nor is there any merit in the Appellant's submission  that  the  judge
      was wrong to describe the Appellant's account  as  "incredible".   The
      judge in a well-crafted and clear  decision  has  given  adequate  and
      sufficient reasons  for  her  findings.  Her  findings  regarding  the
      Appellant's account  being  "incredible"  in  other  words  not  being
      credible, were open to her on the evidence and she has given clear and
      adequate and sufficient reasons for those findings.  If the judge  had
      found the Appellant credible, she would have allowed the appeal.   She
      did not find him credible, and did not accept  his  account,  and  has
      given clear, adequate and sufficient reasons for her findings.   There
      does not need to be  any  inconsistency  in  the  Appellant's  account
      before a judge rejects that account as being incredible, as  seemingly
      contended by  the  Appellant.   Although  inconsistency  is  something
      clearly the Tribunal will take into account, there does not have to be
      a specific inconsistency in the Appellant's own evidence, in order for
      the account to be rejected. The first ground of appeal therefore lacks
      merit.

  19. In respect of the second ground of appeal, it is argued that the judge
      failed to take account of the evidence that being an undocumented Kurd
      would in fact place him at additional risk. In the case of SSH and  HR
      (illegal exit: failed asylum seekers) Iran CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308  at
      [34] it was stated that it was not being suggested that an  individual
      faced risk on return on the sole basis of being  Kurdish  but  it  was
      agreed that being Kurdish was relevant to  how  a  returnee  would  be
      treated by the authorities. It was noted that the operational guidance
      note referred to the government disproportionally  targeting  minority
      groups including Kurds for arbitrary arrest, prolonged  detention  and
      physical abuse, but it was stated that no examples had  been  provided
      of ill-treatment  of  returnees  with  no  relevant  adverse  interest
      factors  other  than  their  Kurdish  ethnicity.  The  Upper  Tribunal
      concluded that the evidence did not show risk of ill-treatment to such
      returnees, although they accepted that it  might  be  an  exacerbating
      factor of a returnee otherwise of interest.

  20. The Judgment in SSH and HR, therefore did make  reference  to  Kurdish
      ethnicity being an exacerbating factor for  a  returnee  otherwise  of
      interest, but not on the evidence before it, giving rise to a risk  of
      ill-treatment  in  itself.   In  that  regard,  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      findings were part of the ratio, given that  the  Appellants  in  that
      case were of Kurdish ethnicity.  As Mr McVeety correctly pointed  out,
      the Upper Tribunal  would  not  have  allowed  the  Appellants  to  be
      returned, if being of Kurdish ethnicity of itself, created a real risk
      upon return.

  21. Although Dr Mynott argued that there had been a deterioration  in  the
      condition for Kurds in the  previous  year,  the  paragraphs  that  he
      referred to in the Country  Guidance,  above,  while  indicating  that
      there had been a resumption of  hostilities,  did  not  indicate  that
      there had been any increase in the risk  faced  by  a  Kurdish  failed
      asylum seeker, who otherwise was not of interest to  the  authorities.
      There would not have been an evidential basis for Judge Malik, even if
      she had  fully  set  out  the  paragraphs  quoted  by  Dr  Mynott,  to
      effectively go behind the Country Guidance case of SSH and HR, and the
      finding of the Upper Tribunal that "We conclude that the evidence does
      not show risk of ill-treatment of such  returnees,  though  we  accept
      that it might be an exacerbating factor of  a  returnee  otherwise  of
      interest".  There was no evidence  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Malik to support the contention from Dr Mynott that Kurdish ethnicity,
      in itself, irrespective of whether or not they  were  undocumented  or
      obtained a Laissez Passer would be at a real risk of persecution, upon
      return.




  22. The Grounds of Appeal therefore do not reveal any  material  error  of
      law and simply amount to a disagreement with the findings of the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge.  I therefore dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malik  does  not  reveal  any
material errors of law and is maintained.  I dismiss the Appellant's  appeal
against that decision.

I make no order in respect of anonymity, no such order having been  made  by
the First-tier Tribunal, and no such order having been sought before me.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 14th September 2017


