
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03388/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24 October 2016                        |On 09 January 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    o o n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar Counsel instructed by Frederick Rine
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       Appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court.  I  make  this  order  because  the  Appellant  had   claimed
       international protection and publicity about his appeal might create
       a risk that would not otherwise exist.

    2. This is an appeal brought with permission given  by  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Rintoul against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  7
       July 2016 to dismiss the appellant's appeal against the decision  of
       the respondent refusing  him  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
       leave to remain on human rights grounds.

    3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  in  September  2013  as  a
       business visitor with permission valid until 26 December  2013.   He
       overstayed and claimed asylum in July 2015.

    4. In summary outline it is his case that he is gay and  risks  serious
       ill-treatment orchestrated by a former boyfriend who is a  rich  and
       politically influential  man  in  Ghana  and  also  from  homophobic
       attitudes against the Ghanaian authorities and societies as a whole.

    5. It was the appellant's case that he  was  being  controlled  by  his
       former partner and resolved not to return to Ghana.  When his former
       partner learned of the decision he used his influence to arrange for
       an arrest warrant to be issued and await his return at the  airport.
       The appellant expressed a fear that his partner would kill him.

    6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge appears to have assessed the  evidence
       carefully.  He  accepted,  having  reminded  himself  of  the  lower
       standard of proof, that the appellant is gay but did not accept that
       there was an arrest warrant waiting for him or that  his  lover  had
       the power to arrange that or otherwise harm him.

    7. The Judge then, appropriately, asked himself if the appellant needed
       protection in accordance with the decision of the Supreme  Court  in
       HJ (Iran) v SSHD (Rev1) [2010] UKSC 31.  The  Judge  summarised  the
       explanation of the law given in HJ (Iran) at  paragraph  26  of  his
       decision and that  summary  has  not  been  challenged.   The  Judge
       accepted that there is widespread discrimination against gay  people
       in Ghana and that sexual activity between men could  be  used  as  a
       basis for prosecution and that, theoretically, prosecution could  be
       used as a way of targeting openly gay  people.   However  the  Judge
       found at paragraph 45 that the discrimination  that  was  widespread
       and evident against gay people was not so severe that it established
       a real risk of persecution of openly gay  people  throughout  Ghana.
       The Judge  regarded  the  reported  examples  of  gay  people  being
       attacked as isolated.  He  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  not
       demonstrated a likelihood of ill-treatment for being openly gay that
       amounted to persecution and dismissed the appeal.

    8. At paragraph 42 of  his  decision  the  Judge  directed  himself  as
       follows, "I have accepted that the appellant is gay.   Next  I  must
       consider whether gay people who  live  openly  would  be  liable  to
       persecution in Ghana".

    9. He then decided that the fact that various gay sexual practices  are
       prosecutable did not establish a real risk of persecution  in  every
       case.  Rather the judge expressed himself to be  "not  satisfied  on
       the background evidence before me that it  is  demonstrated  to  the
       lower standard that the Ghanaian authorities systematically targeted
       gay people in Ghana".

   10. The judge was critical of a  report  from  on  Mark  Luckie  of  the
       University of California stating  that  many  gay  people  had  been
       arrested because the sourcing was not  clear.   Similarly  a  report
       from International Lesbian and Gay Human Rights dated February  2011
       referred to "gay bashing" but not in a way that enabled the judge to
       establish the context of the attacks of the frequency of them.   The
       judge found it significant that there was no evidence in that report
       of the authorities directing the police to track down and arrest gay
       people.

   11. Whilst the judge may not have decided expressly that  the  appellant
       would live as an openly gay man if he were returned to Ghana  it  is
       clear to me that the judge's decision is based on the  premise  that
       if he did he would not face a real risk of persecution.

   12. I must now ask  myself  if  this  finding  was  permissible  on  the
       evidence.  Both parties relied heavily, and appropriately, on a Home
       Office Country Information  and  Guidance  Report  entitled  "Ghana:
       Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity".  Mr Jafar particularly drew
       my attention to part 5.5.1  relying  on  the  Freedom  House  Report
       published in 2011.  This referred to the Government having created a
       "perilous environment" for gay people in Ghana and illustrated  this
       by reference to a Member of Parliament, one David Tetteh calling for
       the "public lynching of homosexuals".  Other  prominent  people  had
       called for the arrest of all gay men and lesbians and to gay  people
       being "sick".

   13. Perhaps most  significantly  at  7.1.4  there  is  reference  to  an
       interview with an official from the Immigration and Refugee Board of
       Canada where someone said that  although  LGBT  victims  can  report
       violence  "there  is  little  recourse  because   homosexuality   is
       illegal".

   14. This sort of comment is unpleasant to read about from the safety  of
       the United Kingdom.  It must have a very  different  effect  on  the
       mind of a gay person contemplating return to Ghana.   This  part  of
       the report was clearly in the mind of the judge.  He mentions it  at
       paragraph 44 of his decision.  The fact that gay sexual activity  is
       contrary to the criminal law, although relevant because it might  be
       thought to set the mood of society, does  not  determine  if  a  gay
       person in Ghana would be persecuted.  There is  little  evidence  of
       gay people being prosecuted.  I  found  nothing  in  the  report  to
       indicate that there was a real risk of people engaging in consensual
       same sex activity facing prosecution.

   15. The reference in the COI  Report  to  Muslim  and  Christian  groups
       having "mobilised their congregations against politicians who defend
       homosexuality" is another way of saying  that  there  are  in  Ghana
       politicians who defend homosexuality.  The CIO also points out  that
       as well as the nasty comments indicated above the present  President
       of Ghana, Mr J Mahama, had stated that  although  there  was  strong
       cultural hostility towards homosexual activity in Ghana  "I  believe
       that laws must prevail.  For instance, people must not be beaten  or
       killed because of their sexual orientation".

   16. Although the evidence as a whole provides clear  authority  for  the
       conclusion that there is much opposition  to  homosexual  people  in
       Ghana there is also  some  support  and  although  there  are  well-
       documented examples of sufficiently serious ill-treatment to  amount
       to persecution being inflicted  on  some  people,  I  am  unable  to
       conclude that the judge was not entitled  to  say,  as  he  did,  at
       paragraph 46:

  "With the evidence relied upon by the appellant, I am  not  satisfied  he
  has demonstrated that the likelihood of him facing serious  harm  because
  of being openly gay in Ghana is so extensive or severe as  to  amount  to
  persecution".

   17. It  follows  that  no  error  of  law  that  is  material  has  been
       established.

   18. I dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision
The appeal is dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 January 2017                 |

