
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03251/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 09 November 2016                  |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD BANNATYNE
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     T M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. We find that it is appropriate to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr E. Waheed, Counsel instructed by RBM Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   For the sake of continuity we will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellant appealed against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse a protection claim.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis ("the judge") allowed the appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 20  September  2016.  The  judge  set  out  the
    background to the claim, including the respondent's reasons for refusal
    [1-8]. He directed himself to the relevant legal framework  [12-15]  as
    well as the most recent country guidance decision  in  CM  (EM  country
    guidance; disclosure) [2013]  UKUT  59  [17].  The  judge  went  on  to
    summarise the oral and documentary evidence  [18-49]  as  well  as  the
    submissions made by both parties [50-56].

4.   The judge turned to make findings on the  evidence.  In  assessing  the
    credibility of the appellant's account he had regard to  section  8  of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 [57-
    58]. He made findings  relating  to  each  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    account and considered what weight could  be  placed  on  the  evidence
    produced by the appellant [59-78]. After having considered the evidence
    in the round he accepted the appellant's account  of  past  events  and
    concluded that the arrest warrant was sufficient evidence to show  that
    the authorities were likely to have a continuing interest in her  [79].
    The judge went on to consider whether, in light of the decision  in  CM
    (Zimbabwe), it would be reasonable for the appellant to  seek  internal
    relocation. He said that he could not find the point  outlined  in  the
    refusal letter with  reference  to  paragraph  225  CM  (Zimbabwe).  He
    concluded that a language  barrier  was  sufficient  to  conclude  that
    relocation was not a viable option [82].

5.   The respondent seeks to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

      i) The grounds set out a number of reasons why the respondent did  not
         accept the appellant's account and asserted that the  judge  should
         have taken the respondent's position set out  in  the  reasons  for
         refusal letter. It was asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
         adequate reasons for his credibility findings.

     ii) The judge referred to a number  of  shortcomings  in  the  evidence
         produced by the appellant but found that they  were  likely  to  be
         genuine documents. It was asserted that it was not for the judge to
         assess whether the documents were genuine and  that  Tanveer  Ahmed
         principles should have been followed.

    iii) The grounds then cited the head note  from  CM  (Zimbabwe)  without
         particularising any error of law in relation to it.

     iv) The grounds then cited an extract relating to  internal  relocation
         from the  earlier  country  guidance  decision  in  EM  and  others
         (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2011]  UKUT  98  and  asserted  that  the
         judge's findings relating to the language barrier  were  flawed  in
         light of that decision.

6.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark  Davies  granted  permission  in  the
    following terms:

         "2.  It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge,  on  concluding  that  the
             Appellant and her husband were low level members of  the  MDC,
             has wrongly assessed the risk to the Appellant on  her  return
             taking into account the country guidance case of CM & EM.

         3.   It is arguable that the Judge wrongly  assessed  the  position
             with regard to internal relocation  particularly  taking  into
             account the low political profile of  the  Appellant  and  her
             husband."

Decision and reasons

7.   At the start of the hearing we indicated that there  was  an  issue  we
    wanted Mr Staunton to consider. We pointed out that the  judge  made  a
    clear finding that he accepted the arrest warrant and that it created a
    current risk on return. The finding did not appear to be challenged  in
    any meaningful way in the grounds of appeal. In circumstances where the
    risk emanated directly from the state authorities, as opposed  to  non-
    state supporters of ZANU-PF, we queried how the appeal could succeed if
    there was no specific challenge to the findings relating to the  arrest
    warrant. Mr Staunton accepted that the  grounds  were  silent  on  this
    point.

8.   Mr Staunton was given time to take further instructions on the  matter.
    When the hearing resumed no application was made to amend the  grounds.
    He accepted that removals to Zimbabwe were "intelligence led", that  it
    was possible that the appellant might be identified on arrival  at  the
    airport and that it caused a  problem  for  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal. When pressed, he accepted the appeal could not succeed.

9.   We find that this  concession  was  correctly  made.  The  first  point
    raised in the grounds of appeal amounted to little more than a  general
    disagreement with the judge's findings of fact without  particularising
    any arguable errors of law. The second point was  simply  confused  and
    incorrect. It is clear that the judge's role was to weigh the  evidence
    produced in support of the claim in order  to  assess  whether  it  was
    reliable. He took into account the weaknesses in the evidence from  the
    MDC pointed out by  the  respondent  [68-70]  in  the  context  of  the
    appellant's apparent lack of knowledge about some matters. However,  he
    also heard evidence from the appellant and was entitled to form a  view
    about her credibility.

10.  The judge also took into account the points raised  by  the  respondent
    regarding what weight could be placed on the arrest  warrant  [72].  He
    took into account those issues as part of a  wider  assessment  of  the
    plausibility of her account. Some matters he found weighed against her,
    but he gave more than adequate reasons to explain why he  accepted  her
    account on the low standard of proof [71-78]. This was consistent  with
    the approach outlined by the Court of  Appeal  in  Karanakaran  v  SSHD
    [2000] Imm AR 271.

11.  In HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00094  the
    Tribunal confirmed that the process of screening  passengers  returning
    to Harare airport is intelligence led. The authorities will be able  to
    identify people  who  are  of  interest  from  the  advanced  passenger
    manifest. The grounds refer to the decision in CM (Zimbabwe)  but  fail
    to identify any material errors with reference to the country guidance.
    On the face of paragraph (2) of the head note  cited  in  the  grounds,
    those who have shown themselves "not favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are
    entitled to international protection." The Tribunal  in  CM  (Zimbabwe)
    did not purport to give guidance on the risk on return at the  airport.
    It confirmed that HS (Zimbabwe) remained the relevant authority on that
    point [202]. What evidence the Tribunal did consider related to risk to
    failed asylum seekers. The focus  of  the  decision  was  on  the  risk
    emanating largely from non-state actors who supported ZANU-PF.

12.  The facts of this case can be distinguished. The  judge  made  a  clear
    and unchallenged finding that he accepted the arrest warrants  produced
    by the appellant. In such circumstances it was clearly open to him, and
    nothing in the country guidance decisions would oblige him to  come  to
    any  different  conclusion,  to  find  that  the  arrest  warrant   was
    sufficient to give rise to a risk on return at the airport. If there is
    an outstanding arrest warrant the appellant is likely to be of  adverse
    interest to the authorities.  The  risks  associated  with  arrest  and
    detention are sufficiently serious to give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm.

13.   While  we  note  that  the  judge's  findings  relating  to   internal
    relocation are likely to be flawed in light of  the  citation  from  EM
    (Zimbabwe) referred to in the grounds, we conclude that that the  error
    is not material to the overall outcome of the appeal.  If  the  judge's
    findings relating to risk arising from state actors are sustainable the
    issue of internal  relocation  simply  doesn't  arise.  The  particular
    nature of the political violence in Zimbabwe, largely arising from non-
    state actors who support ZANU-PF, gave rise  to  consideration  of  the
    issue of internal relocation in several country guidance decisions. The
    circumstances of this  case  are  quite  different.  Having  failed  to
    undermine the First-tier Tribunal's findings  relating  to  the  arrest
    warrants, any criticism of the judge's findings  relating  to  internal
    relocation is immaterial.

14.  For the reasons given above we conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  The
    decision shall stand.



Decision

We find that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making  of
an error of law


Signed   [pic]    Date 14 November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
