
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA030262016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 May 2017                                |On 22 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                  master jT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith of Counsel instructed by South
                  West London Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national  of  Afghanistan.   On  20  September  2016
    First-tier Tribunal Judge (FtTJ) Farmer dismissed  his  appeal.   On  9
    January 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  (DUTJ)  Macdonald  set  aside
    Judge Farmer's decision for two reasons:  first  the  judge  failed  to
    assess hypothetical risk on return to the appellant as at the  date  of
    hearing; second, the judge failed to make  adequate  findings  both  as
    regards risk in the appellant's home  area  and  on  whether  he  could
    safely and reasonably relocate to  Kabul.   Judge  Macdonald  expressly
    preserved the FtTJ's primary findings of facts and positive credibility
    findings.

2.   At the hearing Mr Bramble conceded that the respondent  was  not  in  a
    position to oppose the appellant's appeal.  Both parties agreed that:

    (i)  the appellant was a minor at the date of hearing before  the  FtTJ
         and remained so at the date of hearing before me.  The  appellant's
         date of birth was either 1 January 2000 or 1 January 2001;


    (ii) there were no adequate reception arrangements for minors on return
         to Kabul unless they had family support;


    (iii)    on the basis of the latest evidence regarding the  appellant's
         efforts to trace his family through the  International  Red  Cross,
         his case could not be assessed as one in which he would have family
         support available;


    (iv) on the authority of AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012]
         UKUT  16  (IAC)  and       LQ   (Age:   immutable   characteristic)
         Afghanistan  [2008]  UKAIT  00005  the  appellant  qualified  as  a
         refugee.


3.   Ms Smith urged that I not only endorse the  agreement  reached  between
    the parties but I also find that the appellant faced  a  real  risk  of
    persecution and serious harm in his home area and could not  safely  or
    reasonably relocate in Kabul.  She urged in particular that I  did  not
    specify in my decision that  the  appellant's  entitlement  to  refugee
    status should be regarded as being wholly contingent  on  his  being  a
    minor.

4.   I have concluded that I do not strictly need to make  any  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's risk in his home area, as on the  basis  of
    the agreed facts I must allow the appeal.   However,  I  would  observe
    that, given the fact that the appellant's account of risk in  his  home
    area was accepted by the  FtTJ,  coupled  with  the  latest  background
    country information relating to the situation in the  appellant's  home
    area (Baghlan Province), the appellant would in my judgment face a real
    risk of persecution and serious harm in  his  home  area.   I  do  not,
    however, consider I am in a position to  make  a  specific  finding  on
    whether the appellant would continue to face a real risk of persecution
    or serious harm if returned to Kabul.  To make such a finding  I  would
    need to hear further evidence and submissions and since  I  must  allow
    this appeal anyway, I deem that unnecessary.

5.   Continuing my observations further, even if I  were  to  conclude  that
    the appellant would be able to relocate to Kabul in safety, it is clear
    that it would not be reasonable to expect him to relocate to that city,
    given he would be returned as a minor without family support.

     For the above reasons:

    (As found by DUTJ Macdonald) the decision of the FtTJ was wrong in  law
    and has been set aside:


    The decision I re-make is to allow the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 18 May 2017

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

