
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03410/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th January 2019                          |On 7th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                                   ms A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Anderson
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 29th November 1982 is a citizen of Albania.   The
    Appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  Anderson.   The   Respondent   was
    represented by Mr Howells a Senior Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 23rd  October  2015  and
    claimed asylum on  arrival.   Her  asylum  claim  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 26th  February  2018  and  the  Appellant  appealed  that
    decision.  Her appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Coaster sitting at Newport on 26th June 2018.  The judge had  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  Application for  permission  to
    appeal was made to the First-tier Tribunal.  Permission was granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup on 30th August 2018.  It was said that
    the grounds disclosed arguable material errors of law and  all  grounds
    could be argued.  Directions were issued  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    firstly decide whether an error of law had been  made  and  the  matter
    came before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 3. It was said that the case of MS [2018] referred to by the judge in  the
    decision had been overtaken by ES  [2018]  UKUT  00335.   The  Tribunal
    following an amendment to Section 14 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 had said that a  decision  made  by  the  competent
    authority was not of primary  relevance  to  the  determination  of  an
    asylum appeal and the judge needed to  consider  all  evidence  in  the
    round at the date of hearing.  Second it was said that  the  judge  had
    not looked at the expert report in the round having made a decision  on
    credibility before considering properly that expert report.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 4. Mr Howells noted the judge's decision findings began at  paragraph  32.
    He accepted that there was reference to the NRM report  which  was  not
    before the judge but said that the judge had  decided  the  Appellant's
    credibility claim in detail  between  paragraphs  38  and  57  and  had
    considered the expert report within those credibility findings.  It was
    said that the report had been referred to at paragraphs 38 and 53 prior
    to the conclusions at paragraph 57 in which the judge had  referred  to
    the lower standard of proof and to  looking  at  the  evidence  in  the
    round.

 5. At the end of the hearing  I  reserved  my  decision  to  consider  the
    submissions and evidence.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.



Decision and Reasons

 6. The Appellant's case in summary was that she had been  trafficked  from
    Albania to Italy and eventually fled to the UK.

 7. The judge at paragraph 34 noted there  had  been  an  NRM  report  that
    provided a conclusive decision that the Appellant was not a  victim  of
    trafficking.  He noted that the report was not before him  nor  had  it
    been provided to the Appellant's Counsel.   Surprisingly  it  does  not
    appear that either Counsel or the judge requested such  report  at  the
    hearing or felt the absence before them a deficiency.

 8. The judge at paragraph 36 referred to the case of MS  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
    594 which was referred to him by  the  Respondent.   He  had  noted  in
    particular paragraph  69  of  that  report  which  was  quoted  at  his
    paragraph 36.  On the basis of  that  paragraph  within  MS  the  judge
    stated at paragraph  37  "It  is  therefore  not  open  to  me  in  the
    circumstances of this Appellant's appeal to go behind the decision that
    the Appellant was not a victim of  trafficking.   This  has  a  serious
    adverse effect on her credibility".

 9. Paragraph 69 of MS [2018] inter alia stated:

         "... limiting the circumstances in which on statutory appeal ... an
         Appellant  can  mount  an  indirect  challenge  ...  to  where  the
         trafficking  decision  can  be  demonstrated  to  be  perverse   or
         irrational or one which was not open to the authority and  only  if
         it is can the Appellant invite the  Tribunal  to  re-determine  the
         relevant facts ..."

10. Even on the basis of MS [2018] therefore given the judge had  not  seen
    the NRM report he had not conducted that first part of the test  namely
    to  decide  whether  the  report  was  irrational  or  perverse.    The
    Appellant's Counsel did not it would appear have the report either.

11. However MS [2018] has been overtaken by ES [2018] UKUT 00335 which  was
    not referred to the judge by the Respondent or  indeed  Counsel.   That
    case found that a decision made by the competent authority  is  not  of
    primary relevance to the determination of  an  asylum  appeal.   It  is
    necessary to consider all the evidence in the  round  at  the  date  of
    decision.

12. Accordingly the judge was not bound as he believed by the  decision  in
    the NRM report which in any event he had not seen.   It  is  clear  the
    fact he felt bound by that unseen document heavily  impacted  upon  his
    assessment of the case as a whole as he stated it had a serious adverse
    effect on the Appellant's credibility.

13. Even though the judge thereafter considered the evidence generally  and
    only reached a finding at paragraph 57 he said at paragraph 57  "...  I
    find the inconsistencies referred to above within the  context  of  the
    negative conclusion of the NRM result  means  the  Appellant  fails  to
    discharge the lower standard of proof".  That report  clearly  impacted
    upon his reasoning at that concluding point.

14. Further although  the  judge  had  considered  the  expert  report  and
    referred to such at paragraph 53 he did not find  that  report  helpful
    principally because the NRM report had concluded  decisively  that  she
    was not a victim of trafficking.  Accordingly his consideration of  the
    expert report in the round appears to have been tainted in the same way
    as his assessment of credibility generally.

15. I find therefore that material error of law was made in this case.





Notice of Decision

16. I find that the judge made a material error of law in  this  case  such
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside and  the
    case remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  decision
    before a judge other than Judge Coaster.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




Directions

 1) This case should be heard in the First-tier Tribunal at Newport with  a
    time estimate of two hours.


 2) An Albanian interpreter should be provided for the hearing.


 3) The Respondent within ten working days of these directions should  file
    and serve a copy of the  NRM  report  on  both  the  Tribunal  and  the
    Appellant's representatives.


 4) The parties be at liberty to file  and  serve  any  fresh  evidence  in
    accordance with Procedural Rules and such composite bundles of evidence
    should be served on the other party and the Tribunal no later than five
    working days before the hearing.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
