
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/03430/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2019                  |On 11 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     KC
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Harper, of Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a North Korean national born in 1953.  He  entered
         the UK on 28 January 2017 and claimed asylum on 6 March  2017.  His
         application was refused on 26 March 2019 because the respondent was
         of the view that he would be able to return safely to  South  Korea
         as per the country guidance set out in GP and others (South  Korean
         citizenship) North Korea CG [2014] UKUT 00391 (IAC) and because  it
         was considered that article 8 was not engaged  in  respect  to  his
         private and  family  life  with  his  daughter  and  granddaughter.
         Initially  the  respondent  certified  the  appellant's  claim  but
         following judicial review litigation and the grant of permission by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 27 July 2018, the appellant  withdrew
         his challenge by consent  in  September  2018  and  the  respondent
         agreed to reconsider the claim and issue a fresh decision. Although
         refusal was subsequently maintained, the appellant was given an  in
         country right of appeal on 26 March 2019.

      2. The appeal was heard by Judge Pears at  Hatton  Cross  on  11  July
         2019. He dismissed the appeal by way of a determination promulgated
         on 26  July  2019.  Although  he  found  the  appellant's  evidence
         credible, accepted his account of escaping from North Korea on  two
         occasions and being subjected to harsh treatment  in  his  country,
         and although he accepted that North Koreans may  have  difficulties
         adjusting  to  life  in  South  Korea  and  that   there   may   be
         discrimination in social integration, employment  and  housing,  he
         concluded that that did not warrant  international  protection.  He
         did not accept that the North Koreans would seek out the  appellant
         in the South. He accepted that the appellant suffered from PTSD but
         found that there was no risk of suicide, that medication  would  be
         available in South Korea and that his ill health did not reach  the
         required article 3 threshold. He found that the appellant could not
         meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) because  he  spoke
         Korean and would receive assistance from the protection  programme.
         With respect to the article 8 claim, he found  that  the  appellant
         had been living with his daughter only since  2017,  although  they
         had been separated "by circumstances leading to  legitimate  asylum
         claims for asylum by both of them". He found that the appellant did
         not speak English, that the family was not financially independent,
         that  it  was  highly  unlikely  that  the  appellant  would   find
         employment, that his family and private life had  developed  whilst
         his immigration status was precarious, and that the refusal did not
         result in unjustifiably harsh conditions.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Macdonald on 29 August 2019 and the matter came before me  on
         3 October 2019. In a determination promulgated on 9 October 2019, I
         upheld the decision on the asylum limb of the  claim  as  following
         the country guidance of GP and others (South Korean citizenship) CG
         [2014] UKUT 00391 the judge properly found that the appellant would
         be admissible to  South  Korea  under  the  Readmission  Agreement.
         However, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  on
         private/family life.

      4. At paragraph 19 of my earlier determination, I gave  the  following
         reasons for my decision.

             "On the claim of family and private life, the judge's findings
             are sparse and unclear. Although he does not specifically make
             a finding on whether there is family or private  life  in  the
             UK, he makes a brief reference  to  family  and  private  life
             being developed at a time  when  the  appellant's  immigration
             status was precarious (at 59).  It  is  unclear  whether  this
             means that a positive finding on family/private life has  been
             made. If it has, there  is  no  consideration,  as  Ms  Harper
             argued,  of  the  context  and  circumstances  in  which   the
             appellant's family life with his daughter  was  disrupted,  no
             consideration of the principles of family reunion or the UNHCR
             guidance that was relied upon at the hearing. Nor is there any
             engagement with the appellant's individual circumstances,  his
             age, vulnerability (given that his account  of  torture,  past
             ill treatment, flight from North Korea and the manner in which
             he was forcibly separated from his daughter has been accepted)
             and close relationship with his  daughter  and  granddaughter,
             the only relatives he has contact with worldwide.  The  impact
             of his removal upon his daughter and her ten  year  old  child
             has also been disregarded. The  appellant's  integration  into
             South Korea where he has never lived and  where  the  evidence
             demonstrates he will be  discriminated  against  and  socially
             isolated are also factors that the judge failed to have regard
             to  when  he  considered  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   It   was
             insufficient to rely on GP as determinative of the appellant's
             claim on article 8 grounds within and outside the rules as his
             circumstances are wholly different from the appellants  in  GP
             where the individuals were fit, healthy and younger and  where
             an article 8 claim was not even actively pursued.  Even if  it
             had been, an individual assessment is called for".

      5. The matter was retained in the Upper Tribunal and re-listed  before
         me.

         The Hearing

      6. The appellant and his daughter both  attended  the  hearing  and  I
         heard evidence  from  each  in  turn  with  the  assistance  of  an
         interpreter.

      7. The appellant  gave  evidence  first.  He  relied  on  his  witness
         statement and in response to further questions  put  by  Ms  Harper
         explained how reuniting with his daughter was akin to  "getting  my
         life back". He described how after being caught in China,  returned
         to North Korea and punished, he still risked his life  by  escaping
         for a second time only because  he  wanted  to  try  and  find  his
         daughter. He said he now  realised  how  precious  family  was.  He
         cherished his daughter and grand daughter. He  said  he  could  not
         imagine life without her and that it would like a death penalty  if
         they were separated. He would not be able to see blue skies without
         them. He confirmed that he was not well physically and mentally and
         said  he  was  taking  co-codamol  and  fluoxetine.  However,   the
         medication could not compare to  the  love  he  received  from  his
         family. They would also find it difficult to be parted from him. He
         said he had no idea of what freedom was when he was in North  Korea
         but that he had seen it since being here and he begged for  freedom
         and his human rights.

      8. The appellant said that he  spent  all  his  time  with  his  grand
         daughter when she was not in school.  They  were  very  close.  Her
         grades had improved, she was now top of the class and had  recently
         won an award. He said he had been trying to study English, but  his
         concentration was poor. Although he and his grand daughter  managed
         to communicate using simple language and signs, that would  not  be
         possible via telephone calls or Skype. She had  also  been  happier
         since he had been around. That completed examination in chief.

      9. In cross examination, the  appellant  described  how  he  had  been
         parted from his daughter and how he came to find her.  He  had  not
         known for many years whether or not she was  alive.  She  had  been
         around 15-17 when they first fled to China in 2005 and, after their
         separation, he had no news of her until he escaped a second time in
         2017 and found out she was here. He said that after  the  breakdown
         of his marriage in 2002, his daughter had lived with him.

     10. The appellant said his grand daughter was around ten and was in the
         third year at school when he came here. She had been  born  in  the
         UK. She was not fluent in  Korean,  but  they  spoke  simple  words
         together. He had also tried to learn English and could manage basic
         words when  he  went  out.  He  said  his  daughter  paid  for  his
         accommodation and food. He received free prescriptions and went  to
         see an NHS doctor.

     11. The appellant said that he had worked secretly in China on  a  farm
         for a Chinese family and at a noodle factory.

     12. He said that he had never been to South Korea  and  they  had  been
         brainwashed that the South Koreans were  the  worst  enemy  in  the
         world.  His  reference  in  his   witness   statement   to   facing
         discrimination and abuse there was based on what he had seen on the
         internet and YouTube. He said there was a whole world that  he  had
         not known about before. He was able to receive news on  his  mobile
         phone and could use it to speak to his daughter.

     13. That completed cross examination. There was no  re-examination.  In
         response to my question, the appellant said that his grand daughter
         had not had any contact with her father since  he  (the  appellant)
         had been in the UK.

     14. I then heard from the appellant's daughter, Y.  She  confirmed  the
         contents  of  her  witness  statement.  She  said  she   had   been
         overwhelmed when reunited with her father. She  described  how  all
         families had parents but how she had been living without hers for a
         very long time. She was unable to express how she felt but said she
         could be described as a withering flower that started  to  blossom.
         She said that her daughter had problems because she did not have  a
         father around, so  the  appellant  had  taken  up  that  role.  The
         appellant prepared her breakfast and  spent  time  with  her  after
         school. She could not imagine being apart from him. She asked  that
         they be allowed to stay together. She started  to  weep.  She  said
         that he was not fit mentally to move to South Korea.  Her  daughter
         would not be able to understand it if he were to be  removed.  They
         would not be able to have the same kind of  relationship  over  the
         telephone. She said it would not be  feasible  for  them  to  visit
         South Korea.

     15. The witness confirmed that she worked at a restaurant for 16  hours
         a week.

     16. In response  to  questions  then  put  by  Ms  Cunha,  the  witness
         confirmed that her daughter had been  born  in  2009.  She  had  no
         contact with her father as they had separated when the child was  3
         years old. He did not provide for the appellant or the child.

     17. The witness received benefits as a single mother. Her father helped
         to look after her child. She had worked prior to  his  arrival  and
         her friends helped her out. She said her father's medical treatment
         was free. She paid for his travel and his mobile phone. She said it
         would be impossible to support him in  South  Korea.  She  said  he
         would kill himself if he had to go there. He still thought  he  was
         dreaming by being here with her.  She  had  never  travelled  since
         arriving here. She had a British passport. No one  else  helped  to
         support her father.

     18. That completed oral evidence. I then heard submissions.

     19. Ms Cunha relied on the decision  letter.  She  submitted  that  the
         appellant would be able to receive voluntary aid funding on removal
         and that would assist him. He would be entitled to apply to the IOM
         for funds for up to �2000. She accepted that there was  a  genuine,
         effective and emotional relationship between the appellant and  his
         daughter and between him and his grand  daughter  but  argued  that
         removal would not result in any unjustifiably harsh  circumstances.
         The circumstances in South Korea could  not  be  considered  to  be
         exceptional. There was no  unjustifiably  harsh  interference  with
         family life. Whilst he had a genuine relationship  with  his  grand
         daughter, it was not unreasonable for him to leave her in terms  of
         s.117B(6). She had been here  for  seven  years  without  him.  Her
         mother was able to manage and had support from friends. If it  were
         found that the relationship was akin to  a  parental  relationship,
         interference was proportionate.

     20.  With  reference  to  private  life,  there  were  no   exceptional
         circumstances and removal would not  lead  to  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences. Nor were there very significant obstacles. She relied
         on Lal [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 and submitted that an objective and not
         a subjective view should be taken. The appellant's comments in  the
         witness  statement  about  discrimination  in  South   Korea   were
         speculative and should not be given weight. There was  no  evidence
         that this would happen to him. As  he  had  already  defected,  the
         sections of the expert report on defectors did not  apply  to  him.
         The present government in South Korea was doing its best to improve
         relations with the north. Discrimination was not a very significant
         obstacle. He had shown great fortitude in escaping to  China  where
         he was able to work even without speaking the language. He was able
         to communicate in shops here. It would therefore be easier for  him
         in South Korea where he would know the language. He  would  not  be
         living in fear of being deported as  he  had  been  in  China.  The
         appeal should be dismissed.

     21. Ms Harper commenced  her  submissions  with  a  look  at  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi). She referred me to the  judgment  of  Kamara  [2016]
         EWCA Civ  813,  as  cited  in  Treebhawon  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -
         compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC), as  to  the
         meaning of integration. She submitted that  if  the  appellant  met
         those requirements there would  be  a  breach  of  article  8.  She
         submitted that the situation in South Korea was very difficult. The
         court had accepted in GP that there was discrimination  there.  The
         expert report confirmed that only half  of  North  Korean  refugees
         found work. The situation for the appellant was even more difficult
         due to his age and his mental health.  He  had  never  lived  there
         before  and  had  no  relatives  or  contacts  there.  His   family
         relationships were what gave substance to his life. He  had  risked
         his life for that. Article 8 was not pursued in GP and anyway those
         appellants were young and fit and had relatives in the  south.  The
         appellant was a pensioner with no particular skills. He would  find
         it impossible to achieve a decent  income  and  would  struggle  to
         survive. He had made no contribution to  the  pension  scheme.  The
         discrimination against the northerners was  accepted  in  the  Home
         Office report. This was particularly important in  the  appellant's
         case as he had suffered  torture  and  had  PTSD.  For  him  to  be
         detained and then have to cope alone without the support of  family
         would be  very  difficult.  Reliance  was  placed  on  his  witness
         statement. Had the funding from IOM been a realistic  prospect,  it
         would have been referred to  by  the  respondent  in  the  decision
         letter. That was not the respondent's case  and  no  specifics  had
         been given today. In any case, according to  the  expert,  where  a
         returnee had money, it was common for brokers to take  control  and
         extortion was common. The appellant's daughter  provided  food  and
         accommodation but that was different to supporting the appellant in
         South Korea. There were very significant obstacles to  integration.
         The  submissions  on  the  unduly  harsh   finding   in   GP   were
         misunderstood. They applied to humanitarian protection and that was
         not an issue  here.  Moreover,  those  appellants  were  a  married
         couple.

     22. Ms Harper submitted that all the  same  factors  applied  when  the
         claim was considered outside the rules.  There  was  strong  family
         life with  emotional  and  financial  dependency.  The  appellant's
         mental health was stable because he was here with his daughter  and
         grand daughter.  He would not be able to maintain family life  from
         South Korea. His first six months there, if not longer, would be in
         detention. He would struggle to survive. The article  8  assessment
         had to take account of the displacement suffered by  the  appellant
         and his daughter. They  were  separated  due  to  circumstances  of
         persecution and came here with genuine asylum claims. The appellant
         had risked everything to find his daughter. The thought of her kept
         him going. The principle of family unity had to be  recognised  and
         assessed in the specific context of the appellant's  circumstances.
         There was no public interest in the appellant's removal due to  the
         importance of  refugee  family  unity.  The  appellant  was  making
         attempts to learn English.  He  had  integrated  here  through  his
         family.  Interference  in  his   private/family   life   would   be
         disproportionate.

     23. Ms Cunha then submitted that Ms Harper had been wrong to  say  that
         there was no reference to  IOM  funding  in  the  decision  letter.
         However, it soon became apparent that  she  was  referring  to  the
         September 2017 decision letter which  had  been  withdrawn  by  the
         respondent following the judicial review claim.

     24. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         allowed the appeal and I now give reasons for so doing.

         Discussion and Conclusions

     25. I have considered all the evidence before me and have had regard to
         the submissions  made.  I  reach  my  decision  only  after  having
         considered the evidence as a whole even if some is not specifically
         referred to in my determination. I have had regard to the judgments
         to which I was referred. I would state at the outset that this  has
         been a very moving and emotional case  and  that  in  my  view  the
         circumstances are extremely compelling.

     26. The facts are not in dispute other than whether the appellant would
         face discrimination as described in the  background  material.  The
         appellant and his daughter were found to be credible  witnesses  by
         the First-tier Tribunal and I concur with that conclusion. I  found
         that they gave their evidence in a  straightforward  and  heartfelt
         manner and I accept the accounts in their entirety. The  ten  years
         of compulsory military service endured by the appellant, his escape
         to China with his daughter, his capture and forced return to  North
         Korea, separation from his daughter (who managed to remain in China
         and subsequently travel to the UK), his subsequent torture, over  a
         year of hard labour, the long term effect it had on his mental  and
         physical health and his second  escape  are  all  matters  which  I
         accept and which indeed were accepted  by  the  respondent  in  the
         decision letter.

     27. I consider first whether the appellant meets  the  requirements  of
         the rules in terms of his private life as that will impact  on  the
         issue of article 8.

     28. Paragraph 276ADE(1) provides;

             276ADE    (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for
                      leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the
                      UK  are  that  at  the  date  of   application,   the
                      applicant:

                           (i)     does not fall for refusal  under  any  of
                           the grounds in Section S-LTR 1.1  to  S-LTR  2.2.
                           and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and

                           (ii)    has made a valid application for leave to
                           remain on the grounds of private life in the  UK;
                           and

                           ...

                           (vi)    subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged  18
                           years or above, has lived continuously in the  UK
                           for less than 20 years (discounting any period of
                           imprisonment) but there would be very significant
                           obstacles to the applicant's integration into the
                           country to which he would have to go if  required
                           to leave the UK.

     29. There is no dispute that the appellant meets  the  requirements  of
         sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) so I now consider whether  there  would
         be very significant obstacles to his integration in South Korea  as
         a North Korean defector. In assessing that issue, I have regard  to
         what is meant by integration, to the personal circumstances of  the
         appellant as set out above and to the background material in so far
         as it pertains to the issue to be determined.

     30. I take into account the appellant's pensionable age  of  66  years,
         the fact that he has been  diagnosed  with  post  traumatic  stress
         disorder  as  a  result  of  his  past  physically   and   mentally
         challenging experiences and abuse,  and  the  conditions  in  South
         Korea, as taken at their highest, where he is expected to go. I  do
         not use the word "return" as he has never previously been to  South
         Korea.  I also consider the circumstances in which he was separated
         from his daughter and the process of reunification.

     31. Ms Harper relied on the guidance given in the case of Treebhawon as
         to  the  interpretation  of  the  test  of  integration  where  the
         following extract from Kamara on the "broad concept" was  cited  at
         paragraph 37:

             "It is not confined to the mere ability to find a  job  or  to
             sustain life while living in the  other  country.  It  is  not
             appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject to some
             gloss and it  will  usually  be  sufficient  for  a  court  or
             tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament
             has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a broad
             evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the  individual
             will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
             life in the society in that other country is carried on and  a
             capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
             opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on  a
             day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
             reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
             substance to the individual's private  or  family  life"(added
             emphasis).

     32. I, therefore, look to  see  whether  the  appellant  would  have  a
         reasonable chance of being accepted by the  South  Koreans  to  the
         extent that he would be able to meaningfully  participate  in  that
         society, to cope on a daily basis  and  to  be  able  to  build  up
         relationships that would give him a meaningful private/family life.

     33. I have considered the  letter  from  the  appellant's  GP  and  the
         psychiatric report of a highly experienced consultant psychiatrist.
         Dr Alikhan's letter dated  19  September  2018  confirms  that  the
         appellant suffers from depression which was described as stable and
         for which he had been prescribed Fluoxetine. The doctor opines that
         the depression would get worse if he were to be removed  and  there
         was a possible risk of suicide. It is confirmed that the  appellant
         lost teeth from his upper and lower jaw  (it  was  the  appellant's
         accepted evidence  that  this  was  as  a  result  of  beatings  he
         sustained)..

     34. Dr Hajioff, the consultant psychiatrist, assessed the appellant  on
         26 September 2018 and prepared  his  report  two  days  later.  The
         account of the appellant's past experiences and  ill  treatment  in
         North Korea set out therein accords with the  other  evidence.  The
         appellant was found to be suffering from  PTSD  and  to  have  some
         symptoms of depression as a result of his traumatic experiences (at
         paragraphs 5, 41 and 44). It was noted that he was calm other  than
         when he spoke about his daughter and granddaughter at  which  point
         "his face reddened, his voice was choked and his eyes  filled  with
         tears" (at 27). He was described as having felt "low and  hopeless"
         but "the hope of reuniting with his daughter  helped  to  keep  him
         going" (at 28).

     35. Dr Hajioff sets out the progress the appellant has made since being
         here with his daughter. He is now able to close his bedroom door at
         night whereas before he was afraid to do  so;  he  is  able  to  be
         outdoors after dark; he is no longer afraid when he sees  policemen
         and his concentration and sleep have improved; his  nightmares  are
         less frequent (at 29-33). Dr Hajioff  found  that  the  appellant's
         "depressive and anxiety symptoms have improved during his  time  in
         the UK...since he joined his daughter. He is now very close to  her
         and receives emotional support from her.  There  is  a  significant
         risk that,  if  he  is  separated  from  her,  his  condition  will
         deteriorate, he will become depressed and his  PTSD  symptoms  will
         become worse" (at 42). Whilst the doctor found that antidepressants
         may have assisted the appellant's improvement, it was "more  likely
         to be because he is in what he sees as a safe  place  and  has  the
         support of his daughter" (at 44). Removal would increase depression
         and anxiety (at 48). The doctor did not consider there was  a  risk
         of suicide (at 49).

     36. I have had regard to the expert report from  Dr  Christopher  Bluth
         whose expertise is unquestioned and  who  gave  assistance  to  the
         Upper Tribunal for country guidance in GP. Whilst  his  report  was
         presumably prepared to assist the appellant's asylum claim,  it  is
         also useful material for the consideration of the circumstances the
         appellant would be going to in South Korea and is relevant  to  the
         issue of integration.  No  challenge  was  made  to  the  objective
         contents of the report by Ms Cunha although she did submit that  it
         had not been shown that the appellant would suffer the difficulties
         highlighted in the report.

     37. Dr Bluth states that whilst "on  the  one  hand  the  South  Korean
         government feels it has to accept North Korean refugees because  of
         the constitution ... it  wants  to  discourage  defections  and  in
         practice will not recognise North Koreans as nationals where  there
         is evidence that they do not wish to live in the Republic of  Korea
         ..." (at 5.3.4, 5.3.10-5.3.13). As someone who did not seek refugee
         in the south after his defection and indeed who came to the UK  and
         sought asylum, the appellant is likely to be seen as a  person  who
         does not want to live there. It  is  explained  that  the  defector
         issue is a serious irritant in relations between  North  Korea  and
         China and between North and South Korea who  are  also  seeking  to
         improve relations (5.3.5). There is resentment in South Korea about
         the costs of providing for refugees who do not integrate well  with
         the Southerners (5.3.6).

     38. The report deals at length with the discrimination suffered by  the
         newcomers to the South and whilst Ms Cunha is right  to  point  out
         that this does not amount to persecution, it is a  relevant  factor
         when considering whether there are very  significant  obstacles  to
         the appellant's integration and whether it would be  reasonable  to
         expect him to relocate there. To  all  intents  and  purposes,  the
         South is a foreign country and the northerners are  ostracised  and
         have to adapt to an alien culture (6.3). There is  severe  informal
         discrimination, there are language problems and the  refugees  face
         serious problems in making a living once they are left to fend  for
         themselves after their initial  adaptation/debriefing  process  (at
         6.4-6.7). For refugees who are largely farmers  or  manual  workers
         (such as the appellant who worked moving goods in a watch  factory,
         in building, farming and factories), life chances in the south  are
         very poor (at 6.8). Further, as a pensioner,  the  appellant  would
         face additional problems having no employment skills and not having
         paid anything into the  South  Korean  pension  scheme.   "Old  age
         poverty is a  serious  problem  in  South  Korea  and  due  to  his
         situation, the appellant will be among the very poorest,  literally
         struggling to survive month by month" (at 6.10).

     39. Dr Bluth concludes: "Due to the level of  informal  discrimination,
         and the extent of social exclusion experienced by North Koreans, it
         will be very difficult for the appellant to make a decent life  for
         himself in South Korea. As a person of  pension  age  who  has  not
         contributed  to  the  South  Korean  pension  scheme  and   without
         experience of working in South Korea or marketable  skills,  he  is
         likely to struggle with extreme poverty if forced  to  relocate  to
         South Korea. I believe that it would be unduly harsh for him to  be
         forced to love in South Korea ..." (at 7.5).

     40. The Home Office Country Information and Guidance  on  North  Korea,
         October 2016, supports the contents of the expert  report  in  many
         respects. On  the  initial  debriefing  process,  it  reports  that
         defectors are detailed on arrival and held for up  to  six  months.
         They have no access to counsel and there are reports of  abuse  and
         violence in custody, interrogations and some are deported to  North
         Korea (at 7.1.2-7.1.3 and 7.1.6). It is  reported  that  whilst  in
         principle there is no  discrimination,  in  reality  refugees  face
         difficulties in terms of legal protection from abuse, access to job
         opportunities and obtaining  just  wages  (at  7.1.4).  After  some
         initial help, they are  left  to  their  own  devices  (ibid).  The
         reports from the  American  Psychological  Association  and  Crisis
         Group also report that refugees  from  the  north  are  mistreated,
         viewed  with  suspicion,  discriminated  against,   alienated   and
         isolated. For many  this  exacerbates  their  already  poor  mental
         health and there is a high suicide rate (AB : B44 and B47).

     41. The debriefing period is also described in the report from the Asia
         Pacific Journal. It amounts to several months of  detention  during
         which the new arrivals are taught  about  South  Korea's  domestic,
         social, political, economic and cultural  policies  (AB:B52).  Some
         financial support is then offered before they are left to their own
         devices (B53). There  is  a  high  level  of  unemployment  amongst
         refugees  and  even  those  who  do  secure  work  are  beset  with
         uncertainties  and  earn  low  wages.  They  are  marginalised  and
         excluded  by  the  southerners  (ibid).  There  are   problems   of
         loneliness in living away from family and little support in dealing
         with the PTSD symptoms suffered by many (B66).

     42. In his witness statement the appellant sets out details of the  ill
         treatment,  torture  and  hard  labour  he  was  subjected  to  (at
         paragraphs 5, 8, 9, 13 and 14). He was left with  only  five  teeth
         following the beatings and has suffered  with  hearing  loss  as  a
         result (at 8). He has also  endured  unimaginable  mental  torture,
         having been forcibly separated from his young daughter in China and
         then having spent some ten years not knowing what had  happened  to
         her or even whether she was alive or not. These facts have not been
         disputed by the respondent.

     43. The appellant's daughter and granddaughter are the  only  relatives
         with whom the appellant has contact. His  marriage  broke  down  in
         2002 and he lost contact with his two brothers  in  2008  and  2014
         respectively. His  parents  are  dead.  It  is  accepted  that  the
         appellant has never been in South Korea and that he has no contacts
         there.

     44. Given the personal characteristics of  the  appellant  as  detailed
         above  and   the   conditions   in   South   Korea   for   incoming
         refugees/defectors, I find that there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the appellant's integration in South Korea. He  is  of
         pensionable age with  no  employment  skills.  He  has  significant
         mental health issues and the unchallenged medical evidence is  that
         a separation from his daughter and grand daughter, the only  living
         family he has, would mean a substantial deterioration in his mental
         health. He has clearly suffered physically and mentally and  having
         been reunited with his daughter after  a  separation  in  traumatic
         circumstances, and after having spent almost a decade  without  any
         news of her welfare or whereabouts, I find that to separate him now
         and expect him to relocate to a country where he would plainly have
         great problems  in  being  accepted  and  in  having  any  kind  of
         meaningful private life and no family life to speak  of  amount  to
         very significant obstacles.   The initial period of  detention  for
         several months would, I find, damage his fragile mental health even
         further. He is only now gradually  beginning  to  settle  and  show
         signs of improvement and the  medical  evidence  is  that  that  is
         primarily due to the security he feels in being with  his  daughter
         rather than the effect of anti-depressants.

     45. Even if the appellant were to receive  some  financial  support  on
         removal, and I note that despite  Ms  Cunha's  submission  to  that
         effect there is no evidence of this or even  of  whether  he  would
         qualify, that would be a finite amount  and  the  chances  for  the
         appellant to eke out a long term means of support are, according to
         the evidence, dismal. Whilst Ms Cunha submitted that there  was  no
         evidence the appellant would be subjected to all  the  difficulties
         highlighted not only  by  the  expert  but  in  the  other  country
         background material including the Home Office report,  it  is  more
         than  likely  that  a  person  with  fragile  mental   health,   of
         pensionable age and no employment skills  other  than  manual  work
         would not be in a position to avoid the hardships and other serious
         issues that North Koreans can expect to face in starting a new life
         in the south.

     46. For these reasons I conclude that  the  requirements  of  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(i), (ii) and (vi) have been met.

     47. I now turn to the claim of family life  on  article  8  grounds.  A
         major criticism of the First-tier Tribunal's decision was  that  no
         finding had been made on whether the appellant enjoyed family  life
         in the UK with his daughter and granddaughter. It  was  argued  for
         the appellant that he had more than the usual emotional  ties  with
         his family given his age,  vulnerability  and  the  fact  that  his
         family life had been disrupted by forced displacement.

     48. That submission was accepted by Ms Cunha who rightly conceded  that
         there was a Kugathas dependency between  them  as  the  appellant's
         daughter too has greatly benefited from  being  reunited  with  her
         father. Details of how they found one another again  are  contained
         in the letter from the North  Korean  Residents  Society  dated  17
         April 2019. I  accept  that  the  appellant's  daughter  gives  him
         courage at difficult times, that she looks after him and  that  the
         appellant, his daughter and her child form an extremely close  knit
         and mutually reliant family.

     49. It follows that I find that the appellant clearly  has  established
         family life here. Indeed, he has no family elsewhere and  there  is
         no prospect  of  a  realistic  family  life  outside  the  UK.  The
         appellant is wholly dependent upon his daughter for  financial  and
         emotional support; there is no suggestion that  he  has  any  other
         source of support or income.  His  daughter  too  has  developed  a
         dependency on him having been forcibly parted from him when she was
         a child/adolescent and then having no information  about  his  fate
         until they were reunited here some ten years later. To that extent,
         this  is  an  unusual  case  and  I  accept  the  submission   that
         circumstances in which their family life previously came to an  end
         is a wholly relevant consideration.

     50. As I have found that the appellant meets the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules on private life, his  removal  would  not  be  in
         accordance with the  law.  However,  even  if  I  am  wrong  in  my
         assessment under the rules, I find  that  the  appellant's  removal
         would be a disproportionate interference  with  his  family/private
         life in the UK.

     51. In reaching that conclusion, I have had regard  to  s.117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This  sets  out  the
         public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all   cases   and
         provides:

             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

             (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4) Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.

     52. I rely on all the matters set out above. This is not the normal run
         of the mill case where family/private life has commenced  during  a
         precarious/unlawful period of residence. The appellant  fled  North
         Korea for genuine reasons  and  was  forcibly  separated  from  his
         daughter after they escaped to China. Their  family  life  is  more
         akin to the family reunion envisaged for refugees  and  that  is  a
         matter I take account of.

     53. I do not accept that there  would  be  any  realistic  prospect  of
         family life continuing in South Korea. For starters, the  appellant
         would be held in detention for at least six months and contact with
         his daughter would therefore be on hold for several months. I  also
         have regard to the close relationship the appellant  has  with  his
         grand daughter. I accept that they spend a  large  amount  of  time
         together and that despite their language problems they have found a
         way to communicate and are both learning one another's language  in
         order to do so more effectively.  I  accept  that  telephone  calls
         would be problematic in such circumstances. Maintaining family life
         via visits is unrealistic. As a single mother  with  a  waitressing
         job, the appellant's daughter is  hardly  in  a  position  to  make
         regular visits with her daughter to  see  the  appellant  in  South
         Korea.

     54. I also accept that as a fatherless  child,  the  appellant's  grand
         daughter has come to look upon him as a father figure.  I  have  no
         reason to dispute the evidence  that  the  appellant  prepares  her
         meals, accompanies her to and from school and spends all  his  time
         with her when she is at home. I accept that her  grades  at  school
         have improved and that she has been happier with him  around.  None
         of this evidence was challenged. To that extent, I  find  that  the
         appellant has a relationship akin  to  a  parent  with  his  grand-
         daughter. She is a qualifying child; a British national, born  here
         and who has spent all ten years  of  her  life  here.  Plainly  she
         cannot be expected to leave and I find that even if I  am  mistaken
         about the parental aspect of  their  relationship,  it  is  in  the
         child's best interests for the appellant to remain here with her. I
         find she would be severely  disadvantaged  by  his  removal  having
         developed such a closeness to him over the last three years.

     55. I take note of Ms Cunha's submission that the child had  been  here
         seven years without the appellant. That is  true  but  it  must  be
         borne in mind that she did not know of him during those years so it
         was not a separation as it would be were he to leave her life  now.
         The daily contact and closeness to the appellant that  she  enjoys,
         and which is confirmed by a neighbour in a written statement, would
         be lost and that cannot be in her best interests.  Her  mother  too
         would, as the evidence and her demeanour in court demonstrated,  be
         distraught to be forcibly separated from her father again and  that
         is bound to have an impact upon her own well being and  hence  upon
         her child.

     56. It was not suggested that little weight  should  be  given  to  the
         appellant's family life because his status was precarious  and,  in
         any event, it is the case  that  a  precarious  status  would  only
         impinge on private life and not on family life (Rhuppiah  [2018]  1
         WLR 5536 and Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11). Indeed,  what  weight  it  is
         appropriate to give to such a relationship in  the  proportionality
         assessment depends on the particular circumstances (Lal [2019] EWCA
         Civ 1925 at paragraph 64).  Those  circumstances  are  set  out  at
         length above. No submissions were made on the appellant's use of an
         NHS doctor for his anti-depressants. The appellant's daughter works
         and receives child tax credits. It was not submitted  by  Ms  Cunha
         that these amounted to benefits or that the family was a  drain  on
         public resources. There was also no challenge  to  the  appellant's
         evidence that he was learning English in  an  effort  to  integrate
         better. I also consider the evidence from Kingston United  Reformed
         Church which confirms the appellant's membership  and  his  regular
         attendance and participation in activities and classes.

     57. Given the unusual circumstances  of  this  case  and  the  personal
         circumstances  of  the  appellant,  his  daughter  and  his  grand-
         daughter, I am satisfied that the appellant's removal would not  be
         in the public interest and that there are compelling  circumstances
         which would make his removal a disproportionate interference in his
         family / private life.

         Decision

     58. The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules on  private  life
         grounds and on article 8 human rights grounds.

         Anonymity

     59. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.




    Signed










         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 6 December 2019


