
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03307/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th November 2016                |On 16th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                  ALDO [K]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ball, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 18th January 1998. He
         is therefore now 18 years old. He arrived in the UK on 7th  October
         2014, and claimed asylum on 8th October 2014. His  application  was
         refused but he was granted discretionary leave as an  unaccompanied
         minor. He applied to extend this leave on asylum and  human  rights
         grounds, but this application was refused on 17th March 2016.   His
         appeal against this decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Abebrese after a hearing in a  determination  promulgated  on
         the 15th September 2016.

      2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford
         on the 12th October 2016, who also extended  time  by  one  day  to
         admit the application, on the basis that it was arguable  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law in finding the appellant
         not credible without consideration of the evidence at  annex  K  of
         the appeal bundle; and also without giving  specific  consideration
         to the appellant's age  when  considering  his  ability  to  recall
         events.

      3. The matter came before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
         Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

      4. The appellant submits that he submitted material (which appears  in
         the respondent's bundle at annex K and further material which  also
         appeared at pages 5 to 18 of the appellant's bundle which  included
         newspaper reports) which was material to his claim and which  makes
         the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  unsustainable,  as  these
         contend that there is  a  lack  of  corroborative  evidence  and  a
         failure to substantiate the claim. It is also argued that it was  a
         material error of law to fail to consider the appellant's age,  and
         his minority, at the dates material events took place.

      5. The respondent submits that there is no explanation as to  how  the
         evidence which is said to have been overlooked is material or could
         have changed the outcome of the appeal. There is  no  challenge  to
         the findings of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph  19  that  the
         appellant and his father travelled in and out of  Albania  once  in
         2011, twice in 2012 and also in 2013, nor to the fact  that  checks
         by the respondent reveal that the family  are  not  involved  in  a
         blood feud. The age of the appellant is not a  relevant  factor  in
         this matter. Further there is no  challenge  to  the  finding  that
         there is sufficient of  protection  and  that  internal  relocation
         would not be unduly harsh. Again this means that any  errors  would
         not be material.

Conclusions - Error of Law

      6. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has erred materially in law for
         the following reasons.

      7. At paragraph 18, page 7, of the decision the Judge  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal says that  he  does  not  believe  that  the  various
         murders at the centre of the blood feud are to be believed because:
         "The appellant has not produced any evidence apart  from  his  oral
         claims to substantiate these suggestions". It is however  the  case
         that evidence at pages 5  -18  of  the  appellant's  bundle  is  of
         newspaper reports concerning a blood feud with names of people  the
         appellant says are relatives, and of family certificates which show
         potential family  relationships.  It  is  also  the  case  that  at
         Appendix K of the respondent's bundle there  is  another  newspaper
         article about a killing which appears to  support  the  appellant's
         case.

      8. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal also says at paragraph  21  of
         the decision that he does not believe that the appellant is related
         to [IK] or that he  was  killed,  without  considering  the  family
         certificate evidence, or apparently the fact  that  the  respondent
         had provided evidence that this man had  been  killed  (albeit  the
         respondent says their evidence shows he was killed in 2004 not 2005
         as claimed by the appellant), see paragraph 19 of the decision.

      9. It is also not the case that taking the appellant's evidence at its
         highest that the last "incident" in the blood feud was in 2004,  as
         is stated by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  paragraph  20  of  the
         decision, as the appellant clearly gives evidence  of  attempts  to
         kill him in 2014 (paragraph 6 of the decision).

     10. At paragraph 18  of  the  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does
         provide rational reasons why it was not found  that  the  appellant
         and his father were in confinement since 2004: due to the fact that
         the appellant was going to school  and  his  father  travelling  to
         Kosovo for prolonged periods and then returning for visits. It  was
         open to the Tribunal to conclude that the lack of  self-confinement
         by the appellant, whom they also contend went backwards and forward
         to Kosovo in 2011, 2012 and 2013, is evidence  that  the  appellant
         and his family were not particularly afraid of any  threat  from  a
         blood feud at this time.

     11. However given  the  failure  to  factor  in  the  evidence  of  the
         newspaper reports and the family  certificates,  and  to  give  due
         consideration to the appellant's age when considering  the  history
         (this should have been considered as potentially  relevant  to  the
         evidence the appellant  was  able  to  give  with  respect  to  the
         evidence of written threats  considered  at  paragraph  22  of  the
         decision) I find that the approach of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
         legally flawed in determining whether a blood feud existed  due  to
         failure to consider to material evidence, and  a  failure  to  give
         sufficient reasons why the evidence of the respondent (referred  to
         only very briefly as existing at paragraph 19) was preferred.

     12. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal was properly able to give weight  to
         the fact that sufficiency of protection exists  in  most  areas  of
         Albania as set out at paragraph 23 of the decision, the evidence as
         set out in the country guidance case of EH  (Blood  feuds)  Albania
         [2012] UKUT 348 is that if a blood feud had been found to exist  in
         the north of Albania that there might not be such  protection  (see
         conclusion number 3). The appellant is from Kukes in the  north  of
         Albania so this is clearly potentially  relevant  to  him.  Further
         only very limited reasoning, the presence of NGOs, is given  as  to
         why it would not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to  internally
         relocate to Tirana. The appellant is only 18  years  old,  and  the
         decision  therefore  errs  in  law  for   want   of   reasons   and
         consideration of the appellant's age in this aspect of the decision-
         making.



Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision with no findings preserved.

    3. I remit the remaking hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:  Fiona Lindsley    Date: 15th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

