
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03606/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2019                            |On 28 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    L T D
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



           DECISION MADE PURSUANT TO RULES 34, 39 & 40 (3) OF THE
               TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

   1. The appellant appeals with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 18 September 2018.

   2. Both parties agreed that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error of law for the reasons set out in  the
      grounds of  appeal.  They  were  right  to  do  so.  The  decision  is
      inadequately reasoned in relation to the  reliance  on  implausibility
      and, in relation to the issue of domestic violence, perverse.   In the
      circumstances, the findings as to credibility and as to the facts  are
      fundamentally undermined  and  unsustainable.  In  the  circumstances,
      given that none of the findings of fact can be preserved,  the  appeal
      will have to be heard again and accordingly it is appropriate to remit
      it to the First-tier Tribunal.


   3. There are a number of passages in the decision in which the judge  has
      expressed herself in a manner which  causes  concern.  Describing  the
      appellants account in phrases such as "the realms of nonsense" [82] is
      wholly inappropriate.


   4. Rule 40 (1) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      provided that the Upper Tribunal may  give  a  decision  orally  at  a
      hearing which I did. Rule 40 (3) provides that the Upper Tribunal must
      provide written reasons for its decision with a decision notice unless
      the parties have consented to the Upper Tribunal  not  giving  written
      reasons. I am satisfied that the parties have given  such  consent  at
      the hearing.


      Notice of Decision

     1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
        error of law and is set aside.


     2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
        on all issues.


      Signed                       Date: 21 January 2019
      [pic]
      Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

