
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03255/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2019                           |On 18 February 2019           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              MR XHEVAHIR DAJCI
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 1 April 1998. He appeals
      against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Wyman  sitting
      at  Hatton  Cross  on  10  April  2018  in  which  she  dismissed  the
      Appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  15
      February 2018. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's application
      for international protection.


   2. The Appellant left Albania on 3 September 2015 and went to Belgium. On
      12 October 2015 an  attempt  to  travel  to  the  United  Kingdom  was
      prevented when he was  apprehended  and  returned  to  France.  On  17
      October 2015 the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  and  claimed
      asylum on 6 November 2015. He was referred to the Competent  Authority
      to assess whether he was a victim of  human  trafficking  or  slavery,
      servitude or forced/compulsive labour but  it  was  concluded  by  the
      Authority on 8 July 2016 that he was not a victim of modern slavery.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant claimed that he was at risk of persecution  if  returned
      to Albania on account of his membership of a particular  social  group
      described as victims of trafficking. The Appellant's  father  owed  10
      million Albanian lek (approximately �70,000) to an  individual  called
      Orest who suggested that he could find the Appellant a  job  to  repay
      the debt. Orest took the Appellant to Belgium where the Appellant  had
      to beg. He and Orest then came to  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  by
      climbing into the back of the lorry. Once in England they went to  the
      house of a friend of Orest where the  Appellant  was  not  allowed  to
      leave but was required to cultivate cannabis plants. On  5th  November
      the police raided the property and the Appellant managed to escape. He
      met an Albanian man who helped him to claim asylum the following  day.
      The Appellant believed that if returned to Albania his life  would  be
      at risk both from his father and from Orest. The Appellant  could  not
      relocate within Albania as his father or Orest would find him wherever
      he went.

The Decision at First Instance

   4. The Judge heard evidence from the  Appellant  and  Ms  B  Whetren  the
      Appellant's girlfriend. A copy  of  the  negative  conclusive  grounds
      decision was provided to the Tribunal by  the  Respondent.  The  Judge
      found  that  decision  to  be  irrational  because  she  accepted  the
      Appellant's claim that he had been  forced  to  work  for  Orest.  She
      accepted that the Appellant's father had lost  his  job  and  borrowed
      money from a moneylender who  called  in  the  debt.  The  Appellant's
      father "sold" the Appellant to Orest to repay that debt, see [111]  of
      the determination. The Appellant had been trafficked by his father and
      Orest but as he was a single adult male he would  not  leave  need  to
      live with his family upon return.


   5. The Appellant would be able to support himself by finding a job. There
      was freedom of movement within Albania. Although the  Appellant  would
      need to register to obtain an identity card that of itself  would  not
      put him at risk of being located by his father or by Orest. There  was
      a functioning police force in Albania but there were good  reasons  to
      consider that such persecution would not be repeated if the  Appellant
      were returned to Albania and the appeal was dismissed.





The Onward Appeal

   6. The Appellant appealed against this decision arguing that it  was  not
      open to the Judge to find that internal relocation would be reasonable
      for the Appellant or that there would be a sufficiency  of  protection
      in his particular circumstances especially as  the  Judge  had  mostly
      accepted the Appellant's credibility in his account.  Trafficking  was
      carried out by criminal gangs and it was irrational for the  Judge  to
      say that the Appellant had never claimed that his father or Orest were
      members of a significant gang or had connections to the police. It was
      arguably irrational to infer that because the Appellant did not  refer
      to substantial gang activity this would mean that he was not in danger
      from the criminals who trafficked him.


   7. It was  accepted  that  there  was  a  fully  functioning  police  and
      judiciary in Albania  but  there  were  inadequate  reasons  given  to
      explain why the Appellant would not be the subject of interest of  the
      gang which trafficked him or his violent father. There would  be  very
      significant obstacles to the Appellant's  ability  to  integrate  into
      Albanian society upon return because he had been trafficked. He  would
      have to start from nothing having never  worked  in  Albania  with  no
      family networks to rely on and with a continued  real  fear  of  being
      tracked by an abusive and violent father and the traffickers  to  whom
      the father had sold the Appellant.

   8. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan on 30 May  2018.  In  refusing
      permission to appeal he found the findings made as a whole  were  open
      to the Judge and that adequate reasons had  been  given.  The  grounds
      seeking permission were no more than a disagreement with  the  Judge's
      findings. The Appellant renewed  his  application  for  permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the  application  came  before  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Perkins on 2 October 2018. He found  it  arguable  that
      Judge Wyman's decision that the Appellant did not  need  international
      protection because the Appellant could relocate within Albania was not
      open to the  Judge  or  had  not  been  explained  properly.  He  gave
      permission on each ground but found point 6 to be the most troubling.

   9. I assume that this was a reference to paragraph 6 of  the  grounds  in
      which it was argued that it was irrational to infer that  because  the
      Appellant had not mentioned substantial gang activity he  was  not  in
      danger from the criminals who had trafficked him.

The Hearing Before Me

  10. The onward appeal was initially listed before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Taylor on 8 November 2018 but due to  an  administrative  mishap
      notice of the  hearing  was  not  served  on  the  Appellant  and  the
      subsequent decision  of  Judge  Taylor  (to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
      appeal) was set aside and the matter was relisted when it came  before
      me. The appeal was thus at the error of law stage. I was  required  to
      decide whether there was a material error of law in the decision  such
      that it fell to be set aside and the appeal reheard. If there was  not
      a material error of law, the decision at first instance would stand.


  11. At the outset of the hearing counsel applied for an adjournment of the
      error of law hearing on the basis that  the  Appellant's  brother  had
      come to the United Kingdom a year ago fleeing  Albania  for  the  same
      reason as the Appellant namely that his  father  wanted  to  sell  the
      Appellant's brother to traffickers. The Appellant had been unaware  of
      this and an  adjournment  was  sought  to  enable  the  Respondent  to
      consider the asylum claim of the Appellant's brother in the  light  of
      the positive credibility findings made by Judge Wyman in  relation  to
      the Appellant. This would show how  far  the  Appellant's  father  was
      willing to go to pay his debt. Evidence of the brother's  claim  would
      be put forward in the Appellant's claim at the adjourned error of  law
      hearing.

  12. For the Respondent the  Presenting  Officer  opposed  the  adjournment
      arguing that the brother's  claim  was  irrelevant  to  the  issue  of
      materiality of an error of law on Judge Wyman's part.

  13. I considered the application for an adjournment bearing  in  mind  the
      principle established in the case of Nwaigwe, that the test of whether
      to adjourn is one of fairness.  In  this  case  the  appeal  had  been
      determined by Judge Wyman and an application  for  an  adjournment  to
      adduce further evidence meant the matter came  within  the  principles
      established by the case of Ladd v Marshall. Firstly, was the  proposed
      evidence relevant to the  issues  to  be  decided  by  the  court  and
      secondly had it not been possible to produce that evidence earlier?

  14. I was not satisfied on either of those two grounds that  the  test  in
      Ladd v Marshall was made out. Firstly, it was not at all clear how the
      possibility of a claim by the Appellant's brother  would  impact  upon
      the error of law hearing which I  had  to  determine.  The  Judge  had
      accepted the Appellant's credibility on the issue of being  trafficked
      by his father  and  Orest.  It  was  difficult  to  see  what  further
      assistance on that point the Appellant's brother  could  give  in  any
      event. Secondly, the Appellant's brother had apparently  been  in  the
      United  Kingdom  for  a  year  and  it  was  not  explained  why  this
      information had only come to light on the morning of the error of  law
      hearing. Fairness did not require the adjournment of the case which  I
      could properly decide on the basis of the papers  and  submissions.  I
      therefore refused the application for  an  adjournment  and  the  case
      proceeded.

  15. Counsel relied on the grounds of onward appeal. Point 6 of the grounds
      which had troubled Judge Perkins the most was not a  finding  open  to
      the Judge namely that Orest was not a member of  a  significant  gang.
      Orest trafficked people out of the United Kingdom  in  order  to  make
      them work selling cannabis. He  was  a  member  of  a  criminal  gang.
      Although there was freedom of movement within Albania there was a high
      degree of recording of  personal  information.  Whilst  the  Kanun  in
      relation  to  vendettas  was  little  followed  revenge  killings   by
      criminals were frequent. If the Judge had taken proper notice  of  the
      levels of criminality she might have come to  a  different  conclusion
      and would not have found that the Appellant was able  to  move  around
      the country without being found. On return the Appellant would  be  at
      risk of re-trafficking.

  16. In reply the Presenting Officer argued that  the  Judge  was  familiar
      with the background material on Albania. There was no reason  why  the
      Appellant could not relocate. This was  always  going  to  be  a  fact
      sensitive assessment of the risk to an  individual.  The  Judge  could
      only proceed on the evidence she had. There was no evidence that Orest
      had significant links to the police and the risk of  being  identified
      by him was limited. There was no reason why the  Appellant  could  not
      get help from the authorities. There was no material error of  law  in
      the determination.

  17. In reply  counsel  argued  that  the  Judge's  reasoning  on  internal
      relocation was  very  thin  and  followed  on  from  a  more  thorough
      assessment of the Appellant's credibility. The evidence  showed  Orest
      was a significant criminal. TD [2016] UKUT 92 was a case on trafficked
      women from Albania and was on different  facts  to  the  instant  case
      before the Judge and should not have been relied upon.  In  the  event
      that the determination was set aside, the appeal should be remitted to
      the First-tier to be reheard.

Findings

  18. Having found that the Appellant had been trafficked  into  the  United
      Kingdom as a result of an arrangement between the  Appellant's  father
      and Orest the Judge held that the Appellant could safely  relocate  to
      Albania. He would not have to live in the family  home  but  would  be
      able to move around Albania and find  work  to  support  himself.  The
      grounds argue that the person who trafficked the Appellant, Orest, was
      a criminal likely to have connections to the police and a member of  a
      significant criminal gang.


  19. The problem with that argument is  that  that  was  not  the  evidence
      before the Judge. The evidence was that trafficking the Appellant  was
      a private arrangement between the Appellant's father and Orest. In the
      first place Orest would take the Appellant to Belgium  but  ultimately
      the Judge suspected to the United Kingdom where the Appellant would be
      expected to work to repay the debt. The Judge was very careful in  her
      assessment of the evidence to base her findings on  what  she  had  in
      front of her. There was no indication that anyone else was involved in
      this arrangement. Indeed, it is significant that when  the  time  came
      for the Appellant and Orest to  travel  to  the  United  Kingdom  from
      Belgium they travelled together on two occasions, clandestinely in the
      back of a lorry indicating that  Orest  was  taking  a  very  personal
      interest in what happened to  the  Appellant,  he  was  evidently  not
      delegating matters to others because there were no others involved. He
      had driven the Appellant to Belgium from Albania  indicating,  as  the
      Judge found, there were no others involved.

  20. It is significant to note that when the Appellant made his  claim  for
      asylum to the Respondent the Appellant was in possession  of  his  own
      passport. The Judge noted that  that  was  unusual  for  a  victim  of
      trafficking but whilst it did not undermine the Appellant's  claim  to
      be a victim, it did indicate that this  was  not  a  typical  case  of
      trafficking  by  a  large  or  significant  criminal  gang  who  would
      otherwise have taken the Appellant's documents.

  21. The Appellant sought in submissions to suggest that Orest was a member
      of a significant gang but as  the  Judge  pointed  out  at  [115]  the
      Appellant had never claimed that  either  his  father  or  Orest  were
      members of a significant gang or had connections with the police.  The
      Appellant  did  refer  at  question  148  of  his  substantive  asylum
      interview to the fact he did not know  where  Orest  and  his  friends
      were, but this was in the context of the period when the Appellant was
      working in the cannabis farm in the United Kingdom.

  22. The Appellant had told the Respondent in interview that he had made no
      effort to approach the  Albanian  authorities  and  would  not  do  so
      because he did not consider that they would help him. It is  difficult
      to see how the Appellant was in a position to know that if he had  not
      tried. The Judge was impressed by the background material which showed
      that Albania had a functioning police service and judiciary  and  that
      steps were taken to combat trafficking. Whilst no system of protection
      can be perfect, the Judge's view was that there was an adequate  level
      of protection available for the Appellant to the Horvath standard. The
      Appellant's disagreement with this conclusion is  speculation  by  the
      Appellant that the police would not support him because they would  be
      in some way, not explained, connected to his father or Orest.

  23. It is also speculative of the Appellant to suggest  that  Orest  would
      have a continuing interest in him. Orest's whereabouts are not  clear,
      he was last seen in the United Kingdom according to the facts as found
      by the Judge but what was important was  the  finding  at  [116]  that
      there was a functioning police force in Albania who  could  provide  a
      sufficiency of protection even if there was a continuing  interest  in
      the Appellant.

  24. In the case of TD cited by the Judge it was said that trafficked women
      might have considerable difficulty in reintegrating  into  their  home
      areas on return to Albania. The Judge contrasted  that  position  with
      the Appellant's case. He was a single man with no children who had had
      the advantage of higher education and practical training.  He  had  no
      physical or mental health problems and would be able to find work  and
      support himself. These were conclusions which were open to  the  Judge
      on the evidence and the argument that the Appellant could not relocate
      to Albania is, I find, a mere  disagreement  with  the  decision.  The
      Judge found that just because the Appellant would have to register for
      an identity card it would not mean that he would be at risk  of  being
      located either by his father or by Orest. There was no  evidence  only
      speculation by the Appellant that either  the  Appellant's  father  or
      Orest would have any ability to access the  information  kept  by  the
      Albanian authorities on its citizens. Nothing in the grounds of onward
      appeal or the submissions  made  to  me  have  elucidated  that  point
      further.

  25. The threshold to cross to show irrationality on the part of a judicial
      decision is a very high one and  the  arguments  put  forward  by  the
      Appellant do not come close to showing  that.  This  was  a  carefully
      reasoned  determination  in  which  the  Judge  was  anxious   to   be
      scrupulously fair to the Appellant. It is conceded that  she  analysed
      the credibility issues carefully but because the  Appellant  does  not
      agree with the Judge's equally cogent reasons  for  finding  that  the
      Appellant could safely relocate, the determination  according  to  the
      Appellant  suddenly  became  irrational.  The  Judge  explained   very
      carefully  why  the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  upon  return
      notwithstanding the traumatic events which had occurred in the past.

  26. The Appellant claimed  that  his  rights  under  Article  8  would  be
      breached if he  were  returned  to  Albania  because  there  would  be
      significant obstacles to reintegration. The Judge rejected this claim,
      see paragraph 24 above and adequately demonstrated why  the  Appellant
      could be expected to relocate.  The  grounds  did  not  refer  to  the
      Appellant's relationship with Ms Whetren and rightly, very little  was
      made in submissions to me about the Appellant's Article 8 private life
      claim. Little weight could be placed on that private life  given  that
      the Appellant's status in this country has been precarious.   Overall,
      the Judge's findings were open to her on the evidence and the  grounds
      of onward appeal are no more than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
      findings. They do not disclose any material error of law and I dismiss
      the Appellant's appeal accordingly.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.



Signed:  Judge Woodcraft   Date: 12 February 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


    TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.

Signed: Judge  Woodcraft                                           Date:  12
    February 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



