
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/03345/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20 June 2017                       |       On 05 July 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                                    a a i
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Goodwin instructed by Albany Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) we make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was born on 2  September  1997.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 13 August 2015 and claimed  asylum.
    He claimed to be a non-Arab from Darfur from  the  Tama  tribe.   As  a
    result, he claimed to be at risk on return to Sudan.

 3. On 19 November 2015, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 15 July  2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judges  Davidge  and
    Richards-Clarke) dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.
    Although the panel accepted that the appellant was from Sudan they  did
    not accept that he was a non-Arab from Darfur of the Tama tribe.

 5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Although permission was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    on 13 September 2016 the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  C  Lane)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 6. The two grounds of appeal were that the panel had failed to  take  into
    account supporting evidence linking the appellant to  an  IDP  camp  in
    Kalma which was relevant to the panel's assessment of  the  appellant's
    credibility.  Further, the grounds argued that the  panel  had  wrongly
    failed to give weight to the  evidence  of  a  witness  called  by  the
    appellant who claimed to be a non-Arab from Darfur who  had  known  the
    appellant in Sudan.

 7. Before us, Mr Kotas accepted that the panel had not had drawn to  their
    attention evidence held by the Home Office, but not  available  to  the
    Presenting Officer on the day of  the  hearing,  that  the  appellant's
    witness had been granted refugee status on the basis that he was from a
    non-Arab Darfuri tribe.

 8. Whilst Mr Kotas raised the issue of whether any error by the First-tier
    Tribunal was material,  it  is  clear  to  us  that  in  assessing  the
    appellant's credibility the Tribunal materially erred in law by failing
    to take into account the evidence  supporting  the  appellant  both  in
    relation to his claimed period  in  an  IDP  camp  and  the  supporting
    evidence of the witness who claimed he had lived with the appellant  in
    that camp.  Consequently, the Tribunal's  adverse  credibility  finding
    and  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on  international
    protection grounds cannot stand and we set it aside.

 9. Both representatives indicated that the proper disposal of  the  appeal
    was to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal in order that  the  decision
    can be remade by a judge other than Judges Davidge and Richards-Clarke.



10. Both representatives accepted that the Tribunal's positive finding that
    the appellant was from Sudan should be preserved and we direct that  it
    is.

11. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed
    and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as set out above.

                                 Signed

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                 Date: 4 July 2017
