
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/03180/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                at                Manchester,                Piccadilly
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On                   29th                   September                   2017
 On 17th October 2017

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                      MR HUSAM ELAHADI BELAID ELAKREMI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:               Miss Patel (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:             Mr  Bates  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Bannerman promulgated on the 6th January 2017, in which
      he dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal. The Appellant had  claimed
      asylum on the basis that he was a Gaddafi supporter and a black Libyan
      of Tawergha ethnicity, who would be a bit  risk  of  persecution  upon
      return to Libya.


   2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington  on
      the 16th May 2017. The Grounds of Appeal contended that the Judge:


     i) failed to consider  the  evidence  in  regard  to  the  Appellant's
        Tawergha ethnicity adequately, and that bearing in mind the country
        conditions it was unreasonable to expect DNA evidence;



    ii) failed to address the photographic evidence, and  simply  dismissed
        the main documentary evidence such as a birth certificate;



   iii) failed to consider the witness evidence properly  bearing  in  mind
        that the Judge  refused  an  adjournment  because  the  Appellant's
        witness was sick;



    iv) failed to engage with recent country background material.

   3. Judge  Rimington  found  that  Grounds  (i)  to  (iii)  appear  to  be
      interlinked and that bearing  in  mind  the  crux  of  the  claim  was
      ethnicity of the Appellant it was arguable that  the  Judge  had  gave
      inadequate reasons for his treatment to the evidence, in particular in
      relation to  the  witness  statement  following  the  refusal  of  the
      adjournment to allow the  witness  to  attend.  She  stated  that  the
      criticism of the statement might indicate the importance  of  allowing
      the witness a further opportunity  to  attend.  She  also  found  that
      Ground (iv) was arguable.


   4. Following discussions in the Upper Tribunal, Mr Bates on behalf of the
      Secretary of State conceded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not
      adequately dealt with the witness statement of  Mr  Hussain  Adam,  in
      particular the contents of paragraph 4 of the statement, in  which  Mr
      Adam had said that he had known  the  Appellant  and  his  family  for
      almost 10 years and who states that the Appellant definitely was  from
      the Tawergha tribe and that  he  knew  Hussain's  family  were  highly
      involved with Gaddafi's regime and that he  knew  that  something  had
      happened to the Appellant's brother and his  father  was  missing.  Mr
      Bates also conceded that there was an element of unfairness in the way
      in which the Judge had dealt with the matters  regarding  witness,  in
      that although the Judge said that he had taken account of the case  of
      Nwaigwe (an adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 0418, when refusing the
      adjournment to allow the  Appellant's  witness  who  was  said  to  be
      suffering from diabetes and was dizzy  and  sick  and  was  unable  to
      attend. The Judge had borne in mind that the  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer said that she would not have much to ask the  witness  anyway,
      as they had a statement from him and that the Judge had stated in [56]
      that having regard to the witness statement including that he had been
      granted refugee status, the witness statement being in  short  compass
      that they could proceed in the interests  of  justice,  the  Appellant
      being asked questions about his witness, as the witness was not  going
      to be examined in any great detail by the Respondent, who was happy to
      proceed in the absence of the witness anyway. The Judge went on to  at
      [66] to reject the evidence of the witness by stating "even where  his
      witness statement can be considered, there is no  indication  why,  in
      it, Mr Adam believes the Appellant's is Tawerghan. Importantly I  note
      that Mr Adam's statement in paragraph 2 says that  they  usually  meet
      once or twice a month whilst the Appellant gave  evidence  they  would
      meet every day. That stark and glaring difference is just one  example
      of  where  I  find  the  Appellant's  account  to  be  incredible  and
      significantly damaging to his claim to be Tawerghan."


   5. I agree with the concession made by Mr Bates that there was an element
      of procedural unfairness in the way that the  Judge  dealt  with  that
      witness. With  the  greatest  of  respect   to  Judge  Bannerman,  the
      question was not whether or not the Respondent was happy to proceed in
      the absence of the witness, as this was the  Appellant's  witness  and
      the Respondent undoubtedly would have been happy  to  proceed  in  the
      absence of the Appellant's witness. However, the point  remained  that
      the Appellant's representative was not happy to proceed in the absence
      of the witness, nor was the Appellant, and it was  the  Appellant  who
      sort the adjournment. Either that witness evidence was accepted, or it
      was being challenged by the Secretary of State.  If  in  fact  it  was
      being challenged, particularly in regards to the witness's claim  that
      he had known the Appellant for ten years and he was Tawerghan and that
      the Appellant's family was highly involved in the Gaddafi  regime  and
      that his brother and father were missing, the fact the Respondent  was
      happy to proceed was not the issue. The witness evidence from Mr  Adam
      was  potentially  vital  evidence.  The  Judge  has   not   adequately
      considered the potential prejudice to the Appellant in not granting an
      adjournment, in order to allow his witness, who was  ill,  to  attend.
      She not accept that evidence, in circumstances where the case had  not
      been adjourned to allow that witness to give evidence,  on  the  basis
      that the Respondent did not intend to ask many questions, I  find  was
      in fact unfair to the Appellant.


   6. In such circumstances, I do  find  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Bannerman does contain a material error of law,  and  I
      therefore set aside the decision in its entirety.



   7. The matter is to be remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      rehearing, as was agreed between the parties given the fact  that  the
      decision will have to be  completely  remade,  before  any  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Bannerman.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bannerman does contain a  material
error of law, and I therefore set aside the decision in its entirety;
The case is to be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Bannerman;
I make no anonymity direction, no such direction having  been  made  by  the
First-tier or sought before me.

Signed

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty                              Dated  30th
September 2017
