
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03735/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2018                           |On 28 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    M M N
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dixon, counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Iran (Islamic Republic of), date of  birth
    [ ] 1997, appealed the Respondent's decision to refuse  an  application
    for asylum on  21  March  2016.   The  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge James (the Judge) who, on 3 April  2017,  dismissed  the
    appeal.

2.   The permission to  appeal  was  given  on  18  August  2017  by  Acting
    Resident Judge Appleyard and the Respondent made a Rule 24 response  on
    27 September  2017.   The  grounds  recite  with  helpful  brevity  the
    challenges to the judge's decision which can be summarised as  follows.
    First, failing to make any material findings on the Appellant's claimed
    political opinions, a failure to deal with the country expert  evidence
    report,  a  failure  to  address  medical   evidence   concerning   the
    Appellant's mental health and failing to make findings of fact upon key
    issues.  Making erroneous judgements about the reliability of witnesses
    when there was no evident basis to do so.   Other  grounds  essentially
    argue that the Judge made poor assumptions which were misplaced and his
    approach to the assessment of the evidence, particularly of Mr and  Mrs
    [K], demonstrated a lack of understanding of the  nature  of  the  case
    being put and the significance of their evidence in the  assessment  of
    the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  converted   to
    Christianity.  In addition it was said, bearing in mind the age of  the
    Appellant at the material times and his recollection of  events  before
    he left Iran, that the Judge should have  given  greater  care  to  the
    assessment of the child Appellant's  age  as  a  material  factor  when
    balancing the totality of the evidence.

3.   Mrs Aboni argued that the Judge did fail to  deal  with  the  political
    aspects of the claim, namely the  Appellant's  political  opinions  but
    other than that there was no  error  of  law  by  the  Judge.   He  was
    entitled to reach the conclusions that he did for the reasons  he  gave
    on those other aspects of the claim.  It is trite law that a person  is
    entitled to adequate and sufficient reasons as to why  his  appeal  has
    failed or succeeded, as is indeed the  Respondent.   In  this  case  it
    seemed to me that the Original  Tribunal's  errors  in  addressing  the
    evidence, in assessing it and in coming to conclusions with proper  and
    adequate reasons upon it are significant.  In particular the failure to
    address the evidence of Mr  and  Mrs  [K]  concerning  the  Appellant's
    participation in the church and their assessments of him;  particularly
    Mr [K]'s assessment of the Appellant being genuine in his conversion to
    Christianity.  These were matters which were not  challenged  with  the
    [K]s, nor was it raised by the Judge in such a way so that  the  matter
    might have been addressed by those witnesses, let alone in the  closing
    submissions made.

4.   In other respects it is patently  obvious  that  the  medical  evidence
    should have been addressed.  If it was to be rejected so be it, but the
    absence of dealing with those matters is a significant error in its own
    right and shows that the Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.   I
    find that there are material errors of law by the Original Tribunal and
    the matter will have to be remade.

DECISION

Appeal allowed to extent matter is to be remade in the FtT.

DIRECTIONS

1.   Relist in the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham.  No findings  of  fact
    to stand.  Not before First-tier Tribunal Judge James.

2.   Please list for three hours.

3.    Any  further  statements  of  any  witnesses  or  any  new  additional
    witnesses to be served not later than fourteen working days before  the
    further hearing.   The  identity  and  nationality  of  any  additional
    witnesses to be provided to the Respondent in advance  of  the  further
    hearing, in particular as to their status in the UK.

4.    List  for  a  telephone  PTR  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  list   in
    Birmingham.

ANONYMITY ORDER

An anonymity order was made and it is continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

