
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/03993/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 August 2016                             |On 31 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    k m k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Kadic, Legal Representative from Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Swinnerton (the judge), promulgated on 24 June 2016,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The Appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC).
    She arrived in this country in June 2015 and claimed asylum on 3 August
    of that year.  In essence her claim was based  upon  alleged  political
    activities on behalf of the UDPS in the DRC, two periods  of  detention
    in 2011 and 2012, problems faced by her brother,  political  activities
    undertaken in the United Kingdom, and her sexuality (she claims to be a
    lesbian).

The judge's decision

 3. The judge's decision is fairly  lengthy,  running  to  118  paragraphs.
    However it is right to say that the findings of fact and  reasons  only
    really begin at paragraph 99, and then end at paragraph 105.  The judge
    rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  that  the  DRC  authorities  had   a
    continuing interest in her on the basis that he  found  it  implausible
    that they would have waited for a certain period of time before issuing
    a summons for her to report to the police.  Paragraphs 101 and 102 deal
    with discrepancies as to the particular course of studies undertaken by
    the Appellant whilst in Morocco.  At paragraph 103 the judge found that
    the  Appellant  left  the  DRC  on  her  own  passport  issued  by  the
    authorities in August 2012, some six months after  her  claimed  second
    detention.  The judge was not persuaded that the DRC authorities  would
    have acted in that way if the Appellant's profile was as  prominent  as
    claimed.  Paragraph 104 deals  briefly  with  the  Appellant's  claimed
    sexuality.  The judge did not find it plausible that her  family  would
    have sent her to Morocco if they had been against  her  sexuality.   In
    paragraph 105 the judge states that he did  not  find  the  Appellant's
    account to be credible and found that the Appellant was not a  credible
    witness.  Article 8 is then dealt with in brief terms.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds of appeal are in essence threefold: first, it is said  that
    the judge failed to make proper findings on material matters, a  number
    of which are set out at paragraph 7 and 8  of  the  grounds;  ground  2
    alleges that inadequate reasons are provided for the  limited  findings
    made; finally, ground 3 asserts that the judge failed to deal  properly
    or indeed at all with documentary evidence supplied by the Appellant in
    support of her case.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 20 July 2016.

The hearing before me

 5. Although this is the Appellant's appeal I heard first from Mr Whitwell.
     In fairness to him, he acknowledged  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    problematic.  However he submitted that the judge was  fully  aware  of
    the nature of the Appellant's claim as set out in various paragraphs at
    the beginning of the decision.  At paragraph  99  the  judge  expressly
    says that he had considered all of the evidence in  the  round.   There
    was an implicit finding that the judge had not believed  anything  said
    by the Appellant.

 6. In the circumstances of this case I did not  call  upon  Ms  Kadic  for
    submissions.

Decision on error of law

 7. In my view there are material errors of law by the judge, as  announced
    to the parties at the hearing.

 8. It is true that the judge set out the nature of  the  Appellant's  case
    early on in his decision.  However,  what  is  important  is  that  the
    various elements of the case and the evidence  pertaining  thereto  are
    dealt with properly by way of findings of fact  and  adequate  reasons.
    In this case, and somewhat  unfortunately,  the  judge's  findings  and
    reasons are, in the context of the decision as a whole,  really  fairly
    brief.  There are of course certain findings stated between  paragraphs
    100 and 104 that are adverse to the Appellant's  case.   However  on  a
    fair reading of the decision  and  having  looked  for  myself  at  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, there is real merit in  ground
    1 of the Appellant's grounds.

 9. There is no express consideration of or finding  on  the  claimed  UDPS
    membership despite there being a number of sources of evidence relating
    to this.  There is no finding on whether in fact there were two arrests
    and  detentions  in  2011  and  2012.   There  is  no  finding  on  the
    potentially  corroborative  documentary  evidence  relating   to   UDPS
    membership and the arrest warrant.  There are  no  findings  about  the
    alleged ill-treatment suffered  whilst  in  detention.   There  are  no
    findings in respect of the alleged conditions of release.  There are no
    findings on the brother's claimed activities, whether or not he himself
    was arrested in 2015, and the consequences to  the  Appellant  thereof.
    There are no  findings  as  to  the  Appellant's  father  and  mother's
    circumstances and any harassment suffered by them as a  result  of  her
    and her brother's claimed activities.  There are no findings in respect
    of the Appellant's activities in the United Kingdom.

10. Notwithstanding the findings that were in fact made by the  judge,  the
    omissions highlighted above are in my view significant and  all  relate
    to material aspects of the Appellant's case.  On this basis  alone  the
    decision is flawed and must be set aside.

11. In addition, the judge has failed to deal adequately with the issue  of
    the Appellant's claimed sexuality.  Reference is made in paragraph  104
    to the photographs and there is clearly a plausibility issue  taken  in
    respect of the Appellant being sent to Morocco by her family.   However
    there  are  no  actual  findings  made  in  respect  of  the   intimate
    photographs or the detail of the Appellant's own evidence.  In my  view
    this important and potentially discrete element of the  claim  required
    more substantial consideration than has been  afforded  to  it  by  the
    judge.  This is a  further  material  error  of  law  in  the  decision
    requiring it to be set aside.

12. In respect of the reasons challenge, it is probably the case that these
    would be sustainable insofar as they go. However, they certainly do not
    save the decision as a whole given the significant  omissions  set  out
    above.

Disposal

13. Having set aside the decision of the judge I regard it  as  appropriate
    to remit this appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete  re-
    hearing with no previous findings of the judge preserved, a  course  of
    action to which neither  representative  objected.   I  issue  relevant
    directions below.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Directions to the Parties

      1) The remitted hearing shall a complete re-hearing, with no preserved
         findings of fact. All issues are 'live';

      2)  The  Appellant's  representatives  are   to   produce   a   single
         consolidated bundle containing all the evidence relied upon.   This
         shall be served on the Respondent and  filed  with  the  First-tier
         Tribunal at the Hatton  Cross  hearing  centre  no  later  than  14
         working days before the next hearing;

      3) The Appellant's representatives shall provide a  skeleton  argument
         covering all aspects of the Appellant's case and giving  references
         to evidence relied upon in the consolidated bundle.   The  skeleton
         argument shall be served on the Respondent and filed with the First-
         tier Tribunal at the Hatton Cross hearing centre no later  than  14
         days prior to the next hearing.

Directions to Administration

      1) This appeal is remitted to the Hatton Cross Hearing Centre;

      2) The remitted hearing shall not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge K Swinnerton;

      3) The matter shall be listed on  the  first  available  date  at  the
         Hatton Cross hearing centre;

      4) There is a time estimate of three hours for the remitted hearing;

      5) There shall be oral evidence from the Appellant and one  additional
         witness.



Signed                                  Date: 29 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

