
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03794/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 February 2019                  |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 SALMA AKTER
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Chaudhry, instructed by Blackstones, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1 July  1988  and  is  a  female  citizen  of
    Bangladesh. The appellant into the United Kingdom on a  visit  visa  in
    July 2013. On 1 July 2014, the appellant claimed asylum. By a  decision
    dated 5 March 2018, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for international protection. The appellant appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated  on  3  May  2018,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The circumstances are  somewhat  unusual.  The  appellant  married  her
    husband on 20 March 2009 in Bangladesh. She  claims  that  her  husband
    that hit her about two years later  for  the  first  time.  The  couple
    travelled to the United Kingdom where they have been supported  by  the
    appellant's brother. In December 2013, the appellant's husband left the
    matrimonial home. The appellant understood that her husband had gone to
    Bangladesh. The  appellant  was  threatened  over  the  telephone  from
    Bangladesh by a husband who was unhappy  that  she  was  pregnant.  The
    child (I) of the appellant had a husband was born on 8 September  2014.
    Te husband returned from Bangladesh and resumed cohabitation  with  the
    appellant. For the past three years, the husband,  by  the  appellant's
    own account, has not behaved badly towards her. Both the appellant  and
    her  husband  have  now  separately  claimed  asylum.  The  appellant's
    husband's application remains outstanding.

 3. The judge found the appellant to be a generally credible witness  [35].
    He found that she had not sought to  'bolster  her  account.'  However,
    having considered  the  evidence  of  the  verbal  abuse,  threats  and
    occasional assaults which the appellant had suffered, the judge was not
    satisfied that the treatment which the appellant had  received  at  the
    hands of her  husband  was  'sufficiently  serious  by  its  nature  or
    repetition as to constitute a  severe  violation  of  the  basic  human
    right.' The judge had regard to the fact that at  least  for  the  last
    three years and whilst the couple been living  together  again  in  the
    United Kingdom, the  appellant  has  not  been  subjected  to  any  bad
    behaviour at the hands of a husband.  The  appellant  had  described  a
    husband as a 'good father'.

 4. The judge also found that, applying the lower standard  of  proof,  the
    appellant had not established that she would be at risk  on  return  to
    Bangladesh. Whilst he found that the appellant had a genuine subjective
    fear that her husband might  harm  her  in  Bangladesh  and  the  judge
    acknowledged that there was a 'possibility' that such harm  may  occur,
    he found the risk to be 'highly speculative or too remote.' [39]

 5.  On  appeal,  the  appellant  submits  the  judge's   conclusions   are
    irrational. It made no sense  that  the  judge  should  find  that  the
    appellant  'genuinely  fears'  that  her   husband's   behaviour   will
    deteriorate on return to Bangladesh but that the risk of  it  occurring
    was 'too remote.' I find that the judge did not fall into legal  error.
    He has done nothing more than to distinguish  between  the  appellant's
    subjective fear  (which  he  acknowledged  was  real)  the  objectively
    considered likelihood that that  fear  should  be  realised.  In  other
    words,  the  appellant  believes  that  her  husband's  behaviour   may
    deteriorate but, carrying out the objective  assessment  which  he  was
    obliged to do, the judge found that his behaviour  was  not  reasonably
    likely to deteriorate. There is no contradiction  or  irrationality  in
    the judge's reasoning.

 6. The basis upon which  permission  was  granted  concerned  the  judge's
    finding that 'threats of and/or actual violence the appellant  did  not
    constitute serious harm. [see permission to appellant (Judge Rintoul)].
    It was part of the judge's task  to  determine  whether  the  treatment
    which the appellant had suffered in  the  past  at  the  hands  of  her
    husband constituted persecution or treatment which crossed the  Article
    3 ECHR threshold. In order to  answer  that  question,  the  judge  has
    correctly directed himself to the provisions of paragraph 339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules. I find that he has reached finding as  regards  past
    treatment which was available to him on the evidence of the  appellant.
    Even if that is not correct and the appellant has  been  persecuted  or
    ill-treated, it was open to the judge  to  find  that,  notwithstanding
    past ill-treatment, there were no substantial grounds for finding there
    to be a real risk that the appellant would suffer such treatment  again
    at the hands of a husband. In  reaching  that  finding  the  judge  had
    regard to the very significant fact that the husband had not threatened
    or intimidated the appellant for at least the last three years,  during
    which time they  have  been  bringing  up  their  child  whilst  living
    together in the United Kingdom. It was open to the judge to  find  that
    the husband had, for whatever reason, mended his ways and that  he  had
    not done so solely because he has been living outside Bangladesh. There
    is no evidence before the judge to show that  the  husband's  behaviour
    was likely to deteriorate should  he  leave  the  jurisdiction  of  the
    United Kingdom. The judge's finding as to risk on return to  Bangladesh
    was, irrespective  of  his  findings  as  regards  the  husband's  past
    treatment of the appellant, sufficient to dispose of the appeal.

 7. Finally, the grounds complained that the judge failed to have regard to
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  I  do
    not find at this ground has been established. The child is  only  three
    years old and the appellant is his primary carer. There was no evidence
    at all that the husband had behaved poorly towards the  child;  indeed,
    the appellant's own  evidence  was  to  the  contrary.  The  judge  has
    correctly considered the child as part of the appellant's  family  unit
    when considering their reintegration in Bangladesh [58 et seq].

 8. The judge found that the appellant  might  experience  'problems'  upon
    return  to  Bangladesh  but  that  these  would  not  amount  to  'very
    significant obstacles' to her reintegration into  the  country  of  her
    nationality where she could expect to continue to be supported  by  the
    appellant's brother [55] and where  she  continued  also  to  have  the
    support of her father [54]. The judge has correctly considered risk  on
    return on the basis that the appellant will not return with her husband
    and only with the child so as a single mother.

 9. I am satisfied that the judge has not erred in law the reasons advanced
    in the grounds of appeal or at all. This appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 7 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

